---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol25 - FRIDAY 31 JANUARY 1969'
layout: debate
year: 1969
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 31ST JANUARY, 1969</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_on_parliament">

<heading>MEETING ON PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members met in the Assembly Chamber of the House of Assembly, Cape Town, at 11.30 a.m.</p>

<p>By direction of Mr. Speaker,</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 19th June, 1968, summoning Parliament to meet to-day:</p>

<p>No. 163, 1968.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by Section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Thirty-first day of January, 1969, and I declare that the Fourth Session of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</block>

<block name="quote">Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town on this Nineteenth day of June, One thousand Nine hundred and Sixty-eight.</block>

<p>J. J. FOUCH&#x00C9;, State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council.</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Graaff-Reinet, owing to the death of Mr. A. N. Steyn on 28th September, 1968.</li>

<li>(2) Newcastle, owing to the resignation of the Hon. W. A. Maree on 30th September, 1968.</li>

<li>(3) Windhoek, owing to the resignation of Mr. J. G. H. van der Wath on 8th November, 1968.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a letter had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 12 o&#x2019;clock noon to-day in the Senate House.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_presidents_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State <span class="col_0003-0004" refersTo="page_0019"/>President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the Fourth Session of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>The recent events in Czechoslovakia have once again exposed the true nature of communist imperialism. This tragic affair serves as a serious warning to those who were inclined to relax their vigilance; it has also induced the Western countries to review their defence arrangements.</p>

<p>The crisis in the Middle East is still unsolved and in Vietnam war and devastation continue without interruption. There are, however, welcome signs that serious efforts are being made to reach a peace settlement.</p>

<p>Terrorism is raising its ugly head on an extended scale in various parts of the world, usually fanned by communist incitement and support.</p>

<p>Many parts of Africa remain in a state of ferment. Nigeria, for instance, is still ravaged by civil war.</p>

<p>In contrast the Republic has enjoyed a year of peace and tranquillity despite sporadic efforts on the part of terrorists to cross our borders.</p>

<p>The good relations with our neighbouring States are being further developed. An extradition treaty has been concluded with newly independent Swaziland and similar treaties are being negotiated with Botswana and Lesotho. Negotiations for revising the Customs Union Agreement with these three States have reached an advanced stage.</p>

<p>The Government will continue to strive for good relations with states in Africa and elsewhere on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and non-intervention in each other&#x2019;s internal affairs&#x2014;the essentials for a healthy and civilized international relationship.</p>

<p>Ministerial visits to Africa and other countries were undertaken and important guests from Africa and elsewhere came to the Republic.</p>

<p>The establishment of an air service linking South Africa directly to North and South America will undoubtedly make a contribution to the development of closer ties with that part of the world.</p>

<p>The British/Rhodesian dispute remains unresolved. The Government hopes and trusts, however, that the two parties will arrive at an honourable and acceptable solution.</p>

<p>In South-West Africa the rapid rate of progress in all the important fields of human development has been maintained. The new development phase upon which the Territory has entered has necessitated certain financial and administrative re-arrangements, and this progress will be accelerated by the introduction of certain financial and administrative measures.</p>

<p>An important stage in the development of the right to self-determination of South-West Africa&#x2019;s population groups was reached with the opening of the first session of the first Legislative Council of Ovamboland.</p>

<p>Units of the South African Police are still deployed along the northern borders of South-West Africa, in the Caprivi Zipfel and in Rhodesia. These units no doubt contributed to a large extent to the successful repulsion of the terrorist assault on the peoples of Southern Africa.</p>

<p>It is intended to introduce legislation to consolidate and amend the existing laws governing the control of arms and ammunition by providing for the re-licensing of firearms with the object of establishing a comprehensive Central Firearms Register by means of which the South African Police will be in a better position to exercise control.</p>

<p>Further steps are envisaged to enhance the preparedness of the South African Defence Force against conventional as well as unconventional warfare, both in respect of equipment and methods of training. Training programmes are being revised and the techniques of the Defence Force also adjusted to unconventional warfare by means of practical field trials and field training.</p>

<p>Legislation will be introduced to give legal effect to the decision to incorporate the Division of Civil Defence into the South African Defence Force.</p>

<p>Conscious of the impact of information on world opinion, the Government perseveres in its efforts to disseminate the facts about the Republic and what it represents as widely as possible. This task is pursued by the use, in some twenty languages, of the written and spoken word, the visual image, and all other publicity media available.</p>

<p>The peaceful progress which characterizes the South African scene, in contrast with the disturbances and unrest so prevalent in many other parts, has aroused considerable interest.</p>

<p>Against this background the Government has decided to intensify and broaden its existing international information programme.</p>

<p>During the past year inflation has been held in check and prices have increased at a moderate pace only. The considerable inflow of foreign capital and the accompanying increase in the quantity of money and near money in circulation, however, create a potential danger of renewed inflationary pressure, and there are indications of increasingly optimistic expectations in the <span class="col_0005-0006" refersTo="page_0020"/>business world. For these reasons the authorities have not deemed it advisable to relax substantially the measures against inflation.</p>

<p>Action to reduce the excessive liquidity in the economy, for example by the relaxation of exchange control, has been rendered difficult by uncertainty regarding the marketing of gold since the institution of the so-called two-tier gold market in March, 1968. Fortunately it has been, and still is, possible to obtain the Republic&#x2019;s requirements of foreign exchange without disrupting the free market for gold. The Government trusts that this uncertainty will be removed and that a satisfactory solution can be reached shortly which will entrench gold&#x2019;s place in the international monetary system.</p>

<p>Thrift remains one of the most important weapons against inflation. The year 1969 is the jubilee year of the National Thrift Movement and the Government has already launched a new thrift campaign which, it is hoped, will elicit a favourable response from all sections of the community and thereby contribute to the stability of our economy.</p>

<p>The Commission appointed in 1967 to inquire into the Republic&#x2019;s fiscal and monetary system has submitted an interim report and the Government is at present considering it. A related matter which is also receiving the Government&#x2019;s attention is the financial relations between the Government, the Provincial Administrations and local authorities in the light of reports of various commissions.</p>

<p>In spite of the anti-inflationary measures introduced by the Government, the distributive trade still experienced a high level of activity during 1968, and turnovers generally were at higher levels than those attained in 1967.</p>

<p>There are indications that the growth of the demand for goods and services will continue and that sufficient stocks will be available.</p>

<p>The Republic&#x2019;s exports during 1968 exceeded the record level attained during the previous year while imports have not reached the same high level as in 1967. Consequently the deficit on the country&#x2019;s trade balance has been substantially reduced. Barring unforeseen circumstances, the current favourable tendencies in the Republic&#x2019;s foreign trade are expected to continue during this year.</p>

<p>By way of bilateral and multilateral discussions and negotiations with the Governments of other countries, the Government is continuing to create better marketing opportunities for South African products in export markets.</p>

<p>The policy to stimulate border areas development has already brought forth encouraging results and the Government has decided to accelerate the pace. Additional concessions for industrialists who establish themselves in border areas were announced during the second half of 1968.</p>

<p>During the course of 1968 it became apparent that the rate of new investment in the manufacturing industry was in the process of declining. Consequently the restrictions on the establishment of new industries during the past two or three years have been gradually relaxed, and industrialists are now being reasonably freely permitted to proceed with their development plans, especially where such development can take place in border areas.</p>

<p>Local regional organizations for combating pollution of the sea by oil have been established. Furthermore, attention is at present being given to the Republic&#x2019;s accession to international conventions relating to the prevention and combating of oil pollution.</p>

<p>South Africa is maintaining its strong position in the mining sphere and its mineral resources will for many years to come remain one of its important mainstays. A new gold mine has been opened and platinum production is expected to rise.</p>

<p>The search for natural oil resources is being pursued with increasing momentum and nine of the world&#x2019;s leading oil companies are participating.</p>

<p>Thanks to determined action by the management of the West Driefontein Mine and the brilliant achievements of the mining engineers, imminent disaster was averted from this mine. The State expresses its gratitude to them all, including the devoted mine-workers who braved danger and prevented casualties by working irregular hours far beyond the bounds of duty.</p>

<p>The ever-increasing rate of progress in our national economy makes it necessary for the State annually to increase its contributions in order to further research and training facilities.</p>

<p>The South African Medical Research Council Bill of 1968 will be considered further this Session. It will provide for medical research independent of research into the natural sciences, promoted by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and into the human sciences, promoted by the Human Sciences Research Council.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding widespread drought conditions and a consequent decrease in summer crops, good winter cereal and fruit harvests were obtained during the past season and our agricultural production could therefore be maintained at a reasonable level. This also applies to meat, dairy and poultry products.</p>

<p>Farm planning and farming systems have made continued good progress and our farmers have shown increasing interest in improved farming methods. This trend towards co-operation has not reached the desired magnitude since many farming malpractices are still prevalent. The future of our agriculture and country is seriously <span class="col_0007-0008" refersTo="page_0021"/>menaced by the injudicious subdivision of farms and a certain measure of indifference among many farmers towards resources of knowledge and accepted conservation farming principles.</p>

<p>The following are some of the positive steps that are being taken to promote our agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) An investigation to determine the measures required for proper soil utilization and the prevention of further subdivision of farms into uneconomic units.</li>

<li>(b) A Bill will be introduced to amend the Soil Conservation Act, 1946, in order that harmful farming practices may be combated more effectively.</li>

<li>(c) A special Division of Catchment Area Planning has been established to plan the entire Upper Orange area, to protect this vulnerable area against further deterioration and to prevent the silting up of the storage dams of the Orange River Project.</li>

<li>(d) The livestock industry will derive great benefit from the bacteriological research and vaccine production in the new building at Onderstepoort, as well as from drought-resistant fodder crops to which farmers increasingly resort.</li>

<li>(e) In crop production and horticulture, the new improved cultivars have benefited the farmers in many respects.</li>

</ol>

<p>Agricultural technical co-operation with neighbouring and overseas countries has been greatly advanced by a fruitful interchange of visiting agricultural scientists.</p>

<p>The increased cost structure naturally created problems, but viewed generally, 1968 was not an unfavourable year agriculturally.</p>

<p>The production of several agricultural products shows a steeper climb than local consumption, and agriculture is consequently increasingly dependent upon export. Of special significance are conditions in our traditional export markets, in which export realizations were recently tending to weaken. This may necessitate further adjustments in the agricultural sector.</p>

<p>Legislation is envisaged to provide for matters in connection with the erection, expansion and use of the major urban fresh produce markets and for the appointment of a commission to assist and advise the Minister of Agriculture on matters relating to the fresh produce industry.</p>

<p>Onderhandelinge is die afgelope jaar begin met Botswana oor riviere van gemeenskaplike belang en met Lesotho oor die Oxbowprojek.</p>

<p>Die werk aan die Hendrik Verwoerd-dam vorder sodanig dat die dam in 1970 sal begin water opgaar en teen Julie 1971 voltooi sal wees, terwyl die Oranje-Vistonnel na verwagting teen Julie 1972 klaar sal wees. Die kanaal- en tonnelwerk laer af in Kaapland, waarmee reeds begin is, sal hopelik ook daardie tyd voltooi wees.</p>

<p>Dit word al duideliker dat water die faktor sal wees wat die uiteindelike ontwikkelingspeil van Suidelike Afrika sal bepaal. Die Regering is ten voile bewus van die posisie en &#x2019;n planmatige ontwikkelingsprogram word in die vooruitsig gestel ten einde tred te hou met Suid-Afrika se toekomstige vraag na water en om reg aan alle sektore van die landsekonomie te laat geskied.</p>

<p>Op die gebied van waterbenutting betree die land &#x2019;n nuwe tydvak. Daar sal van owerheidswe&#x00EB; aangedring word op die optimale benutting van water deur die uitskakeling van vermybare waterverliese en beheer oor die suiwerheid van fabrieks-en riooluitvloeisels ten einde besoedeling van openbare water te voorkom en die maksimum hergebruik van water te bewerkstellig. Hiervoor is die daadwerklike samewerking en goeie gesindheid van elke landsburger &#x2019;n voorvereiste.</p>

<p>Die finale verslag van die Kommissie van Ondersoek na Wateraangeleenthede word vanjaar verwag. Dit sal &#x2019;n omvattende beeld van die waterposisie in die Republiek gee en aanbevelings bevat in verband met &#x2019;n meesterwaterplan vir ons land.</p>

<p>Met die oog op die snelle ontwikkeling van ons land, veral op die gebied van die nywerheid, en die noodsaaklikheid dat ons arbeids-en tegniese potensiaal daarmee moet tred hou, het die Regering dit raadsaam geag dat die hele universiteitswese onder die soeklig geplaas word en &#x2019;n Kommissie van Ondersoek is aangestel om ondersoek in te stel na en verslag te doen oor die finansierings-, ontwikkelings-, opvoedkundige en akademiese aspekte van die universiteitswese, insluitende studentebedrywighede.</p>

<p>Daar word voortgegaan met die oordra van groter selfbestuur aan die onderskeie Bantoevolkere, elk met &#x2019;n eie departementele administrasie waarvoor doeltreffende administratiewe geboue voorsien word. Die identifikasie van alle Bantoepersone in Suid-Afrika as burgers van hul tuislandgebiede word beoog.</p>

<p>Dorpsontwikkeling in die tuislande word uitgebrei, onder andere, ter bediening van grensnywerhede, en plaaslike besture word betrek by die behuisings- en dienstevoorsiening. Daar word ook projekkorporasies vir die ontwikkeling van spesifieke ekonomiese moontlikhede in die tuislande beplan, byvoorbeeld &#x2019;n mynboukorporasie om minerale te ontgin.</p>

<p>Bantoe-owerhede word nou meer aktief by die werwing en plasing van Bantoewerkers betrek as gevolg van die instelling van arbeidsburo&#x2019;s in die tuislande.</p>

<p>Die Regering se besluit om groter akademiese selfstandigheid aan die Kleurling, Indi&#x00EB;r-en Bantoe-universiteitskolleges toe teken, <span class="col_0009-0010" refersTo="page_0022"/>is &#x2019;n belangrike mylpaal op die ontwikkelingspad van die onderskeie bevolkingsgroepe. Dit getuig daarvan dat die universiteitskolleges suksesvol uitgebou is en dat hul personele daarin geslaag het om die gewenste en gangbare akademiese standaarde te handhaaf. Wetgewing sal gedurende die huidige sessie ingedien word om uitvoering aan die besluit te gee.</p>

<p>Vir die Kleurlingbevolking van die Republiek beloof die jaar 1969 om een van besondere staatkundige betekenis te wees. Na verwagting sal die verkiesing vir die Verteenwoordigende Kleurlingraad gedurende die tweede helfte van hierdie jaar plaasvind. Die Raad sal uitgebreide bevoegdhede h&#x00EA;&#x2014;uitvoerend, wetgewend en raadgewend&#x2014;in verband met aangeleenthede wat die Kleurlinggemeenskap raak.</p>

<p>Die registrasie van Kleurlingkiesers op die uitgebreide grondslag waarvoor daar in die Wet op die Verteenwoordigende Kleurlingraad, 1964, voorsiening gemaak word, is afgehandel. Die afbakening van die Republiek in veertig kiesafdelings, die samestelling van kieserslyste en die uitskrywe van &#x2019;n verkiesing sal nou volg.</p>

<p>Met die instelling van &#x2019;n statut&#x00EA;re Suid-Afrikaanse Indi&#x00EB;rraad gedurende September 1968 is &#x2019;n verdere mylpaal bereik in die uitvoering van die Regering se beleid van ontwikkeling van die Indi&#x00EB;rgemeenskap. Dit ly geen twyfel nie dat die huidige Raad die goedkeuring en ondersteuning van die bre&#x00EB; lae van die Indi&#x00EB;rbevolking wegdra, wat veel goeds beloof vir die verdere ontwikkeling van harmonieuse rasseverhoudings.</p>

<p>Soos algemeen in die land opgemerk kan word, is goeie resultate deur die Departement van Gemeenskapsbou behaal in die uitvoering van sy taak om afsonderlike, volwaardige gemeenskappe vir die verskillende bevolkingsgroepe te bewerkstellig.</p>

<p>Hoewel daar geen noemenswaardige algemene behuisingsnood is nie, is daar &#x2019;n groeiende aanvraag na huisvesting&#x2014;&#x2019;n normale verskynsel in &#x2019;n snel ontwikkelende land soos Suid-Afrika. Die Regering is voorberei hierop soos blyk uit die feit dat gedurende die huidige boekjaar R12,600,000 meer as in die vorige jaar voorsien is vir behuising vir die laer inkomstegroepe wat nie in hul eie behoeftes kan voorsien nie. Dit is natuurlik die taak van die private sektor om sy bydrae te lewer om die aanvraag van die ho&#x00EB;r inkomstegroepe te bevredig.</p>

<p>Die posisie in die land, in die geheel gesien, regverdig nie die opheffing van huurbeheer nie ondanks druk uit sekere kringe. Die Regering sal dus voortgaan om huurbeheer toe te pas totdat die privaatsektor in so &#x2019;n mate met die oprigting van woonakkommodasie gevorder het dat daar aan gedink kan word om huurbeheer gedeeltelik te begin in-trek.</p>

<p>Ons land geniet arbeidsvrede. Daarby beleef ons &#x2019;n toestand van voile indiensneming soos blyk uit die werkloosheidspersentasie vir die betrokke rassegroepe wat nog steeds minder as een persent is van die getal persone in diens. Pogings word voortgesit om die beskikbare arbeidskragte ten beste te benut.</p>

<p>Die Nasionale Vakleerlingraad het reeds we&#x00EB; en middele ondersoek wat aangewend kan word om die opleiding van vakleerlinge te stimuleer, en die Raad se aanbevelings sal beliggaam word in wysigings van die Wet op Nywerheidsversoening, 1956.</p>

<p>Omdat die gesinslewe so &#x2019;n aktuele saak geword het, word dit in die vooruitsig gestel om steeds meer aandag te gee aan die bedreiging van die gesin en &#x2019;n gesonde gesinslewe, om die verskillende aktiwiteite en liggame wat met die bevordering van die gesinslewe te doen het tot groter doeltreffendheid te ko&#x04E7;rdineer, en om die openbare mening ten behoewe van die gesin te stimuleer. Ten einde uitvoering aan hierdie aspekte te gee, het die Departement van Volkswelsyn en Pensione nou &#x2019;n spesiale Afdeling vir Gesinslewe tot stand gebring, asook &#x2019;n Afdeling vir Bejaardesorg ten einde meer gespesialiseerde aandag te skenk aan die belange van die steeds toenemende getal bejaardes in ons gemeenskap.</p>

<p>Op versoek van die Provinsies en die gebied Suidwes-Afrika het die Regering in beginsel goedgekeur dat &#x2019;n Sentrale Pensioenfonds vir hul onderwysers, verpleegsters en ander werknemers ingestel word. Die beoogde pensioenfonds, geskoei op die lees van die Staatsdiens-pensioenfonds, sal min of meer dieselfde voordele aan lede bied as die Staatsdiens-pensioenfonds en sal deur die Departement van Volkswelsyn en Pensioene geadministreer word. Daar sal gedurende die huidige sessie van die Parlement wetgewing ingedien word om so &#x2019;n fonds in die lewe te roep.</p>

<p>Gedurende die reses is samesprekings gevoer tussen die Minister van Gesondheid en verteenwoordigers van die geneeskundige beroep en is daar tot &#x2019;n ooreenkoms geraak wat gedurende hierdie sessie by wyse van wetgewing aan u voorgel&#x00EA; sal word.</p>

<p>Die fenomenale prestasies wat in ons land met die gebruik van menslike weefsels behaal is, het tegniese, wetlike en praktiese probleme tot gevolg gehad, en die Regering het besluit om wetgewing in te dien ten einde tred te hou met veranderende omstandighede.</p>

<p>&#x2019;n Algemene registrasie van blanke kiesers sal gedurende die tweede helfte van hierdie jaar onderneem word.</p>

<p>Wetgewing sal ingedien word om die bestaande Kieswette te konsolideer en, soos gebruiklik, sal hierdie wetsontwerp, na die eerste lesing, na &#x2019;n Gekose Komitee verwys word.</p>

<p>As gevolg van die wetgewing wat verlede jaar aangeneem is om die Poskantoor op &#x2019;n <span class="col_0011-0012" refersTo="page_0023"/>onafhanklike finansi&#x00EB;le grondslag te plaas, sal die Minister van Posen Telegraafwese hierdie jaar vir die eetrste keer &#x2019;n afsonderlike Poskantoorbegroting aan die Parlement voorl&#x00EA;.</p>

<p>Om verder uitvoering te gee aan die Regering se beleid om die sake van die Departement van Posen Telegraafwese volgens suiwer besigheidsbeginsels te bestuur, sal wetgewing in die loop van die sessie ingedien word om die Poskantoor, ook wat die salarisse en diensvoorwaardes van sy personeel betref, geheel en al van die res van die Staatsdiens te ontkoppel.</p>

<p>Op die gebied van die regspleging sal &#x2019;n wetsontwerp aan u voorgel&#x00EA; word wat bedoel is om te voorsien in &#x2019;n behoefte wat lankal bestaan, naamlik die voorsiening van staatsondersteunde regshulp. Vir hierdie doel word &#x2019;n onafhanklike statut&#x00EA;re liggaam beoog.</p>

<p>Daar is alle rede om optimisties te wees oor die vermeerdering van toeriste uit die buiteland. In di&#x00E9; verband is dit verblydend om te weet dat die nuwe en verbeterde Jan Smutslughawe, as die vernaamste punt van binnekoms, met gemak en sonder onnodige vertragings die verwagte getalle sal kan behartig.</p>

<p>Ten einde aan Suid-Afrikaanse sportmanne en -vroue mededinging van internasionale gehalte te bied, het die Staat &#x2019;n aansienlike finansi&#x00EB;le bydrae gemaak tot die koste verbonde aan die reeling van die Suid-Afrikaanse Spele 1969, wat in Maart en April eerskomende in Bloemfontein gehou sal word en die nie-blanke spele wat later in die jaar elders sal plaasvind.</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the Fourth Session of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#temporary_amendment_of_standing_orders">

<heading>TEMPORARY AMENDMENT OF STANDING ORDERS</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That, in respect of the present Session, subsection (2) of Standing Order No. 30 be substituted by the following subsection:</li>

<li>(2) Private members&#x2019; business shall have precedence&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) on the first Monday of the Session after Government business has been disposed of;</li>

<li>(b) on Tuesdays on and after the eighth sitting day, from 4.30 p.m. up to and including the twenty-third sitting day; and</li>

<li>(c) on Fridays on and after the eleventh sitting day, from 12 o&#x2019;clock noon, up to and including the thirty-sixth sitting day.</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) In the third line in Standing Order No. 32, to omit &#x201C;Tuesday&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;Monday&#x201D;.</li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Mr. A. N. Steyn</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 28th September, 1968, of Mr. Andries Nortje Steyn, who represented the electoral division of Graaff-Reinet, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his parliamentary service, which extended over a period of more than two years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>It is always a painful occasion to lay a motion such as this one before the House. The more so in this case, because we are thinking on this occasion of a very young member whose term of office in this House was a short one. Norrie Steyn represented a constituency in this House which his father had formerly represented here with great distinction for many years. Normally, humanly speaking, one would have thought that, just as his father did, he would have been able to give many years of good and true service to this House and his country. This, however, was not granted him. Although it was only in 1966 that the deceased came to this House, he very soon found his place in this House and amongst his colleagues, and it very soon became apparent that he possessed the ability to render very valuable service to this House. In addition it was soon apparent that he was an original member with his own particular way of looking at things and of expressing himself, a member with fine sense of humour, and a pleasant colleague to have in this House. In his younger days he was known as a good sportsman who played representative senior rugby here in the Western Province. He was also a man who was known for his hospitality.</p>

<p><span class="col_0013-0014" refersTo="page_0024"/>On this occasion our thoughts turn to his wife, who has lost a fine husband, and to his four small children, who have to suffer the loss of a good father. We in this House remember our colleague, with whom we worked together very pleasantly. On this occasion we extend our sincere condolences to his wife and children, and it is with heartfelt sympathy that I introduce this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House should like to be associated with the words that have come from the hon. the Prime Minister concerning the late Mr. Steyn. His service in this House was tragically short, but during that period he gave evidence that he might develop very easily into a worthy successor of his father, who gave such illustrious service in this House.</p>

<p>The deceased was a graduate of Rhodes university. He was a very successful attorney in his area and he was known for the good service he gave his constituency and the manner in which he was prepared to serve his constituents, regardless of what their political affiliations were. We found him a pleasant and approachable member, a man with a keen sense of humour and one whom we looked forward to enjoying as a colleague in this House for many years to come.</p>

<p>Our sympathy goes out specially at this time to his wife and children, and in that sense above all, I should like to second this motion.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1969-01-31T12:55:00">12.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

