---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol112 - FRIDAY 27 JANUARY 1984'
layout: debate
year: 1984
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 27 JANUARY 1984</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber at <recordedTime time="1984-01-27T09:05:00">09h05.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<p>The Secretary read the following proclamation of the State President, dated 8 September 1983, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No 203, 1983</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#prorogation_and_summoning_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<heading>PROROGATION AND SUMMONING OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</heading>

<p>Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue the House of Assembly on the twenty-sixth day of January 1984, and I hereby declare that the Fourth Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on the twenty-seventh day of January 1984, for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town this Eighth day of September, One thousand Nine hundred and Eighty-three.</p>

<p>M VILJOEN,<br/>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>P W BOTHA.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>announced that vacancies had occurred&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) owing to the resignation with effect from 14 September 1983 of the Hon H J D van der Walt, a member nominated in <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0032"/>terms of section 40(l)(b) of the Constitution;</li>

<li>(b) in the representation of the electoral division of Pinetown, owing to the death on 18 November 1983 of Mr S A Pitman;</li>

<li>(c) in the representation of the electoral division of Soutpansberg, owing to the resignation with effect from 22 November 1983 of the Hon S P Botha, DMS.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_member">

<heading>NEW MEMBER</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>announced that the vacancy in the seat of a member nominated in terms of section 40(l)(b) of the Constitution had been filled by the nomination with effect from 15 September 1983 of Dr J E Pieterse.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>Dr J E Pieterse, introduced by Mr A van Breda and Mr S J de Beer, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>announced that a letter had been received from the Secretary-General: Office of the Prime Minister stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11h00 today in the Assembly Chamber.</p>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 09h09 and Resumed at 11h47.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>took the Chair.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president&#x2019;s_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr Speaker stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<block name="quote">*Mr Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</block>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the Fourth Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<p>Mr Speaker, Members of the House of Assembly, the opening of this Fourth Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa is a historic occasion for the country. For this is quite probably the last time that a session of Parliament in its present form and with its present composition will be opened.</p>

<p>You will appreciate that for me personally and for my wife this is a momentous and profoundly moving occasion.</p>

<p>The office of State President was entrusted to me by Parliament on 19 June 1979. It is not for me to pass judgment on how I have fulfilled the duties of the office. But it is a fact that I accepted the post of State President amid the moving pathos and human drama which surrounded the retirement of my predecessor. It is also a fact that South Africa has had to find her way through stormy waters for the past four-and-a-half years, faced with the perils and challenges of these perplexing times. I would not have been able to perform the duties of my office without the administrative expertise, firmly but judiciously exercised, of this Government; in particular I must mention the wholehearted and cordial co-operation of the Prime Minister, and the warmth and loyalty which I have experienced from the Government and all the country&#x2019;s leaders. Nor could I have fulfilled my duties without the providence and strength of a Higher Hand.</p>

<p>Permit me, therefore, to extend my profoundest thanks to Parliament and to all authorities in South Africa, both provincial and local: my thanks for the confidence placed in me and my wife in appointing me to this highest office in our country.</p>

<p>Permit me to place on record that I feel the utmost appreciation towards all South Africans who have supported my wife and me with so much love and human warmth.</p>

<p>Permit me to express the high regard which I have for the heads of state of Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei, and my sincerest thanks for the fellowship and friendliness they have shown towards me.</p>

<p>It will be a pleasure and a privilege for me to continue in this office until the State President chosen in terms of the new dispensation accepts his post.</p>

<p><span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0033"/>&#x2020;In the history of constitutional development, 1983 will go down as a year of great significance for the Republic of South Africa and her peoples. On the second of November the White voters took up one of the major challenges facing South Africa. Indeed, on that date the electorate demonstrated its preference for consensus politics, acknowledged the need for sound inter-group relations and accepted constitutional renewal as a prerequisite for progress and prosperity. The Government is determined to implement the new constitutional dispensation with as little delay as possible.</p>

<p>At the same time it should be emphasized that the Government&#x2019;s commitment to constitutional development is not limited to a new dispensation for Whites, Coloureds and Indians. The Government&#x2019;s constitutional goal is to maintain security and stability and to promote the welfare of all, and to grant to each person individually and as a member of his group, participation in decision-making affecting his interests and expectations.</p>

<p>This should be done in such a way that the claim of any people or group to self-determination in respect of its way of life, the maintenance of standards and survival, is safeguarded.</p>

<p>Considerable progress has already been made towards achieving this goal. A Special Cabinet Committee, in consultation with the leaders of the national and independent states as well as other communities is investigating outstanding matters relating to the social, economic and constitutional development of those concerned as a matter of high priority.</p>

<p>The past year was characterized by increasing unrest and violence in many parts of the world, and we enter the new year amidst increasing threats to international peace and security. The Republic of South Africa goes to meet the future resolved and determined to maintain stability.</p>

<p>There is irrefutable evidence that the Soviet Union is engaged in stockpiling arms in some of our neighbouring countries. The obvious purpose of this is to create a climate of instability which will aid the Soviet Union in promoting its regional expansionist aims. The large quantities of sophisticated conventional armaments are totally out of proportion to the defence requirements of the countries concerned. The gradual build-up of a military infrastructure in the so-called frontline states affords the Soviet Union strategic mobility and increases the possibility of a conventional threat against the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>Public statements by terrorist leaders and acts of sabotage provide conclusive proof of the objectives of South Africa&#x2019;s enemies, namely the destruction of order and of our democratic way of life in the Republic of South Africa. We dare not relax our vigilance or be lulled into a false sense of security. We must be prepared, at all times, as indeed our security forces are, to safeguard the integrity of our borders and to maintain law and order in our country. This is all the more essential in a time of transition since it will provide a basis for orderly constitutional development.</p>

<p>Unrest in certain parts of Southern Africa also increased as a result of the inability of certain governments to maintain development and stability in their countries. In an attempt to hide the critical conditions prevailing in such countries and to abscure the designs of the Soviet Union in Southern Africa, the accusation is spread world-wide that South Africa undertakes actions aimed at destabilising her neighbours. The Republic of South Africa rejects this allegation. We are willing to co-operate with all the countries of Southern Africa on the basis of internationally accepted principles and practices. It would not be in South Africa&#x2019;s interest for her neighbours to fall into political, social and economic ruin. It is precisely this inherent instability and these critical conditions which provide fertile ground for Soviet intrigues and expansionism.</p>

<p>The Angolan government openly allows Swapo to use its territory as a springboard for the most shocking deeds of terror against the population of South-West Africa. The standpoint of the South African Government is clear: the people of South-West Africa must decide for themselves, without any form of intimidation from outside, on their own constitutional future. This is made extremely difficult by <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0034"/>the terror campaign conducted by Swapo, aided and abetted by Cuban forces.</p>

<p>In order to promote stability and progress in Southern Africa, talks are continually held between the Republic of South Africa and other states. Mozambique is one such state. It is still too early to say what concrete results will come of these talks.</p>

<p>Multilateral co-operation between the Republics of South Africa, Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei has gained in strength. Since the successful summit conference of November 1982, an intensive programme of co-operation has come about, the Development Bank For Southern Africa has been established and representatives of all these countries are working together in a spirit of service to their people.</p>

<p>The regional industrial development incentive scheme, launched by the Republic in conjunction with the Governments of Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei, has produced very encouraging results in the short period since its inception.</p>

<p>Promoting the interests of the small businessman remains a high priority. Preparations for the establishment of a new legal form for the small businessman have now been completed and it is envisaged that a Closed Corporations Bill will be introduced during this Session.</p>

<p>During the past two years, the South African economy has had to adjust to a number of foreign and domestic destabilising influences, including the world recession, the weakness of the gold price and the worst drought in decades. Towards the end of February 1983, the economy suffered a setback when the gold price dropped by about 100 dollars an ounce and substantially increased government assistance became necessary to alleviate the ravages of the drought.</p>

<p>In these circumstances the Government had no option but to pursue a policy of fiscal and monetary restraint. In response to market forces interest rates rose and the value of the rand, particularly in relation to an exceptionally strong US dollar, declined. This policy contributed to a dramatic improvement in the balance of payments on current account, which showed a surplus in the last quarter of 1982 and throughout 1983, while the rate of inflation fell substantially, to around 10 per cent. Moreover, the recession was tending to bottom out and the prospects for a recovery in economic activity were enhanced by evidence of an economic revival in the United States. The Government would welcome an abatement in the high pattern of interest rates, although it recognizes the part which high rates have played in the fight against inflation.</p>

<p>Although South Africa has no foreign debt problem and an excellent credit rating, it is clearly imperative under present world conditions to pursue a conservative financial policy in order to ensure a sound balance of payments and to curb inflation. This should enable South Africa in the year ahead to take advantage of the expected improvement in economic conditions in the main industrial countries and to benefit from a sound export-led expansion of general economic activity.</p>

<p>*We are grateful that by the grace of God Almighty the severe drought of the past few years has been broken in large parts of the country. The drought again underlined the importance of agriculture in the national economy. The Government was obliged to provide large-scale bridging assistance to various agricultural industries and individuals over a wide front.</p>

<p>The dependence of the entire economy on water was again underlined by the drought. The efficient development and utilization of the country&#x2019;s water resources is considered to be of great importance.</p>

<p>It is expected that it will be possible to commission the Koeberg nuclear power station in the course of the year; this will be a major achievement. It is also expected that within the foreseeable future the Uranium Enrichment Corporation will be able to supply all the enriched uranium South Africa needs for her nuclear energy programme.</p>

<p>The Government is constantly striving to enhance the independence and accessibility of our courts and judiciary. For this reason, certain proposals arising from the recommendations made by the Commission of Inquiry into the Structure and <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0035"/>Functioning of the Courts are of the utmost importance to the development of our judicial system. Legislation in this regard will be submitted to Parliament in the course of this Session.</p>

<p>In the difficult circumstances of the past year a large number of unemployed workers were granted assistance from the Unemployment Insurance Fund. Further, a significant number of unemployed young people were involved in training programmes at Government expense and efforts continued to create job opportunities in decentralized areas and in the national and independent states.</p>

<p>It is in the interests of all South Africans that the upgrading of the skills of the work force, the promotion of good relations in the work place and the improvement of the productivity of South African workers should continue to receive searching attention.</p>

<p>Home ownership is one of the most important cornerstones of the Government&#x2019;s programme of renewal and reform to ensure continued progress and prosperity. The sale of more than half a million State-financed homes at very reasonable prices was welcomed in all quarters. Forces are being joined in such a way that the State, financial institutions, local authorities and employers are becoming involved in the housing action.</p>

<p>The Government&#x2019;s policy on the educational dispensation within the new constitutional system was made known in a White Paper in November last year. It was formulated in the light of the report by the Main Committee of the HSRC investigation into education as adapted by the Interim Education Working Party on the strength of comments from the public and interested bodies.</p>

<p>The educational process in South Africa brings me to a new point: the struggle to keep the environment clean and tidy and to protect our country&#x2019;s soil. This is of supreme importance. A national campaign to preserve our natural heritage and to combat littering has already been launched. Every South African must be encouraged and inspired to play his part.</p>

<p>Another requirement of enormous national importance, as seen by the Government, is to reduce the excessively high accident and death rates on our roads. For this reason the Government has decided on Road Safety Year 84. I appeal to all South Africans to give their fullest co-operation in this regard.</p>

<p>To all the people of South Africa and to the Government go my thanks and appreciation for the sacrifices they have made, the determination with which they have acted. Special thanks are due to the men and women who serve South Africa in the public sector. Above all, I honour the members of the Security Forces who have made the supreme sacrifice in the service of their country.</p>

<p>As someone who has been active in public life for many years I should like to convey to you finally a message of faith, hope and confidence in the future.</p>

<p>Mr Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the Fourth Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#report_of_select_committee_on_paarl_mountain_amendment_bill">

<heading>REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON PAARL MOUNTAIN AMENDMENT BILL</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>laid upon the Table the Report of the Select Committee on the Paarl Mountain Amendment Bill (Hybrid) [B 26&#x2014;83], reporting that the Committee had been unable to complete its inquiry.</p>

<p>Report and proceedings to be printed.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Statement)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, with your leave I should like to make the following statement on the business of this House:</p>

<p>The Second Reading speech on the Part Appropriation Bill will be delivered on Thursday, 16 February. The debate will commence on the same day, while the reply <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0036"/>will be given on Wednesday, 22 February. There is no Committee Stage, and the Third Reading will be taken on Thursday, 23 February.</p>

<p>The Additional Appropriation Bill will be considered on Tuesday, 28 February, and as is customary, all the stages will be dealt with on the same day.</p>

<p>The Second Reading speech on the Transport Services Appropriation Bill will be delivered on Wednesday, 29 February; the debate will commence on the same day and will be resumed on Monday, 5 March. The Committee Stage will be taken on Wednesday, 7 March, and the Third Reading on Monday, 12 March.</p>

<p>The Second Reading of the Post Office Additional Appropriation Bill will be taken on Wednesday, 22 February, and as is customary, all the stages will be dealt with on the same day.</p>

<p>The Second Reading speech on the Post Office Appropriation Bill will be delivered on Tuesday, 13 March. The Second Reading debate will be continued on Wednesday, 14 March. The Committee Stage as well as the Third Reading will be taken on Thursday, 15 March.</p>

<p>The Second Reading of the Main Appropriation will commence on Wednesday, 28 March. The Second Reading debate will be resumed on Monday, 2 April, and will continue until Thursday, 5 April, while the reply to the debate will be delivered on Tuesday, 10 April. The Votes of the State President and of Parliament will be dealt with in Committee on the same day. Further dates for the Committee Stage will be fixed after consultation with the Whips and announced later. The dates for the Third Reading debate will also be announced at a later stage.</p>

<p>The duration of the Easter Recess will be from the adjournment on Friday, 13 April, until the House meets again on Tuesday, 24 April.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">H E J VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>When is the Indian referendum?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>What has that to do with you? [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Order!</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#reappointment_of_select_committee_on_paarl_mountain_amendment_bill">

<heading>REAPPOINTMENT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON PAARL MOUNTAIN AMENDMENT BILL</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_of_development_and_of_land_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEVELOPMENT AND OF LAND AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That with reference to the resolution adopted by the House on 18 August 1983, the Select Committee on the Paarl Mountain Amendment Bill (Hybrid) [B 26&#x2014;83] be reappointed.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>(The late State President B J VORSTER)</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House, deeply conscious of the great loss sustained by South Africa on 10 September 1983 through the death of Mr Balthazar Johannes Vorster, DMS, former State President of the Republic of South Africa, places on record its sincere appreciation of the invaluable services so selflessly rendered by him to his country and its people, in particular as a member of this House for more than 25 years, as a Deputy Minister from 1958 to 1961, as a Cabinet Minister from 1961 to 1966, as Prime Minister from 1966 to 1978 and as State President from 1978 to 1979.</block>

<block name="quote">This House expresses its profound sorrow at the loss of an outstanding statesman, whose memory is held in affection and admiration not only by the members of this House, but also by the people of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that an expression of its heartfelt sympathy in their sad bereavement be conveyed to Mrs Vorster and the other members of Mr Vorster&#x2019;s family.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_opposition">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, on behalf of those on this side of the House I should like to second the motion of condolence of the hon the Prime <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0037"/>Minister on the occasion of the death of the former State President. We wish to express the hope that his nearest relatives will find the strength to endure times of loneliness.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#treurnicht">

<from>*Dr <person refersTo="hansard_za">A P TREURNICHT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, this party should like to associate itself with the motion of the hon the Prime Minister. For a person to have become Prime Minister of South Africa at such a youthful age, and subsequently State President, must have required exceptional qualities of character, insight and leadership. We are of the opinion that although a leader probably does not have the consent of all people on all points at any given moment, Mr Vorster did display that exceptional leadership and distinguished himself in an exceptional way.</p>

<p>We pay tribute to an exceptional debater, to a person with gifts of leadership, to a person who rendered exceptional services to the Republic of South Africa and all its people. We associate ourselves with the motion in conveying our sympathy as well to his family.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">W V RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate the New Republic Party with the motion moved by the hon the Prime Minister and to say that we do so with sincerity and feeling for the family on the passing of a man with whom we differed politically, but whom I and those who served in this House under him came to know and respect. We support the motion.</p>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>(The late Mr S A Pitman)</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 18 November 1983 of Mr Selwyn Anthony Pitman, who represented the electoral division of Pine-town, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service of more than 4 years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy in their bereavement be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased.</block>

<p>It was with regret, Sir, that we heard of the death at the youthful age of 52 years of Mr Pitman as a member of this Parliament. Although he was a member of this House for only four years, he was known as an able debater and a man who was fearless in expressing his opinions. Although, naturally, we did not always share his views, we will certainly remember him as one of the active members in this House.</p>

<p>In expressing our sympathy to his family, his friends and his colleagues in his party, we recall that he was the first PFP member of Parliament to be elected in Natal where he was known as a successful student, a keen sportsman and a successful advocate of the Supreme Court.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_opposition">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I wish to express my gratitude to the hon the Prime Minister for having moved this motion. Mr Pitman was a very close and personal friend of mine and I cherish his memory. I do not think he would have thought it proper to make use of an occasion such as this to make a long speech on his behalf. All I wish to say is that we on this side of the House valued him highly as a colleague. He was a very close friend of ours and we knew him as a man with a passionate love for his country and all its peoples.</p>

<p>In seconding this motion I should like once again to express my thanks to the hon the Prime Minister for having moved it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#treurnicht">

<from>*Dr <person refersTo="hansard_za">A P TREURNICHT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to associate ourselves with the motion introduced by the hon the Prime Minister. We on our part would also like to convey our sympathy to the family of the deceased.</p>

<p>The hon member distinguished himself by making a constructive contribution to the debates and the proceedings of this House.</p>

<p>It goes without saying, of course, that we did not always agree with him, but I think the hon member distinguished himself by his refinement and courtesy. We gladly support the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">W V RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I wish to associate myself and my party with this motion <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0038"/>and to say that we were all shocked by the untimely death of Harry Pitman. I knew him best on the cricket field where we were possibly closer than we were on the political battlefield, and where I learned to respect him as a sportsman and as a man.</p>

<p>I should like to associate myself and my party with this motion and extend our condolences to his widow and family.</p>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#tribute_to_the_hon_s_p_botha_dms_for_services_rendered_as_leader_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<heading>TRIBUTE TO THE HON S P BOTHA, DMS, FOR SERVICES RENDERED AS LEADER OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its appreciation of the distinguished services rendered to Parliament by the Hon S P Botha, DMS, former Minister of Manpower, in his capacity as Leader of the House of Assembly.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_opposition">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I gladly second the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hoon">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H HOON</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, the CP wishes to place on record that it cannot, unfortunately, associate itself with this motion. [Interjections.] The hon S P Botha, the former Leader of the House of Assembly, is at present a very contentious figure and there are many questions about his conduct while he was Leader of the House of Assembly which are still hanging in the air. The Hon S P Botha is involved in the situation which compelled him to resign as member of the House of Assembly and Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Order! The hon member should merely indicate whether there is any objection to the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hoon">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">J H HOON</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, Sir, there is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>In that case I shall now give notice that I shall move the motion on Monday.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1984-01-27T12:07:00">12h07.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

