---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol1 - TUESDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1984'
layout: debate
year: 1984
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 1984</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>The House met in the Assembly Chamber at <recordedTime time="1984-09-18T08:30:00">08h30.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<p>The Secretary intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Chairman of the House.</p>

<debateSection name="#election_of_chairman_of_the_house">

<heading>ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#clase">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">P J CLASE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Victor, I move:</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr Zacharias Petrus le Roux take the Chair of this House as Chairman of the House.</block>

<p>It is my privilege to propose Mr Rex le Roux as the first Chairman of the House of Assembly. There is no doubt about the special talents he is endowed with. It is indeed true that he possesses the necessary qualifications and the right personality to occupy with honour the office of chairman.</p>

<p>His birthplace was near the border between the Transvaal and the Cape Province, not far from the Vaal River, in the vicinity of Barkly West. He obtained the degrees BSc Engineering and Surveying as well as LL B at the Universities of Witwatersrand and Pretoria.</p>

<p>In 1981, having already been a member of the House of Assembly for six years, he obtained a Master&#x2019;s degree in urban and regional planning. He did excellent work as surveyor, advocate and even lecturer in surveying at the University of Pretoria.</p>

<p>He was elected to the Transvaal Provincial Council in October 1970, and four years later he was elected MP for Pretoria West. In the House of Assembly he soon distinguished himself as a diligent worker and an able debater. Until quite recently he rendered valuable and greatly appreciated service as chairman of the Commission for Co-operation and development.</p>

<p>To be a successful chairman of the House of Assembly requires special talents of heart and intellect. These have been generously bestowed on Mr Rex le Roux. His strong <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0016"/>personality, his friendly, though firm, conduct, his fairness and sound judgment makes him particularly suited to this important and demanding task. I have no doubt that he will perform his task with dignity and grace and that in the best tradition of fairness and impartiality, he will very soon gain the confidence of all hon members.</p>

<p>Mr Victor, I want to conclude by paying tribute to Mrs Cora le Roux who, in her pleasant and friendly way, has supported her husband for so many years with love, interest and compassion. Together they will be a credit to this House in future. Every well-meaning hon member wishes Mr Rex le Roux a successful and happy period of office and wishes him and his wife many happy years together.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">*HON MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">N J PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Victor, it is a great honour for me to second the proposal of the hon Chief Whip.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, the Secretary called upon Mr Z P le Roux to indicate whether he accepted the nomination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">Z P LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Victor, I am pleased to submit in all humility to the choice of the House of Assembly.</p>

<p>Thereupon the Secretary declared Mr Z P le Roux duly elected.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>*Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">Z P LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Victor, before taking the Chair of the House of Assembly I should like to express my sincere gratitude to all hon members for electing me unanimously as the first Chairman of the House of Assembly in the new dispensation in terms of the new Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, Act No 110 of 1983.</p>

<p>I accept this high office in full awareness of the fact that it behoves this House to pursue at all times the maintenance of Christian values and civilized norms as well as respect for and the protection of the human dignity of all people.</p>

<p>&#x2020;It is true that in the last instance the Chairman is the principal officer of the House of Assembly. It will therefore be my duty as the first Chairman and servant of this House to develop a code of conduct along the lines of the traditions and principles enunciated by hon speakers of Parliament. This will enable me to serve effectively as a custodian of the rights and the privileges of this House and of all its hon members.</p>

<p>*Deeply conscious of how great and important this responsibility is I humbly accept the duty to be the servant of this House, and believe that I may indeed rely on the support and assistance of all hon members.</p>

<p>Mr P J Clase and Mr N J Pretorius conducted Mr Z P le Roux to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I believe I speak on behalf of all hon members of all parties in this House when I wholeheartedly congratulate you on your election as Chairman. I believe it is the right office for you. You are a firm person but you also have a sense of humour. I think we shall get along well. [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_official_opposition">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE OFFICIAL OPPOSITION</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Official Opposition I, too, should like to congratulate you on your election as Chairman and assure you of our co-operation. We also wish you everything of the best for your task.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#treurnicht">

<from>*Dr <person refersTo="hansard_za">A P TREURNICHT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I should like to associate myself with the congratulations conveyed to you by the hon the Leader of the House. I also want to assure you that you will have the fullest co-operation of us on this side of the House. I am only sorry that I cannot invite you to a rally in Waterberg. However, I am sure that you will come and shoot impala there occasionally.</p>

<p>We convey to you our sincere congratulations and assume you of our full support.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">W V RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I want to associate the NRP with the words of congratulation that have been expressed. I want to assure you that you will have the full support of hon members of this party in the execution of your onerous duties. We will accord you the respect due to the Chair and to your office, and also to the person of the <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0017"/>Chairman, and we will do so in the true spirit of a loyal opposition party.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to convey my sincere thanks to the hon the Leader of the House, the hon the Leader of the Official Opposition and hon leaders of other opposition parties in this House for the friendly words addressed to me. I appreciate them. Your support is essential to me if I am to execute my official duties properly. I thank you all most sincerely.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>stated that he had been requested by Mr Speaker to notify the House that vacancies had occurred in the House of Assembly&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) owing to the resignation with effect from 1 September 1984 of Dr J E Pieterse, a member nominated in terms of section 40(l)(b) of the Constitution of 1961;</li>

<li>(b) in terms of section 7(6) of the Constitution of 1983, in the representation of the electoral division of George, owing to the election of the Hon P W Botha, DMS, as State President with effect from 5 September 1984; and</li>

<li>(c) owing to the resignation with effect from 15 September 1984 of Prof the Hon O P F Horwood, a member nominated in terms of section 40(l)(b) of the Constitution of 1961.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS</heading>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>announced that the vacancies in the seats of members of the House of Assembly nominated in terms of section 40(l)(b) of the Constitution of 1961 had been filled by the nomination in terms of section 4(l)(b) of the Constitution of 1983 of Mr J C G Botha and Dr E H Venter with effect from 17 September 1984.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>announced that the Honourable Mr Justice P J Rabie, Chief Justice of South Africa, yesterday administered the oath to the following members of the House of Assembly: Messrs J C G Botha, N W Ligthelm and J C B Schoeman.</p>

<p>Dr E H Venter, introduced by Mr P J Clase and Mr R P Meyer, made and subscribed the oath and took her seat.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#calling_of_a_joint_sitting">

<heading>CALLING OF A JOINT SITTING</heading>

<speech by="#chairman_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>read a Message from the Acting State President calling a joint sitting, as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">I hereby call, under the provisions of section 67 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1983, a joint sitting of the House of Assembly, the House of Representatives and the House of Delegates on 18 September 1984 for the purpose of the opening of Parliament.</block>

<p>P W BOTHA,</p>

<p>Acting State President.</p>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 08h44 and Resumed at 11h47.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#third_report_of_select_committee_on_the_prohibition_of_mixed_marriages_act_and_section_16_of_the_immorality_act">

<heading>THIRD REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE PROHIBITION OF MIXED MARRIAGES ACT AND SECTION 16 OF THE IMMORALITY ACT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>laid upon the Table the Third Report of the Select Committee of the House of Assembly (Fourth Session, Seventh Parliament) on the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act and section 16 of the Immorality Act, 1984 (SC 12a&#x2014;84).</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#welcoming_of_mr_speaker">

<heading>WELCOMING OF MR SPEAKER</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>reported that he had been welcomed as newly elected Speaker at the Joint Sitting this morning.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president&#x2019;s_opening_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S OPENING ADDRESS</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>reported that he had received a copy of the President&#x2019;s Opening Address delivered at the Joint Sitting, which was in the following terms:</p>

<block name="quote">*Mr Speaker, Members of the House of Assembly, Members of the House of <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0018"/>Representatives, Members of the House of Delegates:</block>

<p>It is a special honour for me to welcome you to this the First Session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>Today evolutionary and constitutional political reform is seen to have meaning. It is the beginning of a Constitutional dispensation in which various population groups will have a political say without domination of one group by another. This is yet another milestone in the history of South Africa, a history that is marked by momentous events such as Union in 1910 and the start of the Republican era in 1961.</p>

<p>Today witnesses the result of a quest over many years to extend the democratic process to Coloureds and Indians in a meaningful manner and within a stable framework. These groups, which up to now have enjoyed only limited political rights, have now become part of the decision-making process. Their citizenship thus acquires greater meaning.</p>

<p>However, like its predecessor, this Parliament, which today becomes a reality, will have to face certain challenges.</p>

<p>Viewed economically, we are endeavouring to create a constitutional framework within which a larger part of the population will have a say in the utilization and allocation of the country&#x2019;s limited resources with regard to the supply of public services.</p>

<p>Today we therefore usher in a new era of decision-making as to how common needs as well as the specific needs of the individual population groups and communities are to be provided for.</p>

<p>None of us is likely to have any illusions about the multiplicity or the scope of these needs.</p>

<p>South Africa is characterized not only by a rapid population increase, but also by a pluralistic economy. In addition to a well-developed modern sector and a large subsistence sector, there are also parts of South African society that have not yet been fully integrated in the modern sector although they have in fact progressed beyond the subsistence sector.</p>

<p>This plurality is apparent from, among other things, the relatively uneven distribution of income, the imbalance that marks the geographic distribution of economic activities and the unsatisfactory socio-economic conditions of sections of the population.</p>

<p>It is therefore essential that national objectives such as the promotion of economic growth and the creation of job opportunities, regional development and the socio-economic advancement of certain groups and communities should enjoy a high priority in dealing with the country&#x2019;s political, social and economic problems.</p>

<p>However, in striving to attain these and other national objectives, the shortage of skilled labour is a serious problem. There is therefore a great need for educational and training facilities, not only to combat ignorance and illiteracy, but also to serve various social, cultural, economic and political purposes.</p>

<p>Seen against the background of the peace initiatives in Southern Africa and the new constitutional dispensation now being implemented, it is to be foreseen that, in this new era, the enemies of South Africa, fearing the positive results of all these developments, will be spurred to new heights in their onslaught on South Africa. In this process even greater demands might therefore be made in respect of security, defence and the maintenance of law and order.</p>

<p>In the field of agriculture, the oppressive drought conditions have necessitated supportive Government action, while our business sector is increasingly having to contend with disruptive competition from countries where conditions are such that satisfactory markets and prices can no longer be guaranteed.</p>

<p>Then, too, the Republic of South Africa is surrounded by countries whose economies are in a relatively early stage of development and which are linked in a special manner with the RSA. Their economic and political stability will therefore affect South Africa&#x2019;s economic and political stability.</p>

<p>All of us have certain expectations, not only as to how these numerous common needs, but also our own individual needs, are to be met.</p>

<p><span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0019"/>&#x2020;The economic resources of our country are, however, not sufficient to provide for all these needs. In our decisions it is therefore imperative that we should take the economic realities of our country into account. This applies not only to the public sector but also to every member of the community.</p>

<p>In these decision-making processes we must acknowledge the fact that, just as a buoyant economy is simply not possible in an unstable political environment, political stability is likewise impossible in unstable economic and socio-economic conditions.</p>

<p>A heavy responsibility therefore rests on both the public sector and the public in general not to make excessive demands on the country&#x2019;s productive resources. In providing for common, community and individual needs, priorities must be determined with great care so that lasting economic stability can be achieved. There is therefore no room for short-sighted planning.</p>

<p>Economically our country is experiencing certain problems at present, as evidenced by, among other things, an upward tendency in the inflation rate, a weakening of the balance of payments and a decline in the value of the rand against other currencies.</p>

<p>It is true that this weakening of our external accounts can largely be attributed to external factors&#x2014;in particular the recent decline in the gold price, the slow recovery of world demand for South African goods exports and the continued drought. Together with the renewed upward pressure on prices, this reflects, however, an imbalance in the economy, caused largely by sharp increases in public and private consumption expenditure. Greater demands by both the public sector and the public are therefore being made on the economy than it is able to satisfy&#x2014;a situation which, if it continues, cannot fail to have grave implications for our economy in the longer term.</p>

<p>The Government has therefore had to resort to drastic economic policy measures. Although it is realized that, as far as economic growth is concerned, matters have to date gone reasonably well since a positive growth rate will probably be achieved this year, these measures weigh heavily on the public. The Government is also well aware of the fact that certain sectors of the economy, such as the agricultural and the small business sectors, as well as certain sections of the population, have been severely affected by these measures.</p>

<p>The Government has already undertaken publicly to curb its spending. However, it is realized that the curbing of capital expenditure will not only have a disruptive effect on some sectors of the economy, but will also, in the case of the supply of essential infrastructure which in some cases is already showing signs of lagging behind, not solve the problem but rather aggravate it.</p>

<p>Although it will be difficult to achieve in the short term, the emphasis will therefore, wherever practicable, have to be placed on the curbing of current expenditure. Among other things this will necessitate an ongoing evaluation of the services for which the public sector should accept responsibility.</p>

<p>There is a growing and unjustified tendency to expect the Government to accept responsibility for compensating individual sectors and groups for the fluctuations being experienced in economic activity. It must, however, be realized that, as in the case of an individual, a country that lives beyond its means will be faced with grave problems in the longer term.</p>

<p>The Government views these matters in such a serious light that it has, by means of legislation, provided for the establishment of a National Priorities Committee which will examine not only government expenditure, but also the financing thereof, on an ongoing basis. The composition of this committee is such that all the parties involved in the executive authority will participate in its activities.</p>

<p>However, the solution of our economic problems requires a team effort on the part of the public sector at all levels of government and the public in general. Today I therefore wish to call on every member of the community to exercise self-control and to refrain from living beyond his or her means.</p>

<p>We are faced with the need to scale down both our short and long-term expectations in accordance with the economic <span class="col_19-20" refersTo="page_0020"/>and financial potential of our country. However, it is also the responsibility of each member of the community to help to strengthen the country&#x2019;s economy by utilizing his or her energy in a more productive manner.</p>

<p>There is therefore no reason to be overwhelmed by negative economic developments which are only of a temporary nature. It will be possible to surmount these difficulties and to ensure a sustained improvement in our living standards by means of, on the one hand, sound financial and economic policies and practices and, on the other, greater diligence and a sustained increase in the productivity of our human and capital resources.</p>

<p>If we succeed in adjusting our short and long-term expectations to our country&#x2019;s economy and in consistently increasing the productivity of our productive resources we shall in the long term reap the fruits of our efforts.</p>

<p>If we deal with these challenges by means of self-control, industry, thrift, realism, forbearance and mutual respect, with the emphasis on consultation, negotiation and co-operation and with a genuine desire to arrive at just and equitable solutions, we shall lay the foundations for sustained economic prosperity, while at the same time making further constitutional development possible.</p>

<p>In fact, there are already signs that the measures that have been taken, added to the more positive outlook for South African exports other than gold, should effect a relatively swift improvement in the current account of the balance of payments. If we also succeed in curbing both public and private consumer spending, interest rates may in due course return to lower levels. Thus a sound foundation will be laid for the next economic upswing and for economic growth and the creation of job opportunities.</p>

<p>The economic challenges facing us remind us of the complexity of our task in trying to enhance the quality of life of every inhabitant of South Africa.</p>

<p>The needs, the circumstances and the aspirations of the people of our country are of a diverse nature. The nature of our task is therefore such that it is neither simple nor capable of being solved instantly.</p>

<p>Politically, Black participation requires structures and processes other than those offered by this Constitution. We therefore realize that the Constitution in terms of which this Parliament has been created and you have been summoned here today, does not provide fully for the diversity which marks the South African population. Democratic political participation must also be further extended among our Black communities in South Africa in order to ensure their advancement and to meet the demands for justice.</p>

<p>My Government will continue to create, on the basis of consultation and negotiation, a framework within which co-operation with Black States, both independent and self-governing, can take place. Furthermore, means will have to be found to enable Black communities outside the independent and self-governing states to participate in political decision-making in matters affecting their interests. Thus we have to continue to build on the foundations which have been laid by the establishment of Black local authorities.</p>

<p>*This historic day is rich in meaning.</p>

<p>In meeting here today we are continuing on the road taken by us to establish at the southern point of Africa a community living in peace, prosperity and justice, and honouring the principle of self-determination of population groups and nations.</p>

<p>We continue today our strivings to uphold Christian values and civilized norms while retaining religious freedom.</p>

<p>We have pledged ourselves to implementing developmental processes by means of orderly reform. The maintenance of order, security and stability and the protection of our country and its people against those preaching and instigating revolution and violence, guarantee such developmental processes.</p>

<p>We shall strive to recognize the human dignity of all and to realize the principle of justice.</p>

<p>We pledge ourselves to maintain at all costs the position of the Republic as a sovereign, independent state within the community of states. We likewise pledge ourselves to strive for the ideal of world peace and also, by means of international co-operation, to enable other members of <span class="col_21-22" refersTo="page_0021"/>the community of states to become fully-fledged members thereof.</p>

<p>Specifically in Southern Africa, the Republic wishes to guide, in conjunction with its neighbours, the subcontinent towards an era marked by progress and prosperity.</p>

<p>It is not possible for a task of this nature ever to be completed.</p>

<p>For us, transient creatures that we are, it is our highest calling to hold consistently to this course, not because we are certain of what the final destination will be, but because we are convinced that what we are doing is right.</p>

<p>We shall continue to bestow freedom on nations and groups on the basis of self-determination in deciding their own affairs, and co-responsibility in matters of common concern.</p>

<p>We shall continue to develop South Africa so that it will become a worthy object of our love and pride.</p>

<p>Finally, today is a decisive day. The times ahead will make heavy demands on all of us. Faced with our own inadequacy and the forces that are threatening to destroy us, the challenges facing us seem to be insurmountable.</p>

<p>If we are convinced of the rightness of our actions, no challenge will be too great. By the grace of God, we will find the answer to the challenges in ourselves. We have the means: the minerals, the infrastructure, the technology, and I believe that we have the leaders&#x2014;White, Black, Coloured and Indian&#x2014;to create a system within which the individual will be able to enjoy his fundamental rights, and communities and population groups will not feel threatened. I pray that we all may be blessed with the faith so necessary for this task.</p>

<p>Mr Speaker, Parliament has in its wisdom set out in the Preamble to the Constitution the challenges in store for us and our answer thereto. In the spirit of the Preamble, my Government will lead the Republic, and I pray that you may join me in associating yourselves with the lofty ideals set out in the Preamble.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Mr Speaker, Members of the House of Assembly, Members of the House of Representatives, Members of the House of Delegates:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almight God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the First Session of the Eighth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_chairman_of_committees_of_the_whole_house">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES OF THE WHOLE HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Chairman, I move without notice:</p>

<block name="quote">That Dr Helgard Michael Janse van Rensburg be appointed Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_deputy_chairman_of_committees_of_the_whole_house">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES OF THE WHOLE HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move without notice:</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr Valentin Albert Volker be appointed Deputy Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I move:</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1984-09-18T08:30:00">11h52.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

