---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol47 - FRIDAY 1 FEBRUARY 1974'
layout: debate
year: 1974
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 1974</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members met in the Assembly Chamber of the House of Assembly, Cape Town, at <recordedTime time="1974-02-01T10:30:00">10.30 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

<p>By direction of Mr. Speaker,</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 15 June 1973, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 146, 1973.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the First day of February, 1974, and I declare that the Fifth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</block>

<block name="quote">Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Kareedouw on this Fifteenth day of June One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-three.</block>

<p>J. J. FOUCH&#x00C9;, State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancy">

<heading>VACANCY</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess a vacancy had occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Gezina, owing to the resignation with effect from 27 December 1973 of Mr. J. H. Visse.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening1">

<heading>OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a letter had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11 o&#x2019;clock a.m. today in the Senate Chamber.</p>

<p><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0013"/>Mr. SPEAKER and members proceeded to the Senate Chamber to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the Fifth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa has not only maintained its international position but is expanding its relations and contacts with the outside world, despite certain limiting factors. Anti-South African activities abroad are acquiring greater sophistication and financial support. Use is also being made of international pressures, which are directed not only against Western countries cooperating with South Africa, but particularly against countries in Africa, thus inhibiting the full and open development of inter-governmental relations with more African states. The Government has nevertheless persisted in its efforts and has succeeded in extending contacts and co-operation not only in Africa but also in the wider international spectrum. Additional diplomatic missions have been and are being opened, and more ministerial and other government visitors come to the Republic every year.</block>

<block name="quote">I hope to have the honour soon of welcoming His Excellency General Alfredo Stroessner, President of Paraguay, to our country.</block>

<block name="quote">The renewed outbreak of hostilities between the Arab States and Israel led to the decision by the Arab oil-producing countries to impose an oil embargo on several countries including South Africa, Portugal and Rhodesia. One of the reasons given for cutting off Arab oil supplies to South Africa is the alleged active part this country is supposed to have played in the recent Middle East war. Our policy of non-participation in the disputes of others is however traditional and well known, and South Africa has in fact played no part in that war. We, like many others, firmly believe that world peace and economic progress can best be served by an equitable solution acceptable to both sides. We sincerely hope that the present moves will lead to positive results.</block>

<block name="quote">Events during the past year have again underlined the intricate network of relations and the interdependence in important matters between the Republic and its neighbouring States. The oil crisis has shown how one or more members of this group cannot isolate themselves from the effects of events threatening to disturb the economy of the others.</block>

<block name="quote">The Customs Union Agreement provides a framework within which there is an increasing amount of contact at ministerial and official level for tackling common problems in the economic field.</block>

<block name="quote">We have noted with abhorrence the actions of terrorists in Southern Africa and elsewhere, actions which have caused death or serious injury to innocent human beings.</block>

<block name="quote">Terrorism is a world-wide phenomenon which knows no boundaries, and it is to be strongly deplored that the international community is still unable to agree on action against it. Indeed, some Governments and international organizations give material help to terrorists, and efforts are being made at international forums to make certain forms of terrorism legitimate. It must be expected that terrorist activities involving better and more sophisticated weapons, will increase.</block>

<block name="quote">The United Nations continues to pass, by large majorities, ever more virulent resolutions against South Africa, while turning a blind eye to the positive developments in this country.</block>

<block name="quote">Towards the end of 1973, the Security Council saw fit to end the Secretary-General&#x2019;s contacts with the Government of South Africa&#x2014;contacts aimed at finding common ground with South Africa on the future of South-West Africa. The United Nations, created to ensure peace and good will amongst nations, is fast <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0014"/>becoming an instrument for the fabrication of anti-South African propaganda and hatred. It is to be hoped that common sense will yet prevail and that it will be realized that by artificially creating a situation of confrontation the organization is defeating its own aims and undermining its principles.</block>

<block name="quote">A number of pressure groups in South Africa are trying to bring about unconstitutional political, social and economic changes in this country. These groups do not have in mind normal evolutionary change; they are bent upon radical, even revolutionary, political activities. Implicit in their call for change is the threat of internal violence.</block>

<block name="quote">A disturbing feature about the activities of these pressure groups is that practically all their funds emanate from abroad, in some cases from quarters which finance terrorist movements.</block>

<block name="quote">It has therefore become necessary for the Legislature to consider measures to ensure that these pressure groups do not succeed in artificially creating a particular political climate internally, and to prevent them from presenting a one-sided and distorted image of South Africa abroad and from accepting money from outside the borders of South Africa to further a cause which cannot find sufficient financial backing in the country itself.</block>

<block name="quote">So far as internal security is concerned, in spite of the attempts I have mentioned, peace and order continue to prevail as a result of effective action by those responsible for their maintenance.</block>

<block name="quote">The equipping and training of the South African Defence Force for its defensive role are being continued. In the field of armaments manufacture the Republic is fully self-sufficient in respect of most of its requirements.</block>

<block name="quote">A committee of inquiry into the national service system revealed certain shortcomings which will be rectified so as to bring about uniformity throughout the Force.</block>

<block name="quote">It is gratifying to be able to state that, in spite of the world-wide increase in the incidence of crime in recent years, there has been no increase in the incidence of serious crime in the Republic during the past year and in some instances there was a decrease.</block>

<block name="quote">A reasonable measure of success has been achieved in curbing the evil of drugs, owing mainly to the provisions of the Abuse of Dependence-producing Substances and Rehabilitation Centres Act, 1971 (Act No. 41 of 1971), which considerably increased the powers of the Police.</block>

<block name="quote">The past year has again claimed the lives of several members of our Police Force, White as well as non-White, while serving on the borders, and on behalf of the Government and the peoples of the Republic I wish to express sincere condolences to those whose loved ones fell in the service of their country.</block>

<block name="quote">In recognition of their invaluable services it has been decided to award a special medal to policemen who perform border duties.</block>

<block name="quote">The changes made in the composition of the Government&#x2019;s information service have already resulted in satisfactory progress in the scope as well as in the tempo of its activities.</block>

<block name="quote">The newly established training school for information officers has been expanded into a comprehensive training institution which makes use of closed-circuit television as well as other techniques, and some of the first trainees are already serving in the field.</block>

<block name="quote">Nevertheless, the broad political and ideological onslaught on the Republic is so extensive and well organized that the provision of further aids for the information service is being considered.</block>

<block name="quote">This year, for the first time since 1970, the Republic, through its official information service, will once again publish an official yearbook.</block>

<block name="quote">It is gratifying to report a very real improvement in the interest and active support of the private sector in the activities of our information service.</block>

<block name="quote">The current balance of payments position of the Republic was strong during the past year. Although imports increased appreciably, exports remained at a high level and the value of the net gold output showed a substantial rise. The latter increase was due to the remarkable rise in the price of gold on the private market.</block>

<block name="quote">On capital account, however, the balance of payments showed a downward trend during the latter part of 1973, <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0015"/>as a result of various factors, including the higher rates of interest prevailing abroad, the availability of funds in the domestic money and capital markets, and the repayment of foreign official loans. The consequent net outflow of capital led to a substantial decline in the country&#x2019;s gold and other foreign reserves, particularly during the later months of 1973. It is expected, however, that the net inflow of capital will be resumed in the near future.</block>

<block name="quote">The strength of the rand <i>vis-&#x00E0;-vis</i> other currencies is reflected in the Government&#x2019;s decision to assume the obligations of Article VIII of the International Monetary Fund Agreement. This step has brought the Republic into line with the world&#x2019;s leading industrial countries.</block>

<block name="quote">International monetary reform is at present being studied by a committee of the Governors of the International Monetary Fund. South Africa is represented on this committee where we are playing a constructive role. Thus far, however, the progress made by the committee has been disappointing.</block>

<block name="quote">The revival in domestic economic activity gained further momentum. While, as a result of the trends in the balance of payments, conditions in the money and capital markets have recently become more constrained, there is still ample scope for sound economic growth. It remains the Government&#x2019;s policy to encourage such growth and, provided this is not inhibited by international developments, a further strong upsurge in the economy can be expected in 1974.</block>

<block name="quote">Economic conditions in the country have shown a further improvement during the past year. Industrial production has increased and conditions in the trade sector have also developed favourably.</block>

<block name="quote">Although there has been a welcome slowdown in the rate of inflation in the recent past, prices in general continue their upward trend. The Government is continuing its fight against inflation energetically and on a broad front. During the past year a representative committee was set up in an attempt to draw all sections of the community into a broad programme of action against inflation.</block>

<block name="quote">Last year a number of the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into the Export Trade of the Republic of South Africa were adopted and these measures are serving as a substantial inducement to local exporters to conduct the foreign marketing of their products more efficiently.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government has actively participated in the preparations for the new series of international trade negotiations which are intended to reduce the existing barriers to world trade and was represented at the Ministerial Meeting held in Tokyo last September to formulate basic principles to this end.</block>

<block name="quote">The measures taken by the Government to encourage a higher level of economic growth have undoubtedly produced positive results and stimulated industrial activity. The increased demand for goods and services could thus far be satisfied mainly by fuller utilization of existing production facilities. The further expansion of our needs is expected to bring about a marked increase in new investment by the manufacturing sector during 1974, and the Government will do its utmost to assist in this respect.</block>

<block name="quote">The measures taken by the Government to accelerate the training of Bantu and those taken to increase productivity in general will undoubtedly have a significant effect on the further development of industry in both the long and the short term. Increasing provision will be made for the necessary training facilities.</block>

<block name="quote">The sugar industry had one of its most successful seasons in 1972-&#x2019;73 and achieved new production levels.</block>

<block name="quote">The 15th Congress of the International Society of Sugar Cane Technologists is due to be held in Durban during June this year. I shall be pleased to act as patron to this congress.</block>

<block name="quote">A constant rate of growth is being maintained by South Africa&#x2019;s tourist industry.</block>

<block name="quote">So far as the supply of oil is concerned, South Africa finds itself in the same position as other importing countries in that it has to contend with a considerable reduction in its oil supplies from some of the main oil-producing countries. There is a possibility that the supply of fuel will be reduced still further. The Government has been obliged, therefore, to introduce a number of measures in an effort to reduce <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0016"/>the consumption of fuel and will have to review the position as and when the need arises.</block>

<block name="quote">The very substantial increase in the price of crude oil will undoubtedly have its effect on our economy as well as on those of other consumer countries of the world.</block>

<block name="quote">In the meantime positive steps are being taken to develop and conserve the country&#x2019;s energy resources and to economise in their use. The Government is, for instance, taking a careful look at the large-scale exports of those minerals which, owing to the energy crisis, have become of growing importance to South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">This crisis confronting the world has highlighted the need for efficient use of all existing sources of energy and strongly emphasized the importance and timeliness of the uranium enrichment work launched by the Government. The first part of the uranium enrichment pilot plant should be commissioned in the near future.</block>

<block name="quote">Although oil in exploitable quantities was not found in 1973 the Government feels in duty bound&#x2014;especially in view of present world conditions&#x2014;to continue exploration, and remains optimistic that the search will meet with success.</block>

<block name="quote">*The total sales value of all minerals mined in the Republic last year exceeded R2 500 million, which represents a growth rate of more than 28% and an increase of nearly one-third over the 1972 figure. This exceptional achievement can be attributed mainly to an increase of approximately 45% in the value of gold sales (despite a drop in the amount of gold produced), as well as to a rise of from 60% to 70% in the value of diamond sales and a higher income from sales of platinum-group metals and certain base minerals.</block>

<block name="quote">The marketing prospects for South African minerals on world markets as well as locally are particularly promising at present.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa&#x2019;s potential for the production of radio-isotopes, which are used in medicine, industry and agriculture, continues to increase and since June 1973 the local production of iodine-131 has had to be undertaken on a weekly basis; this has met more than 95% of the country&#x2019;s needs for solutions of this material. The Atomic Energy Board&#x2019;s hot cell facilities for cobalt 60 production have now been completed and the first cobalt pencils were encapsulated towards the end of last year.</block>

<block name="quote">Substantial improvements in the minimum wages of many thousands of workers in various trades and industries were made last year. Only by increasing productivity can full benefit be derived from these improvements.</block>

<block name="quote">Good progress is being made with the system introduced by legislation last year for communication between Bantu workers and their employers, and liaison committees are being used extensively in a number of trades and industries.</block>

<block name="quote">During 1973 the number of registered unemployed continued to drop and constituted less than 1% of the number of persons employed. It remains necessary to supplement the Republic&#x2019;s manpower with trained immigrants. Although there was a marked decrease in the number of immigrants last year, it is expected that their numbers will increase as a result of conditions which have arisen in their countries of origin owing to energy problems and other factors.</block>

<block name="quote">Poorer grain and horticultural crops, simultaneously in South African and other countries, have caused the world&#x2019;s food supplies to drop to an alarmingly low level, have intensified the competition for the available food supplies and have resulted in the prices of agricultural products skyrocketing throughout the world. Rapid rises in the prices of farming requisites as a result of higher wages and international monetary developments have also contributed to the higher prices of agricultural products. As a result of good rains grazing conditions are good and indications are that bumper summer grain crops will be harvested. Favourable export possibilities in 1974 may be influenced by increased freight and other factors. Our rapidly increasing population and international competition in the field of agriculture make research, development and extension essential for systematic progress of the agricultural industry.</block>

<block name="quote">A general inventory of agricultural resources is being compiled to give a complete picture of the agricultural potential. Modern methods, including remote-sensing and ultra-violet photography, are being employed to work out a system of <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0017"/>land use classification. Irrigation research continues. A central computer is being installed for the collection and processing of all data with a view to the intensive planning of development programmes. Research on improved mechanical and irrigation systems is being carried out in order to make increased agricultural production possible, and a voluntary testing programme for mechanical agricultural equipment has been introduced to advise manufacturers and farmers on the improvement, buying and best use of such equipment.</block>

<block name="quote">The rate at which agricultural land was subdivided in judiciously has dropped sharply since appropriate legislation was passed in 1971, but the use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes is causing concern. Research has been done by the State with a view to increasing the production of better quality agricultural products, and, as a result, a large number of new crops have been developed and released. Because of stricter control under the Soil Conservation Act, good progress is being made with the protection of the soil.</block>

<block name="quote">In order to keep pace with the country&#x2019;s constant growth and the increasing demand for water, comprehensive water schemes are being planned or are already under construction in practically all densely populated areas and centres showing exceptional growth. In the overall planning a sound balance is continually being aimed at between the provision of water for agricultural purposes and for industrial use.</block>

<block name="quote">Efforts are being made to meet South Africa&#x2019;s timber requirements from our own resources. It is planned to expand the afforested areas by an additional 50 000 hectares per annum, a programme in which, it is hoped, the public and private sectors will play an equal role.</block>

<block name="quote">The further progress made during 1973 with the constitutional development of the Bantu homelands is evidenced, <i>inter alia</i>, by the fact that no fewer than four additional territories have been declared self governing.</block>

<block name="quote">In view of the urgent need to develop agriculture and to increase production in the Bantu homelands, for which adequate working capital, skill and entrepreneurship are required, the homeland governments have now enlisted the corporations and White agencies in the development of economic farming projects.</block>

<block name="quote">The establishment of national corporations for the various homelands for the purpose of economic development is at present being considered, and it is envisaged that Bantu governments will participate increasingly in the establishment of industries in their various homelands.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government is urgently proceeding with the consolidation of the territories of the various Bantu homelands and the acquisition of the necessary land is being accelerated.</block>

<block name="quote">Requests by most of the homeland governments for assistance in connection with the overall planning of their areas are receiving special attention.</block>

<block name="quote">Bantu Affairs Administration Boards have been constituted in terms of Act No. 45 of 1971 for the whole of the Republic and are functioning smoothly.</block>

<block name="quote">Upon representations by the South African Indian Council, the Indian community will in future, as in the case of the Coloured Persons&#x2019; Representative Council, be able to elect a number of the members of the Indian Council. In accordance with recommendations by the Indian Council the provisions of the existing legislation in this regard will be put into operation in the course of the year. The Indian Council will also be enlarged from the existing 25 members to the permissible number of 30 members.</block>

<block name="quote">The housing position of Whites in the higher and lower income groups is satisfactory in spite of shortages. The position of the middle income group, however, remains difficult. The attention of local authorities is specifically drawn to their responsibility to provide sufficient building sites for their inhabitants, where necessary, by undertaking township development themselves.</block>

<block name="quote">Mainly on account of the uncontrolled influx of families from the country into urban areas, there is still a strong demand for Coloured housing. Active steps are being taken to wipe out the backlog especially in the larger cities.</block>

<block name="quote">The Department of Posts and Telegraphs, henceforth to be known as the Department of Posts and Telecommunications, proposes to conduct and develop the Post Office Savings Bank, which is at present being conducted for the account <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0018"/>of the Exchequer, for its own account under the exclusive control of the Post Office.</block>

<block name="quote">After planning at an interdepartmental level, the national education policy has been gradually implemented on a co-ordinated basis. Two provincial education departments switched to the new system of differentiated education in January 1973 while the other education departments have done so from the beginning of this year.</block>

<block name="quote">The main report of the Commission of Inquiry into Universities will become available shortly and it is expected that the Commission&#x2019;s findings and recommendations, in so far as they are accepted, will have a material effect on the whole spectrum of tertiary education, particularly university training.</block>

<block name="quote">Since an effective and intensive probation system is considered indispensable to any programme for crime prevention and penal reform, the introduction of such a system is being explored. The establishment of a centre for expert crisis intervention in more cities than the one where such a centre is already operating successfully is under consideration.</block>

<block name="quote">Our health services, which are rendered by various authorities, are developing more and more into an integrated service. This will ensure that the limited number of trained persons in the health profession and the available facilities will be used to the greatest advantage.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government associates itself with the idea of a World Population Year in 1974 and is accepting its responsibility in this connection by developing a country-wide family-planning programme.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa&#x2019;s efforts in the field of sport in 1973, and the achievements of its sportsmen and sportswomen here and abroad, testify to the sincerity of our convictions that every nation should be given every opportunity of competing with the best in the world.</block>

<p>Mr Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the Fifth Session of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#publications_and_entertainments_bill">

<heading>PUBLICATIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS BILL</heading>

<summary>(Notice of Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I wish to give notice that I shall move on Monday&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to provide for the control of certain publications and objects, cinematograph films and public entertainments; to amend the Post Office Act, 1958; to repeal the Publications and Entertainments Act, 1963; to amend the Customs and Excise Act, 1964, and the Indecent or Obscene Photographic Matter Act, 1967; and to provide for incidental matters.</block>

<p>I should just like to add here that I have laid upon the Table today the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Publications and Entertainments Amendment Bill recommending the Bill of which I have just given notice.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1974-02-01T11:40:00">11.40 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

