---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol50 - FRIDAY 2 AUGUST 1974'
layout: debate
year: 1974
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 2 AUGUST 1974</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber, Houses of Parliament, at 8.30 a.m.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 27 February 1974, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 28, 1974.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Second day of August 1974, and I declare that the First Session of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</block>

<block name="quote">Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town on this Twenty-seventh day of February, One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-four.</block>

<p>J. J. FOUCH&#x00C9;, State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The Secretary announced:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the following letters had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister:

<ol>

<li>(a) Letter, dated 17 May 1974, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 12 o&#x2019;clock noon today in the Senate Chamber;</li>

<li>(b) Letters, dated 31 July and 1 August 1974, respectively, notifying the names of persons declared <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0016"/>duly elected as members of the House of Assembly at the general election and by-elections;</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) that the Honourable Mr. Justice J. T. van Wyk, Judge-President of the Cape of Good Hope Provincial Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>The Serjeant-at-Arms announced the Honourable Mr. Justice J. T. van Wyk who was received by members standing and, having taken his seat at the Table, administered the oath to the members present and thereupon withdrew.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The Secretary intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#potgieter">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. E. POTGIETER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, it gives me great pleasure to move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That Mr. Alwyn Louis Schlebusch do take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</p>

<p>In proposing this motion I do so in the conviction that Mr. Schlebusch is endowed with the necessary qualities to impart lustre and dignity to the office of Speaker. Mr. Schlebusch was returned to Parliament as the member for Kroonstad on 30 July 1962, and has therefore been representing that constituency for the past 12 years. If I remember correctly his special interests were matters relating to farming, railways and justice. In particular he made positive contributions whenever railway matters were being discussed. The same applied to agricultural matters. The hon. member also served on the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. As far as Select Committees on specific matters are concerned, his special sphere of interest was justice. Subsequently he also became Chairman of the National Party parliamentary study group on justice. In August 1972 he became Chairman of the important Commission of Inquiry into Certain Organizations, and served in that capacity until April 1974.</p>

<p>For the sake of the new members of this new Parliament I think it is important to emphasize the significance of the Speakership, and for that reason I want to quote what a few authorities have to say on this subject. Firstly, I quote from the book by Erskine May&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">His duties are as various as they are important. In fact, he is the representative of the House itself, in its powers, its proceedings and its dignity.</block>

<p>&#x2020;According to Kilpin, the Speaker, as his title implies, was in the early days the man who was chosen by his fellow members to speak for them. Although he still retains this important function, he has many other duties as well. These include the maintenance of order in debate, responsibility for the Minutes of Proceedings of the House and the official reports of the debates, the control of strangers and the officers of the House, and the supervision of the Assembly buildings and grounds. Of course it is in maintaining order in debate that Mr. Speaker exercises his most public function. According to old parliamentary terminology he was in fact often called &#x201C;moderator&#x201D;&#x2014;his function was that of moderating and arranging. Without the firm hand of Mr. Speaker the more heated debates could easily become mere disorderly squabbles. At the same time Mr. Speaker must rely on the co-operation of members. In addition, he is the interpreter and the custodian of the rights and privileges of the House and of the members of the House, especially the members of the minority parties, while at the same time being the servant of the House.</p>

<p>*As you will perceive from the foregoing, I regard the Speakership as being of great importance. During my 31 years in the House of Assembly it has become clear to me that the ideal Speaker must have the characteristics of authority and impartiality. But then I want to add at once that if the members in the House do not have an unshakeable confidence in the impartiality of Mr. Speaker, we will not achieve a smooth functioning of business in accordance with the procedure which has to be followed in this House. Therefore it is very important that a Speaker has the co-operation of hon. members.</p>

<p><span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0017"/>Mr. Victor, you know this House. It is a very delicate machine. Sometimes matters proceed smoothly, but then, too, I have often seen how uproarious and stormy incidents can occur here. That is the test of a Speaker&#x2014;he must have an imperturbably good nature, tolerance and the patience of a man from the East. As I have come to know the member whom I have proposed, I can give hon. members the assurance that he is a well-balanced person. He has that pleasant, imperturbable and tolerant temperament. I am convinced, too, that he realizes that he will have to deal here as Speaker with disputes among members, however mild-tempered they may be&#x2014;such as myself for example, for I am a man of peace. I also want to say that a Speaker will have to act very tactfully and will have to take the temperament of individual hon. members into account. A member often does something which, subsequently, he deeply regrets. Therefore we must remember that hon. members in this House will have to behave towards one another in a worthy and courteous manner, like gentlemen.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker will of course act in a very impartial manner. In the short while Mr. Schlebusch has officiated here as Deputy Speaker hon. members have had the opportunity of seeing how impartial he can be in his actions. If there is one outstanding characteristic of our future Speaker&#x2014;and I am convinced that he will become a great Speaker&#x2014;then it is the impartial manner in which he has always acted in this House. I am convinced that he will act in a very unprejudiced manner, as the protector of members in this House. I think the hon. member for Houghton would agree with me when I say this. She represents a group which, in the past, consisted of fewer of two members! Even now, when there are seven of them, they still comprise a small group, and the test of the Speaker will be, by way of impartiality, to afford even small groups the opportunity of stating their views in such a manner that there will be an interaction of ideas, and so that the best results may be achieved in the interests of South Africa.</p>

<p>Mr. Victor, it therefore gives me great pleasure to propose Mr. Schlebusch. He has had an exemplary and brilliant career of public service. I know that he has been endowed with the excellent, inherent characteristics which will make him a credit to the Chair when he occupies this eminent office of Speaker.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kotz&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. F. KOTZ&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Secretary, it gives me great pleasure to second the motion of the hon. member for Brits.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, the Secretary called upon Mr. Schlebusch to indicate whether he accepted the nomination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schlebusch">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. L. SCHLEBUSCH</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, it is in all humility that I submit to the choice of the House of Assembly.</p>

<p>Thereupon the Secretary declared the hon. member duly elected.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schlebusch">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. L. SCHLEBUSCH</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, it is in all humility that I assume the office of Speaker, for I am very well aware of the achievement of my illustrious predecessors. In particular I wish to praise my immediate predecessor for the lustre he lent to this office. However, I am encouraged by the confidence placed in me by this House, for which I am deeply grateful and which will be a source of inspiration for me in the performance of this difficult task. I know too, Mr. Victor, that I can depend on the hearty co-operation of a body of officials of a very high order.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I shall to the best of my ability try to maintain the high standard of efficiency and impartiality that has been attained by my predecessors.</p>

<p>In conclusion I wish to request all hon. members to assist me in upholding the proud traditions and ideals of the office of Speaker.</p>

<p>Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. S. F. Kotz&#x00E9; conducted Mr. Schlebusch to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, you will grant me the opportunity to extend my heartiest congratulations to you on your election to this very high office. Through the mouth of the eloquent hon. member for Brits you have already heard, Sir, what in fact was expected of a Speaker in the past and also what will be expected of you. In extending my most hearty congratulations to you, Sir, I do so in the knowledge that you will most certainly not fail to realize all those expectations. It is in fact for that reason, Sir, that your colleagues were unanimous in considering you eminently suitable for holding this very <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0018"/>high office. I think, Sir, you will permit me to point out just in passing that you are in the Chair as the servant of this body and this will help you to discharge your duties since you realize, as we do, that this body is most certainly one of the most orderly of its kind in the world. One is very grateful for that.</p>

<p>You, Sir, as we know you, have been chosen because you are worthy of the trust of your colleagues. You have at your command a very thorough knowledge of the rules and procedure of this House and have shown yourself to be a loyal and expert parliamentarian. I believe, Sir, that your calm yet decisive disposition will enable you to perform this difficult task with honour. I believe, Sir, that you have already shown that you will at all times uphold the dignity of this House and will accord protection to the members, all of whom are entitled to your protection, irrespective of office or person.</p>

<p>You have shown, Sir, that you have a well-balanced judgment, and we have no doubt that you will not only perform this difficult task successfully, but also fill most capably the office previously held by worthy and great predecessors.</p>

<p>We therefore take pleasure in congratulating you, Sir; we wish you a pleasant term of office, and it is without any hesitation whatever that I can give you the assurance on behalf of all the colleagues facing you here, from the highest to the humblest, that you can depend on our support and our loyalty to the Chair at all times. To you, our heartiest congratulations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official Opposition it is a privilege for me to congratulate you on becoming the heir this morning to a great tradition of fine Speakers in this House of Assembly. I think that there are few legislatures in the world that have had so high a standard in regard to the Speakers who have served them over the years. In becoming heir to that tradition, Sir, you become heir also to another tradition which I am glad was also mentioned by the hon. the Prime Minister, and emphasized by him, but which was not so much emphasized by the hon. the Chief Whip on the other side of the House. I refer, Sir, to the fact that you are also privileged to be the servant of this House. As such, you will have very great responsibilities. I can assure you that you will have the full cooperation of the Opposition in the carrying out of those responsibilities.</p>

<p>I want to tell you, Sir, that your lot will not always be an easy one. There have been difficult and stormy times in this House. Those of us who have been here for some little time can remember that this House does not always run on oiled wheels. We wish you, Sir, not only godspeed but also luck in the exercise of your office. You will need both. Our experience of you as Deputy Speaker leads us to believe that you have those attributes that will make you a fine Speaker. I congratulate you, Sir.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from>Mrs. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate the Progressive Party with the sentiments that have already been expressed in regard to your appointment this morning, and to wish you luck and success in your office. You may need the luck, Sir!</p>

<p>I wish also to say something about the words uttered by the hon. Chief Whip opposite in regard to one particular function you will perform, I have no doubt, as efficiently and competently as your predecessor did. I refer to the protection of minority groups in this House. I have a very particular interest in that aspect of your predecessor&#x2019;s work and I must say, Sir, that he could not have fulfilled it better than he did. I have no doubt, Sir, that you are going to carry on that tradition and that the duty of the Speaker in protecting minority groups in this House will be well cared for in your hands.</p>

<p>We are pleased to associate ourselves with the sentiments that have been expressed on both sides of this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to thank the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. the Leader of the Opposition as well as the hon. member for Houghton most sincerely for their good wishes on my election as Speaker.</p>

<p>It will be my constant endeavour to act justly and impartially and to protect the minority, having regard to the fact, of course, that for the purposes of stable government, the will of the majority will be decisive. In this difficult task I count on the co-operation of hon. members.</p>

<p>I should like to address a special word of welcome to hon. members who have been sworn in today for the first time. May you, through diligent study and dedicated <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0019"/>service, soon feel at home in this House of Assembly, one of our most valued institutions.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I trust that the Almighty will succour me in my honest endeavour to be a true servant of this House. My fervent wish is that I will make the words of Mr. Speaker Lenthall my own. When he, a timorous man, was confronted in the House of Commons by an enraged Charles I demanding to know whether certain members whom he wanted to arrest were present, he replied&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">May it please your Majesty, I have neither eyes to see nor tongue to speak in this place, but as the House is pleased to direct me, whose servant I am here. Thank you.</block>

<p>Proceedings suspended at 9.30 am. and resumed at 11.40 a.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#speakers_report">

<heading>MR. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Tuynhuys, accompanied by Ministers, the Leader of the Opposition and other honourable members, where we were received by the State Prsident, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of this House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_ceremony">

<heading>OPENING CEREMONY</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members proceeded to the Senate Chamber to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#commission_to_mr_speaker_from_the_state_president_to_administer_oath_or_affirmation">

<heading>COMMISSION TO MR. SPEAKER FROM THE STATE PRESIDENT TO ADMINISTER OATH OR AFFIRMATION</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table:</p>

<block name="quote">Commission from the State President, dated 2 August 1974, authorizing Alwyn Louis Schlebusch to administer, as long as he holds the office of Speaker of the House of Assembly during the continuance of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>*At the beginning of the year the Government warned that the world, and South Africa in particular, would have to contend with growing uncertainty in the international situation during the next five years. Subsequent events, especially during the past three months, have amply borne out this warning.</p>

<p>The latest of these are the developments in Cyprus which show how quickly and how directly the whole world can be affected by events in a particular area. We can but trust that the interest of all those involved in the maintenance of peace as well as the awareness of other greater external dangers will lead to the finding of an acceptable settlement. In this hope the ceasefire is welcomed as a first step.</p>

<p>We also welcome the recent agreements between Egypt and Israel and between Israel and Syria as the beginning of an attempt to restore peace. It is our sincere hope that the proposed further negotiations will lead to the stabilization of the situation in the Middle East.</p>

<p>Recent events in Portugal may have far-reaching consequences for South Africa as well. The Government is keeping a watchful eye on developments and will of course at all times act in the best interests of the Republic.</p>

<p>It is and always has been South Africa&#x2019;s policy to avoid becoming involved in the internal affairs of other states. We are therefore not interfering with developments in Mozambique and Angola, but trust that orderly governments will be set up and maintained in the neighbour <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0020"/>states, and we assume that the territorial integrity of our country will be respected by those governments. South Africa on its part is always willing to co-operate with its neighbours. The continuation of the economic and other co-operative arrangements we have with Mozambique and Angola can only be to our mutual advantage. We hope and trust that the proven principles on which the Republic has based its coexistence with its neighbours will find a response in the new emergent governments.</p>

<p>The unpredictable world situation has obliged the Government to speed up planning to contend with a possible escalation of the low-intensity war against South Africa. This primarily means that urgent measures have to be taken to improve the manpower position of our Defence Force and to augment armaments. Satisfactory progress is being made in both respects.</p>

<p>The terrorist threat continues to create problems for South Africa, which necessitate the presence of members of the South African Police and the Defence Force on our borders. On behalf of the Government and the various population groups of the Republic, heartfelt sympathy is once again expressed to those who have lost loved ones in this struggle.</p>

<p>Persisting efforts on the part of subversive organizations to incite factions of the population to unrest are being effectively countered by the constant vigilance and action of the South African Police. Isolated strikes and protest campaigns which, according to certain publications, mouthpieces of the South African Communist Party and other subversive organizations, are being instigated or given moral support have had no significant effect. These events are, however, indisputable evidence that efforts to stir up unrest will be continued by our enemies and will if necessary be intensified if and as often as they consider conditions to be propitious.</p>

<p>Despite international instability in the monetary sphere, the serious problem of fuel supplies and the scarcity of raw materials experienced by certain sectors, there has been&#x2014;in contrast to the position in certain other countries of the world&#x2014;a marked increase in the rate of economic activity in the Republic. The general improvement that manifested itself in 1973 continued during the first half of this year. In fact, the available data indicate that the Republic may this year achieve one of the highest economic growth rates in its history.</p>

<p>This marked upswing in the economy has resulted in a high level of imports, particularly of capital goods. The increased prices of oil and other imported goods were also an adverse factor affecting the balance of payments. Exports, however, remained at a relatively high level, and this factor, coupled with the high price of gold in the private market, resulted in the current account of the balance of payments remaining basically sound.</p>

<p>A period of rapid economic growth is normally characterized by a strong inflow of foreign capital. Partly because of the higher rates of interest prevailing abroad, however, the inflow of capital was relatively low. With the narrowing of the gap between overseas and domestic rates of interest, this inflow may be expected to increase.</p>

<p>Owing to all these factors, gold and other foreign reserves fluctuated moderately in recent months but on the whole remained at a satisfactory level.</p>

<p>The fluctuations of the rand with the U.S.A. dollar in relation to other currencies have not always coincided with South Africa&#x2019;s interests and for that reason the authorities amended this exchange rate practice on 21 June this year. The rand/dollar exchange rate will now probably be adjusted more frequently in the light of South Africa&#x2019;s interests, with the broad aim of maintaining a greater measure of stability in the effective rate of the rand in relation to all other currencies.</p>

<p>Although the Committee of Governors of the International Monetary Fund which studied the reform of the international monetary system has done useful work, it was not possible to reach unanimity on several important questions. One of these was the future monetary role of gold, which will now be studied further in the Fund. However, the recent decision of the major industrial countries that gold may be used as collateral for loan transactions between monetary authorities and that for this purpose it may be valued at a price higher than <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0021"/>the official monetary price amounts to recognition that the present official price is unrealistic and that gold must still play an important role in the international monetary system. Considering the present uncertainty about the value of paper money, the price of gold on the private market should remain high, although factors such as high rates of interest and tight liquidity conditions may cause temporary declines in the price.</p>

<p>Owing to the rapid rate of growth of the economy and the resultant high demand for credit, it recently became necessary to increase the Reserve Bank&#x2019;s discount rate as well as other important rates of interest. As indicated before, it is hoped that this step will have a favourable effect on the balance of payments. This should also serve to encourage savings and place the banks in a better position to finance economic growth. It remains the aim of the Government to promote growth and with this in mind it was announced recently that in future applications to raise loans abroad in order to finance deserving capital projects would be given sympathetic consideration.</p>

<p>After two not very good years, 1973 has turned out to be a satisfactory year of growth for the manufacturing industry, and the indications for 1974 are most promising. In 1973 the volume of production was no less than 9,0 per cent higher than in 1972.</p>

<p>Virtually all industries contributed to the higher growth rates which were achieved mainly through better utilization of existing capital and labour resources. The number of hours worked by production workers in the manufacturing sector during the first ten months of 1973 was five per cent higher than during the corresponding period in 1972, while the volume of production per man-hour rose by four per cent over the same period.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the marked increase in production, private industrial concerns have apparently until quite recently been hesitant to embark upon substantial expansion of their production capacity. An encouraging upturn in fixed investment was noted from the fourth quarter of 1973 onwards, and it may reasonably be expected that progress will be more rapid as the revival of the economy continues and increases in tempo. Quite a number of very big projects are at present being planned by the public as well as the private sector or are already nearing completion, and this is expected to increase the momentum of the revival further.</p>

<p>The country&#x2019;s economic growth has not, however, been without problems. One of the greatest sources of concern is the continued high rate at which prices are rising, which is at present due mainly to the higher oil prices, dearer imports and the upward pressure in the domestic cost structure. The rate of domestic expenditure is accelerating and the commercial sector is already benefiting by this tangibly in the form of increased turnovers.</p>

<p>The Government is therefore faced with the very difficult task of relieving the inflationary pressure in the economy and at the same time further promoting economic growth. To succeed in this, the Government needs the support of every businessman, industrialist, producer, employer, employee and consumer in the country. If everyone co-operates to achieve increased production and productivity, on the one hand, and to use their available earnings prudently on the other hand, inflation will be curbed and rising standards of living will be ensured for all the inhabitants of our country.</p>

<p>Apart from this, the Government&#x2019;s Advisory Committee on Inflation, on Inflation, on which are represented all interest groups in the public as well as in the private sector, is giving constant and active attention to ways and means of alleviating the problem of inflation. In order to encourage healthy competition, which ought to make a material contribution towards keeping price increases within reasonable limits, it appears to be necessary to take more effective steps against undesirable trade practices as well as harmful monopolistic conditions and concentrations of power in the national economy.</p>

<p>The progressive relaxation and dismantling of import control in accordance with South Africa&#x2019;s international treaty obligations are also helping to promote healthy competition in the national economy. Import control, however, affords some of the country&#x2019;s manufacturing industries a measure of incidental protection and, in terms of the Government&#x2019;s policy not to remove this protection before <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0022"/>sufficient tariff protection has been provided, care is being taken to ensure that the existing import control measures are relaxed and dismantled in a manner that will be in line with the country&#x2019;s policy of tariff protection.</p>

<p>Now that the schemes that have been introduced as a result of an inquiry into South Africa&#x2019;s export trade have been in operation for over a year it is clear that these export incentive measures are doing a great deal to make local businessmen more export-conscious. By making full use of increased opportunities for export which have been created in this way, entrepreneurs could make a far greater contribution to the Republic&#x2019;s export drive.</p>

<p>The Government is participating in the preparatory work for the multilateral trade negotiations which are taking place under the aegis of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and which were launched at ministerial level in Tokyo last year.</p>

<p>International developments, particularly in the Middle East, have in recent times faced the Western World with grave problems in connection with the supply and prices of crude oil and petrol. These developments have also had their effect on the Republic, and the Government has for some years been taking vigorous steps to safeguard our stocks and supply position as far as possible. A constant watch is being kept on the situation. The formulation of a comprehensive energy policy is being given urgent attention by the Energy Policy Committee which has been appointed by the Government.</p>

<p>It is regretted that there is an impression in some quarters that the measures introduced by the Government to save fuel are no longer as necessary as before and need therefore not be observed quite so scrupulously. The Government wishes to emphasize that, apart from the fact that colossal additional sums in foreign exchange have to be made available as a result of higher purchase prices, South Africa is one of the countries against which an official oil embargo remains in force, and that strict compliance with the restrictions should be a matter of honour and urgent necessity to every South African. The Government will have to keep these measures in operation as long as it is in the interests of the Republic to do so.</p>

<p>&#x2020;It is gratifying that fewer farmers operating on a reduced acreage still succeed in feeding a growing domestic population and are also able to export to other countries.</p>

<p>In contrast to last year&#x2019;s maize crop, which was insufficient to meet the local demand, record summer cereal crops were harvested this year, owing to exceptionally favourable climatic conditions, and the prospects for winter cereals are also promising.</p>

<p>The exceedingly good season in the summer rainfall areas led to a remarkable improvement in veld conditions generally, and this should stimulate livestock production. It is hoped that the entire population will co-operate in preventing veld fires in order to retain the benefits of the protective veld cover. Conditions in the extensive farming areas being better than they were last year, participants in the Stock Reduction Scheme now have the opportunity of improving their resources still further. Generally speaking, more animal products could be supplied if farmers continued to adhere to a judicious stocking rate.</p>

<p>The late, heavy summer rains took their toll, however, and extensive damage was done by unprecedented floods in several parts of the country. Special measures had to be taken to afford financial assistance in deserving cases, but owing to the general improvement in agricultural prospects, appreciably less use is being made of assistance to farmers under the Agricultural Credit Act.</p>

<p>At present the international agricultural position is also much more favourable than it was last year. Nevertheless, the threat of food shortages of a year or so ago, as a result of poor crops in large areas of the Western World. Heavily underlined the importance of an agricultural industry that is sound in every respect. To prevent a recurrence of such shortages, methods of increasing agricultural production and the stockpiling and carry-over of stocks are being given priority. Special attention is being devoted to research aimed at increasing food production and improving the quality of agricultural products. Extension services are propagating economic farming practices suited to natural environmental conditions.</p>

<p><span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0023"/>Notwithstanding the generally more favourable agricultural conditions, both in this country and abroad, the prices of agricultural products continue to rise steadily, but at a slower rate than in the past few years.</p>

<p>The Commission appointed during the 1973 Parliamentary Session to inquire into the marketing of agricultural products has made good progress and its report is awaited with great interest.</p>

<p>The spectacular increase in the sales value of several South African-produced minerals that was a feature of 1973 is continuing, and there is every indication that the total sales value of our minerals will reach a new peak this year. Apart from gold, metalliferous base minerals should contribute the major share of revenue from minerals, notwithstanding the fact that revenue from diamond and platinum sales has also continued to increase.</p>

<p>With the intensification of the search for minerals and sources of energy, steps are being taken to speed up the collection, processing and publication of information and of maps that are indispensable to the growing mining industry.</p>

<p>The predicted upsurge in the demand for uranium, and the fact that South Africa has significant potential uranium reserves not explored hitherto, will have the effect of accelerating the pace of research aimed at developing suitable processes for the economic exploitation of these reserves in the years ahead.</p>

<p>Nuclear fusion in hot plasmas, which is fast becoming an experimental reality in some overseas laboratories, offers a promising possibility as a future long-term source of energy.</p>

<p>Rapid economic growth is making heavy demands on the economically active population. To meet these demands it is essential for every individual to do his utmost to attain the highest possible levels of productivity and efficiency.</p>

<p>Active steps are being taken to improve the wages of unskilled workers, and the job-content of various occupations is continually being reappraised with the result that opportunities are being created for the improvement of the skills and earning potential of less skilled employees.</p>

<p>As regards social security measures, the amending legislation passed by parliament earlier this year raised the wage ceiling, which resulted in a substantial number of workers being brought within the scope of the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Act and the Unemployment Insurance Act and sharing in the benefits provided.</p>

<p>Unemployment continues to decline and totals less than one per cent.</p>

<p>In view of the importance of a supplementary inflow of trained manpower from overseas it is gratifying to report positive signs that the decline in the number of immigrants to the Republic has been checked.</p>

<p>Steady progress is being maintained in providing housing for the various population groups.</p>

<p>A committee was appointed to investigate community facilities in certain townships where large numbers of persons in the lower income group are living, and improvements may be expected in this field as a result of its recommendations which are at present under consideration.</p>

<p>Noticeable progress has been made in improving the appearance of certain housing schemes. Ample provision is being made for open spaces which can be used for parks, playgrounds and other amenities, and which can also serve as &#x201C;green belts&#x201D;. It is hoped to foster the civic pride of the inhabitants in this way.</p>

<p>The position in regard to the considerable shortage of dwelling units for Coloureds is expected to improve appreciably within the next few years.</p>

<p>The Coloured Persons Representative Council has been prorogued on the advice of the Chairman of the Executive.</p>

<p>The second general registration of Coloured voters has been commenced and it will be followed by the second general election of the Coloured Persons Representative Council.</p>

<p>The Administration of Coloured Affairs continues to give active attention to the extension and diversification of all educational, social and agricultural services among the Coloured population, as well as to the development of local management bodies for Coloured townships.</p>

<p>Encouraging progress has been made in the field of higher education, and the first training centre for Coloured motor mechanics was opened recently.</p>

<p><span class="col_19-20" refersTo="page_0024"/>During June of this year 22 Indian communities living in Indian Group Areas in the Transvaal and five in the Cape Province were able to constitute Management or Consultative Committees in terms of the respective Local Government Ordinances to attend to the local affairs of their own people in those provinces.</p>

<p>In order to resettle disqualified Indian traders suitably in their own group area or some other area where the necessary business potential exists, the Department of Community Development either erects shopping centres or provides the loan funds for the erection of such centres. The largest and most impressive of these business complexes, the Oriental Plaza in Fordsburg, Johannesburg, is nearing completion. It will eventually house no fewer than 340 Indian shops and develop into a major tourist attraction.</p>

<p>Final proposals for the consolidation of the Bantu homelands should be completed in the near future.</p>

<p>In co-operation with the homeland governments, good progress is being made with the regional and overall planning of each homeland in an organized manner. In addition to the active steps taken to promote the economic development of the homelands, the transfer of further powers and functions to the homeland governments is receiving constant attention.</p>

<p>The Transkei&#x2019;s request for independence within five years is under consideration and a joint committee is being set up to go into every aspect of the matter. The Government is confident that the negotiations and preparations for the Transkei&#x2019;s independence will be concluded to the satisfaction of all concerned.</p>

<p>While the movement of tourists in other parts of the world has slackened as a result of the difficult economic and political conditions prevailing, it is gratifying that a constant rate of growth is being maintained by the South African tourist industry.</p>

<p>The Public Service is hampered by a shortage of experienced personnel in key divisions. The modernization of work methods, the improvement of procedures and management techniques, mechanization, and the intensification of staff training, both academic and functional, have nevertheless made it possible to meet the essential requirements of a stable public service.</p>

<p>The Government wishes to place on record its sincere appreciation of the loyal services rendered by public servants in the wide spectrum of Government and semi-Government Departments.</p>

<p>Improved conditions of service, <i>inter alia</i> unparalleled benefits under the Government Service Pension Act and a new salary structure, have been introduced not only to give public servants their due but also as positive steps to stem the tide of resignations from the Service, particularly during the first years of service.</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the current financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the First Session of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#leader_of_the_house">

<heading>LEADER OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, by your leave, I should just like to inform hon. members formally that it has been decided that the Minister of Finance will act as the Leader of the House and that, in the event of his absence, his duties will be fulfilled by the Minister of Defence.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, by your leave, I wish to make the following announcement in connection with the Budgets that are to be presented. The Main Budget will be presented on 14 August, the Budget of the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications on 3 September, and the Railways and Harbours Budget on 18 September.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading><span class="col_21-22" refersTo="page_0025"/>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Mr. J. O. N. Thompson, D.F.C.</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I beg to move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 3 April of Mr. John Oswald Newton Thompson, D.F.C., who represented the electoral division of Pinelands for a period of more than 12 years, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Our late colleague, Mr. Speaker, was a fairly young man, who was born on 2 December 1920. He rendered public service not only in this House, but for a short while, in 1961, he was also a member of the Provincial Council of the Cape of Good Hope. He was elected to this House on 18 October 1961 for the constituency of Pinelands and remained a member of this House until 3 April 1974. Whilst a member of this House, he also served as an Opposition assistant Whip from 17 July 1970.</p>

<p>*Mr. Speaker, in the years in which I have occupied this post, it has fallen to me to move many motions of this nature, but I readily admit that I have seldom moved a motion with as much regret as I do this morning, because the cruel, tragic death of this ex-colleague has brought all of us face to face with, and has underlined, the very real fact that members of this House are sometimes called upon to act under very difficult, even dangerous, circumstances in the execution of their duties. I believe that the tragic death in this way of this colleague of ours has come as a shock to us all, not only to hon. members to whose party he belonged, but to all of us who sat with him in this House. I myself knew him since the &#x2019;fifties, when we both practised at the Johannesburg Bar. Subsequent to that he became a member of this House, where he acted with great dignity and took part in the proceedings of this House with authority. He comes, Mr. Speaker, from one of the most respected families of South Africa. He comes from a family that has produced people who have played an important role in the national life of South Africa. He himself made a positive contribution, and, humanly speaking, one had expected many more years of greater, positive service to have lain ahead for him. He was a pleasant person, and a sportsman who excelled in several branches of sport. I think I can say without any hesitation that he was one of the exemplary members of this House, a man who always had a ready smile for everyone and, I believe, a person who did not make enemies or did not make them easily. He was a person&#x2014;one noted this with appreciation, and it is with appreciation that one mentions it once more&#x2014;who always acted in the best traditions of this House. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that it is with regret that I move this motion this morning, and together with hon. members on both sides of this House I should like to convey the deepest sympathy of this House to his wife, his children and his widowed mother.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to be associated with the words which have come from the hon. the Prime Minister. I want to say that because of a long association over many years, this is one of the saddest duties I have had to perform in this House. We are speaking today, Sir, of a man who was a distinguished Parliamentarian and a great gentleman who, despite the dedication and vigour with which he pursued the causes which he espoused, I believe made no enemies and made many friends on both sides of the House and amongst his political enemies as well. He was a delightful companion with a rare sense of humour, a keen mind and unimpeachable integrity. I think he had that rare attribute, that he was always prepared to look facts in the face.</p>

<p>The hon. the Prime Minister has mentioned his distinguished parliamentary career. You know, Sir, it is given to few men to succeed in one walk of life, but Ossie Thompson succeeded in almost everything that he undertook. He was an outstanding student. He gained many distinctions in his law studies. He was an outstanding schoolboy, who won for himself a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford. He had a fine career at the Bar, both in the Transvaal <span class="col_23-24" refersTo="page_0026"/>and here at the Cape. He was a brilliant sportsman. He was an airman who was decorated for his courage and, Sir, above all, he had that great attribute, that compassion, which never allowed him to see an injustice persist; he always had to try to put it right, to see that justice was done to everybody. When he started in politics&#x2014;this was typical of the man&#x2014;he fought hopeless seats several times and then went to the Provincial Council and finally came here, and I think he made a wonderful impression on this House. He had a wonderful record as a Parliamentarian, not only as a Whip but for the many things that he did behind the scenes. He was Chairman of our sports group; he was secretary of our Bantu affairs group, and he was a Whip, but, perhaps more important, he was captain of the Parliamentary Cricket Eleven. He played his part in bringing members together and getting an understanding between them. I think I can say of him that he was a man who automatically accepted responsibility and gave meticulous care to the interests of his constituents. As I say, Sir, he had the compassion which could not allow injustice to persist. As the hon. the Prime Minister has said, he had all those attributes which one would have expected would result in his playing an even greater role in more distinguished posts later in life.</p>

<p>There was one thing about him, Sir; he was a great believer in South Africanism. I think it was a development of the faith which his great-grandfather had had, who presented a Bible to the Voortrekkers when they left Grahamstown because of his belief that English-speaking and Afrikaans-speaking could work together in the interests of South Africa. At the time of he Langenhoven Centenary he founded and collected the funds for the Langenhoven Centenary Trust, the object of which was that certain selected English-speaking South Africans should have the privilege of studying at an Afrikaans-medium university, Stellenbosch University, his old Alma Mater. I think it is a fitting tribute to the man that his friends have decided to establish an Oswald Newton Thompson Bursary Fund in his memory, the object of which will be not for English-speaking to study at an Afrikaans university, but for students from Afrikaans-medium schools to study at an English-medium university here in the Western Province.</p>

<p>When one asks how one remembers a remember him as a distinguished Parliamentarian, as a devoted family man, as a man like this, there is a problem. Does one man whose natural habitat was the cricket-field, as a happy angler, or does one remember him as a true and sweet friend? I second.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on these benches, the members of the Progressive Party, wish to associate ourselves with the motion which has been proposed by the hon. the Prime Minister. Perhaps it is correct that some of our members did not know the late Ossie Thompson as well as other hon. members of this House. Nevertheless he was no stranger to us. My colleague, the hon. member for Houghton, has over the past 13 years known Ossie Thompson as a hardworking and conscientious fellow-member of this House. He was conservative in the best sense of that word. He was always on hand. He was reliable. He was loyal to the members of his team. He was courteous and he was gallant to his political opponents. I knew the late Ossie Thompson as a redoubtable political opponent, because it was he who defeated me in the general election in Pine-lands in 1961. Since that year I, as a voter in his constituency, have seen how Oswald Thompson, supported by his wife, left no stone unturned to serve the interests of the voters he represented. As has been mentioned, he was a prominent personality in the community, and especially here in the Cape Peninsula. I believe that by his contribution to our society he enriched the lives of all of us.</p>

<p>May I repeat what I said when the sad news of his tragic death was first received. He was conscientious and determined, but at all times thoughtful and chivalrous. We of the Progressive Party salute a gallant political opponent, a man with a fine record of service to South Africa in peace and in war. Our thoughts and our sympathy are with his wife and family at this time.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1974-08-02T12:55:00">12.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

