---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-11-05
---

FRIDAY, 05 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at the Imbizo Hall, Empangeni, KwaZulu-Natal at 10:10.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank hon President Mbeki for accepting our invitation to
come and deliver his annual address to the NCOP. I therefore call upon His
Excellency, the President, to come and address us. [Applause.]

  THE CHALLENGES FACED BY THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES, PROVINCES AND
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN BUILDING A PEOPLE’S CONTRACT TO CREATE WORK AND TO
                                FIGHT POVERTY
 The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of
 the NCOP, His Majesty King Zwelethini. Chaiperson, I have just agreed with
 His Majesty that I am going to have to negotiate with the NCOP that His
 Majesty should become a member. [Applause.] That would do a lot to improve
 the function of the NCOP. I am very glad to see you here, Your Majesty.
 Hon Premiers, hon members of the NCOP, hon Chairperson of Salga, mayors
 and councillors, people of Empangeni, KwaZulu-Natal and ladies and
 gentlemen, thank you very much for affording me this opportunity to, once
 again, address the NCOP.
 I must congratulate the NCOP for taking this decision to meet in our
 provinces, and therefore having the opportunity to interact with our
 people so that they understand the Council better. I am indeed sure that
 you yourselves will understand better what the people see, the people
 think and feel and want the people feel should be done.
 This is the first time, Chairperson, that I attend the NCOP during this
 tenth year of our freedom and therefore the first time since our last
 elections. I would therefore like to say congratulations to those members
 of the NCOP who were elected earlier this year and thank you for the work
 that this House has done in various forms over the last 10 years further
 to entrench the system of democracy in our country.
 Since we are meeting in KwaZulu-Natal, Chairperson, I also need to
 congratulate the Premier of the province for doing something, which I am
 sure all of us were concerned about. At least he has begun to do
 something, which we were all concerned about, namely changing the gender
 composition of the provincial government. [Applause.]
 Very well done, Premier Ndebele. We hope you are going to keep that up. I
 think you could do with even better representation of women in the
 executive. The fact that we are celebrating 10 years of liberation creates
 a possibility for us to assess the tasks and manner of functioning of the
 NCOP. This may have been done already or you may be in the process of
 doing it. If it has been done, Chairperson, I would indeed be very
 interested to hear what the outcome is of that assessment.


 After 10 years, what is our view of the manner in which the NCOP functions
 and the task that it is charged with. In that regard, I’d like to draw
 attention to two particular matters. One of them is that it is quite clear
 that an important element of our system of governance is the idea and the
 practice of popular participation such as is demonstrated in the meetings
 that have taken place here, consistent with the view that we have held for
 many decades, that the people shall govern. We have now spoken of a
 people’s contract, therefore emphasising a need for institutions such as
 the NCOP to engage with the people so that the people can participate in
 that process of governance.


 We try and encourage this interaction of popular participation in our
 system of governance in many ways. The process of izimbizo, which is held
 by provincial government, by national government and so on, is part of
 this process of ensuring that we encourage that process of popular
 participation.
 Other means of regular communication between government in all spheres
 with the people are also targeted so that we communicate as much
 information to the people as possible, so that we empower them to
 intervene and participate in this process directed at improving their
 lives. It is a central feature of the evolution of the system of
 governance in this country that we bring government as close as possible
 to the people, that we engage the people in the process of government and
 do not allow that gaps should appear between the governors and the
 governed.
 A second matter on which I think we are all concentrating is the issue of
 the acceleration of the process of transformation, focused on the
 objective of a better life for all our people, focused on the objective of
 improving, as quickly as is possible, the quality of life of all our
 people. I think, as we have assessed the progress made over the last 10
 years and therefore the basis that has been established to address that
 particular challenge, we have come generally to the determination that a
 very strong, comprehensive policy base and legal base have been
 established and critically and centrally the task that we face is the
 implementation of those policies and ensuring that those policies produce
 the outcomes that are visualised.
 I believe that if we talk about those two things, entrenching the process
 of popular participation, strengthening the people’s contract and
 accelerating the process of transformation, inevitably we have to pay
 particular attention to the issue of local government and that includes
 the traditional system of governance.


 The NCOP occupies a particular and a special and a unique place in our
 national life. There is no other body like it in terms of our system of
 government. It is part of the national Parliament. It is also a parliament
 of the provinces. It is also a legislative bridge between the local and
 the national spheres. There isn’t any other institution in our country
 which covers all three spheres of government in the way in which the NCOP
 does. Therefore, the question of the tasks, the manner of function, the
 role of the NCOP 10 years after liberation, what should be improved and
 what do we need to change – answers to those questions can only come from
 this body. There is no other body like it that would address such
 questions.
I do believe, one of the matters that the NCOP then would have to discuss
is: What role can the NCOP play or should it play with regard to the
central task of ensuring that we further improve the participation of our
people in the determination of their future. The NCOP must answer the
question: What contribution can it make to achieve the objectives that we
agreed upon when we spoke about a people’s contract? What contribution
should the NCOP make to the process of accelerating the process of change,
so that we move forward faster with regard to the matter of a better life
for the people?
My sense, sitting at national government, is that there has been somewhat
of a reduction in terms of the legislative load coming out of national
government into national Parliament. It is a reflection of course of the
work that has been done over the last 10 years in terms of the elaboration
of policies and the adoption of national legislation. I think there will be
fewer laws that will come before the NCOP compared to the period behind us.
If that is true, which I think it is in theory anyway, this should create
some space for the NCOP to take on some tasks that it could not have done
before, because it did not have the time. In principle, or theoretically,
it should be the case. It is precisely that kind of space which would
enable the NCOP to say: This is what we do, this is what we need to do –
perhaps differently – in this period as we begin our second decade of
liberation.
The expression and the implementation of the concept of a people’s contract
are obviously best effected at a local level. This is where the leadership,
the councillors, the mayors and the traditional leaders have to maintain
daily contact with the mass of our people. When we talk about a people’s
contract we must surely focus on how this is being done, effected and
realised at that local government level. Again, this might have been done
by the NCOP. Shouldn’t we ask that the representatives of organised local
government, Salga, that sit in the NCOP, to submit a report to the NCOP
about the functioning of the ward committees? It is a matter that the NCOP
needs to study. Shouldn’t Salga submit a report to the NCOP to indicate the
accessibility of council meetings to the public, in the way that this
particular session of the NCOP is accessible to the public? What is
happening? Shouldn’t Salga report on popular participation involvement in
the implementation of the IDPs?
I am asking this and making these suggestions with regard to the matter of
popular participation, a people’s contract, the fact that the people shall
govern, because these are instances where this should be expressed, for
instance in the ward committees, accessibility to council meetings,
involvement in the implementation of the IDPS and there may well be other
instances. I think, given the great fortune, as I was saying that the NCOP
is this legislative bridge between the local and national spheres of
government, with members of Salga sitting in the NCOP, I think we could
take advantage of that to get an assessment, as the NCOP, as to what is
happening at local level. That should give us the possibility, as the NCOP,
to ask ourselves the question: What then can the NCOP do to help in this
regard, to help in the process of ensuring that local government does
indeed act in a manner, and function in a manner that encourages that
popular participation, that encourages the strengthening of the people’s
contract. It may very well be that all of this has been done already. If it
has, I would certainly be very interested to hear the outcome of that
process.
Recently we have seen around the country some unacceptable forms of protest
at local level, resulting in some instances in the destruction of public
property. I must say in this regard that the law will be enforced when
anybody who decides to act in that manner destroys public property. The
SAPS will act against those people and those people will be charged.
Nevertheless, we need to understand that one of the reasons for these
protests is unsatisfactory communication between councils and councillors
and the people they serve. It is an expression of frustration where people
get cut off from these representatives whom they have elected and it spills
out, because they do not see that there is any response to the immediate
challenges that they face. It thus finds expression in these unacceptable
ways. I am mentioning this to say that I think clearly we were correct to
insist that a central part of our system of governance in this country must
be the process of direct contact with the people, the people’s contract and
popular participation. In the end, as the NCOP reviews itself 10 years
after our liberation, surely the NCOP then would have to answer the
question: What can the NCOP do to help at that level of local government to
improve the process of popular participation?
 A second matter of importance is this issue of the acceleration of the
 process of change, of making an impact, a better and a faster impact, with
 regard to improving the quality of life of all our people. We come back to
 the matter of local government. The NCOP and its members are very familiar
 with the tasks of local government, even as spelled out in our
 Constitution. For instance, where it deals with the objects of local
 government, the Constitution says that they are to provide democratic and
 accountable government to local communities, to ensure the provision of
 services to communities in a sustainable manner, to promote social and
 economic development, to promote social and economic development, to
 promote a safe and healthy environment and to encourage the involvement of
 communities and community organisations in the matters of local
 government. These are constitutional requirements that fall on the
 shoulders of local government. They are indeed of the greatest importance
 in terms of what happens to the lives of our people and in the country as
 a whole.
 Consistent with these observations in terms of our Constitution, I am
 quite certain, Chairperson, that we all agree about the critical
 importance of local government in terms of meeting challenges that face
 our people. Indeed the process of rationalisation of government structures
 that was undertaken earlier, reducing the number of municipalities from
 843 to 284, was intended precisely to ensure that they have the capacity
 to be able to serve the people. We need efficient and effective
 municipalities to deliver better services to the people, to ensure that
 poor households have access to basic infrastructure and the poor provided
 with free basic services. Further, as we accelerate the implementation of
 our Expanded Public Works Programme, we will need strong municipalities to
 work in partnership with other spheres of government. The use and the
 implementation of the municipal infrastructure grant also makes demands on
 the capacity of municipalities to be able to use those grants, indeed to
 strengthen the infrastructure, impacting directly on improving directly
 the quality of the lives of our people.


 We know that there are many problems in our country that we have not
 solved and they are going to take us time to solve, whether these are
 matters of clean water, sanitation, electricity, access to health
 services, issues of employment and so on, we have continuing challenges in
 all of these areas. Clearly, all experience shows that what we need to do
 to respond better to all of this is again to look at the question of the
 capacity of our municipalities. That is the origin of the Project
 Consolidate that has been put forward by the Minister of Provincial and
 Local Government. At national level that project is also supported by an
 interministerial committee, because indeed, the challenge of strengthening
 the municipalities cannot be left merely to this one department headed by
 Minister Mufamadi.
 Minister Mufamadi explained that:
      As government, not only do we need to establish more policy coherence
      among the various dimensions of our work, but also we need to pay
      attention to the technical requirements for good governance. We have
      identified a number of municipalities that are experiencing a short-
      term need for an intense, hands-on support.
      We are assembling a high-calibre team, which will be deployed to work
      with municipalities to tackle the identified tasks. Since this support
      is meant to fade out over time, provinces will immediately replicate
      this process in order to position themselves such that they can
      continue to support municipalities in their own areas of jurisdiction.
      For their part, the municipalities concerned will fully embrace this
      as an opportunity for them to learn by doing.


 Some of the information that came out in the audit done to look at what
 capacity the municipalities have and don’t have - some of those results
 are very worrying indeed. That audit focused on their capacity for service
 delivery and implementation of policies. This audit found that 136 of the
 284 municipalities have little or no capacity to service their areas and
 therefore need urgent support to improve their delivery mechanisms.
 Some of the criteria that were used to make this assessment showed for
 instance that 241 municipalities have more than 30% of those who have some
 form of income less than R1 600 per month; 135 municipalities have an
 unemployment rate of greater than 35%; 226 municipalities have more than
 50% indigent households; 182 municipalities have less than 60% their
 households with access to refuse removal; 203 municipalities have less
 than 60% households with access to sanitation, flush toilet, chemical
 toilet or septic tank;  122 local government structures have less than 60%
 of their households with access to electricity; 155 municipalities have
 less than 60% of households with access to clean water; 116 municipalities
 have less than 60% of their households living in shacks. I mention these
 figures because when we then talk about addressing the capacity problem at
 local government level, it is indeed to be able to get the municipalities
 to be able to address these particular challenges. That is the intention
 of Project Consolidate. These municipalities should be given support to
 build the necessary infrastructure and develop the institutional capacity
 and systems that would ensure that they are able to discharge the
 constitutional mandate to which I referred.


 Further, Project Consolidate will pay particular attention to the
 following areas:  Ensure community development that would empower
 communities and encourage participation of our people in the spirit of
 Letsema and Vukuzenzele; assist with capacity-building, setting systems,
 human resource development and improved organisational culture.
 It will pay attention to these matters, for instance, in the provision of
 free basic services, as agreed to, ensure that we properly implement local
 economic plans that would help to create jobs and to bring success to the
 Expanded Public Works Programme; that we put in place systems and
 mechanisms that would address the matter of corruption; that we further
 pursue the interventions that have already been agreed to; focus on the
 rural and urban nodes so that we indeed accelerate the process of the
 reconstruction and development of our country. It must have a set of
 performance indicators so that we are able to measure whether we are
 making progress or not.
 There are structures at national level, and I am quite certain that there
 are structures at provincial level to make sure that we are able
 effectively to implement Project Consolidate. It is a challenging task,
 partly arising from the fact - certainly if you look at the rural
 municipalities - that many of us do not want to live in those rural areas
 and would want to move to the urban areas. Project Consolidate is going to
 draw attention specifically to the need for the skills that are required
 there, so that when we talk about service delivery and good governance, it
 must be based on the actual capacity within the local institutions, to
 make sure that those local institutions and municipalities are able to
 discharge their responsibilities properly. I am very pleased with regard
 to this Project Consolidate because the private sector has also agreed to
 come into this. As government we will be working with the private sector
 to ensure that we indeed build this capacity that is so critically
 important, to achieve that objective of the acceleration of the process of
 change.
 As an important part of that, the deployment of the community development
 workers should help that we succeed and improve the quality of service
 that we deliver to the people, as well as ensure that we do indeed respond
 better to what the people need. I am told that there have been some
 suggestions that there are tensions between these workers and councillors
 and municipal officials. There is a certain spirit of competition, which
 is really unnecessary. I am sure the community development workers are not
 interacting with the people so that they should then become candidates for
 the following municipal elections. The councillors don’t need to fear the
 competition. We have to provide this service, because many of our people
 are too poor even to travel to municipal offices, where they would gain
 access to services. They usually do not have the necessary knowledge or
 information to deal with their daily challenges. We need to have these
 community development workers in place among the people so that they
 constitute a direct bridge between the people and the institutions of
 government.
 This past Wednesday, on 3 November, after the last workshop of all three
 spheres of government that took place earlier in the week, the government
 approved the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Bill, of which the
 objective is, among other things, to get all spheres of government to work
 together to establish institutions and procedures that would ensure better
 co-ordination and collaboration in the formulation and implementation of
 government policies.
 This is very important because the three spheres of government, as we have
 seen with Project Consolidate, have to work together in an integrated way.
 This Bill is important because we know that in the past there were
 instances when the different spheres of government were not sufficiently
 co-ordinating their programmes, where at times provincial programmes would
 be made without proper discussions with local government and where,
 similarly, municipalities would formulate, for instance, Integrated
 Development Plans without consultation with the provinces.

It would therefore seem that we need to work together to bring capacity to
our municipalities and to improve the work of local councillors. We must
indeed ensure that the community development workers were properly co-
operating with the councillors. We must ensure that all spheres of
government co-operate in terms of ensuring that we do indeed accelerate
this process of change. I think that the NCOP again will have to ask itself
the question: What should the NCOP do to participate in the acceleration of
the process of change? Taking into account this unique way in which the
NCOP is organised, bringing together all three spheres of government, the
NCOP needs to look at what it can do to reinforce these processes
visualised in Project Consolidate and what can it do to ensure that we
indeed succeed with regard to all of them?

The NCOP has structural and immediate access to all three spheres of
government, provincial, national and local. The NCOP can summon the
President to come and address you. You can summon a mayor to come and
address you. I think with regard to the matter of ensuring popular
participation, the NCOP needs to look at this matter, namely, what it can
and should do to assist in the process of accelerating the process of
change. I would hope that it would be possible for all of us to look at
these matters closely and take some decisions. I would like to assure you
that as far as the national government is concerned, national government is
ready to give maximum support to the NCOP as it discharges its functions.
[Applause.]

We must be able to say, Chairperson, that as we celebrate 10 years of
liberation and as we begin our second decade of liberation, the NCOP has
become an even better instrument in the service of our people. Thank you,
Chairperson, and best wishes for your work.

IPHINI LIKASIHLALO WOMKHANDLU WEZIFUNDAZWE KAZWELONKE (Mnuz M J Mahlangu):
Ngizothanda ukuthatha leli thuba ngibonge kakhulu kuMphathisihlalo
woMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe. Ngibonge futhi kakhulu nakuMongameli
kukho konke asitshele khona. Ngisho ukuthi sizokuthatha siwumkhandlu
sihambe siyokubheka kuthi uma sifika ekhaya sibone ukuthi singabamba liphi
iqhaza eledlula leli esesilibamba manje singumkhandlu. Mangiqale-ke
ngokuthi: Silo samabandla onke, hlanga lomhlabathi! Mhlonishwa Mongameli
wezwe lonke uThabo Mbheki, oNdunankulu bezifundazwe zonke ikakhulukazi
umnumzane uSbu Ndebele okunguyena esihambele isifundazwe sakhe, amalunga
ahloniphekile oMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe akhona phakathi kwethu,
uSihlalo jikelele we-Salga okhona phakathi kwethu, zihambeli zethu
ezihloniphekile ngiyanithanda nonke namhlanje ekuseni.

Ngithanda ukuqala ngesihloko esingejwayelekanga esithi ubunye kanye
nokubekezela. Ubunye kanye nokubekezela kubalulekile emphakathini ngoba
sibhekene nezinselelo ezinkulu ezenziwa nguhulumeni wobandlululo eminyakeni
eminingi eyadlula. Leyo nselelo idinga ubumbano kanye nokubekezela. Ubunye
bethu bubalulekile ngoba buyisiqalo sentuthuko nenqubekela phambili.
Ngaphandle kokuthi sibambane futhi sibekezelelane, yonke le nselelo
engikhuluma ngayo izoba yize leze. [Ihlombe.]

Hlanga lomhlabathi, thina kulesi sifundazwe singabantu bakho. Thina
neNdlunkulu yonke sihlanganiswa yisifiso esisodwa sokusebenza
ngokubambisana ukwenza ngcono izimpilo zabantu. Angeke zenzeke ngcono
izimpilo zabantu uma singasebenzisani sonke - laphaya phezulu egalari kanye
nalapha phansi. Le minyaka eyishumi eyedlule Mongameli wezwe, izakhamuzi
zonke zaseNingizimu Afrika kubandakanya izingane, abadala bethu, abalimi
kanye nabakhubazekile bayaqhubeka nokuhlomula ezinhlelweni zikahulumeni
okuhloswe ngazo ukwenza ngcono izimo zenhlalo nomnotho. Sisho ngeqholo
Mongameli wezwe nangesibindi sikutusa ukuthi ungumholi ohloniphekile nowazi
umsebenzi wakhe. [Ihlombe.]
Kuyiqiniso ukuthi ubuholi bakho abulethanga kuphela ithemba ngekusasa
ezigidigidini zabantu kodwa kulethe nenjabulo nentokozo ezimpilweni zonke
ngenxa yezinguquko ezibonakalayo ezimweni zabo zenhlalo.

Mongameli ohloniphekile wezwe, sikubonile futhi izolo uthola isipho
esihloniphekile eNyunivesi yaseKapa lapho bewuhlonishwa khona ngomsebenzi
omuhle owenzile lapha ekhaya nasezwenikazi lonke lase-Afrika kanye
nasemazweni omhlaba. Indlu iyakubongisa. [Ihlombe.] Kusukela ngoMsombuluko
silokhu silapha Mongameli, kukhona izinto ekade sizitshelwa ngabantu, hhayi
abaholi kodwa abantu abasikhethile ukuthi sibahole phambili. Ngithanda
ukuveza lezo zinto ekade besitshela zona bese ngisonga inkulumo yami
ngokusho ukuthi sesihambe kangakanani kwezinye izinto.

Abantu bathi-ke uhulumeni omusha owakhethwa kusukela
ngo-1994 wabuyiselwa futhi ngama-70% ngo-2004 usaqhubeka nokuhlinzeka
ngezimali zosizo ezinganeni, kwabadala nakwabakhubazekile ukuze bakwazi
ukuxosha ikati eziko. Bathi bayabonga kakhulu kuhulumeni.
[Ihlombe.]Bayabonga futhi ukuthi amanzi aseyaqala ukufika ezindaweni zabo,
nogesi sekuyakhombisa ukuthi usuyangena kanye nokuthi izindlu seziyakhiwa
ezindaweni ezithize. Nokho, bashilo-ke Mongameli ukuthi uhulumeni kufanele
enze ngokushesha ngoba kusekhona izindawo lapho ugesi ungakafinyeleli
khona, namanzi ngokunjalo nezindawo lapho izindlu zingakakhiwa khona.
[Ihlombe.]

Ngiyanethembisa kakhulu ukuthi lokho okushiwo uMongameli kanye nalokho
okushiwo uNdunankulu wesifundazwe mhla bevula izindlu zesishayamthetho
ezehlukene emva kokhetho kuzokwenzeka. Naluzwa uhlelo lukaMongameli lokuthi
kufanele sibuyele emuva kubantu sizobheka lonke uhlelo lukahulumeni ukuthi
luyasebenza yini. Njengoba zise lapha nje namhlanje yingenxa yalokho.
Baphinde basho-ke Mongameli ukuthi kusekhona izindawo nokho – into
engidabukise kancane engithanda ukuthi ngiyikhulume futhi ngincenge kakhulu
emakhosini ethu aKwaZulu-Natali naseSilweni ngokunjalo nezakhamuzi
zaKwaZulu-Natali – kungizwise ubuhlungu uma ngizwa umphakathi uthi kithi
kusekhona izindawo lapho ungakwazi uhulumeni ukungena khona ukuze
ubalethele intuthuko. [Ihlombe.]

Ngithanda ukucela eSilweni, emakhosini onke akhona kule ndlu nakubaholi
bezepolitiki bonke abakhona ukuthi le mali esetshenziswa uhulumeni
ukuzodala intuthuko kubantu yimali yenu. Yemukeleni kuhulumeni ukuze
anithuthukisa ukuze nikwazi ukubona impilo yenu ibangcono. Ngiyanincenga
ukuthi nibumbane . . . (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): I would like to take
this opportunity to say thank you very much to the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces. I would also like to thank the President for
everything what he has told us. I must also say that we would take this as
a Council and look at it so that when we go back home we can see what role
we as Council can play other than the one we are currently playing. Let me
start by saying: Your Majesty the King! The hon the President of the whole
country, Thabo Mbeki, the Premiers of all the provinces, more especially Mr
S’bu Ndebele, who is our host in his province, hon members of the Council
present here amongst us, the national Chairperson of Salga present amongst
us, our honourable guests, I greet you all this morning.

I would like to start with a rather unusual, crucial topic, which is: Unity
and perseverance. Unity and perseverance are very important in our
community because we are facing huge challenges created by the apartheid
government many years ago. Those challenges requires unity and
perseverance. Our unity is important because it is the beginning of
development and prosperity. Without co-operation and perseverance all the
other efforts that I am talking about would be in vain. [Applause.]

Your Majesty, we in this province are your people. We and the entire Royal
House are drawn together by one aspiration, that of working together in
bettering the lives of people. People’s lives would not be improved if we
here on the floor and you up there on the gallery do not work together.

In these past 10 years, Mr President, all South African citizens, including
children, our elderly people, our farmers and our physically challenged
continue to benefit form government programmes that are aimed at improving
people’s lives socially and economically. We praise you, Mr President, and
we proudly say you are an honourable leader who knows his work. [Applause.]
It is indeed true that your leadership not only brought hope to millions of
people, but also brought enjoyment and happiness to people’s lives because
of the prosperity in their social welfare.

Hon the President of the country, we saw you again yesterday when you were
honoured by the University of Cape Town, where you were being honoured
because of the good work that you have done here at home and in Africa as a
whole, even abroad. The House joins you in the celebration. [Applause.]
Since Monday, when we started here, Mr President, there have been things
that people, not leaders, but people who elected us to lead them, have been
telling us about. I wish to reveal those things that they have been telling
us about and I will then sum up my speech by saying how far have we come
regarding those things.

People are saying the new government who was voted into power in 1994 and
again brought to power with 70% in 2004 still continues to help people with
child grants, to give pensions to the elderly and grants to the physically
challenged so that they may at least be able to have something to eat. They
say they are very grateful to the government. [Applause.] They are also
grateful that water is now coming to their localities, and there are
positive signs that electricity is also coming and toilets are being built
in certain areas. However, they did mention, Mr President, that the
government must accelerate the provision of these things because there are
still places that electricity has not yet reached and that water has not
yet reached and places where houses have not yet been built. [Applause.]

I promise you that what was said by the President and the Premier when they
were opening Parliament and the legislature respectively would be carried
out. You heard the President when he made the call that we should go back
to people to see if the government programme is indeed working. It is for
this very reason that we are here today. They also said that there are
still areas – something that saddened me a bit which I would like to say
and appeal to our traditional leaders in KwaZulu-Natal and His Majesty as
well as the citizens of KwaZulu-Natal – it pained me when I heard people
say that there are still places that are no-go areas, where the government
cannot go to bring development. I am appealing to all our amakhosi in
KwaZulu-Natal and His Majesty, as well as the citizens of KwaZulu-Natal.
[Applause.]

I wish to appeal to His Majesty, all amakhosi present here in this House
and all political leaders present, that the money used by the government to
bring development is your money. You must accept that money from the
government so that it can bring development, thus making your lives better.
I am pleading for unity amongst you … ]

. . . because those are national issues. Those are also basic services that
we all need in the morning. When we wake up, we want water to wash with and
to drink. When we go to bed, we want electricity to cook with and to light
our houses. We want the roads to travel on.

Sifuna lezo zindlela zibonakale. Uma sivalela uhulumeni amathuba okuba enze
lokho, kusho ukuthi-ke zisibuyisela emuva thina ngokwethu.[Ihlombe.]
Ukwesweleka kwemsebenzi Mongameli abantu baphawulile ngakho ukuthi
kuseyinselelo enkulu esibhekene nayo singuhulumeni. Kukhona izikole
ezinamagumbi okufundela angenasilingi futhi ezingenazo izindlu zangasese.
Ezinye izindlu zangasese zisetshenziswa njengegumbi lokugcina izimpahla
zesikole. Abalimi abasafufusa abaqhamuka kuleyo miphakathi eyayincishwe
amathuba emibusweni engaphambili basadidekile ukuthi bangawafeza kanjani
amaphupho abo. Basicelile kakhulu ukuthi sibasekele nokuthi sibabonelele
emabhizinisini abo. Kuselapho nje, ngithanda ukusho ukuthi ngizwe ubuhlungu
obukhulu uma kade abakhubazekile bethu, abasha kanye nabadala abahlezi
laphaya phezulu egalari besitshela ukuthi kukhona osozimali
ababasebenzisayo. [Ihlombe.] Bathatha imali kahulumeni basebenzise umuntu
onganalutho kuthi uma sebezitholile lezi zimali bashiye umuntu ngemuva
bathathe yonke imali bayifake esikhwameni. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[We want those roads to be visible. If we prevent the government from doing
that, it would mean putting ourselves back. [Applause.] People, Mr
President, commented about the scarcity of employment, saying it is still a
big challenge that we as government are still facing. There are schools
that have neither roofs nor toilets. Other toilets are used as storerooms
for school property.

Emerging farmers who are from the previously marginalised communities are
still perplexed as to how they can make their dreams come true. They asked
us to help them in their business ventures in any way possible. Still on
that aspect, I wish to say that I felt pain when I heard our physically
challenged, youth and our elderly people up there in the gallery telling us
that there are businessmen who use them. [Applause.] They take the
government’s money and use the poor people and when they get those moneys
they put all of it into their own pockets . . .]

. . . making themselves richer and the poor poorer. That was a painful
thing to hear and I can assure you that the government will address this,
and the national Ministers were here when some of these issues were raised.
Mechanisms will be found to address those things and make sure that those
people should actually go to jail, because they are defrauding the
government. [Applause.]

Kukhona futhi okunye engikuzwile engithanda ukuthi ngikuhlabe. Ngiye
ngakuhlaba ngoLwesibili. Kukhona abasebenzi bombuso abangazi ukuthi
kunabantu noma akunabantu yini. [Ihlombe.] Bonke laba bantu enibabona
behlezi egalari bavuka baya okhethweni bafike basikhetha ukuthi sibenzele
izinto abazifunayo. Uma bebhalela oNgqongqoshe, baphenduleni ukuze bathole
impendulo. [Ihlombe.] Ukuthi niyakwazi ukukwenza lokho noma anikwazi
Ukukwenza … (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[There is also another thing that I heard of and I wish to denounce it. I
denounced it on Tuesday. There are public servants who do not care about
people.[Applause.] All these people that you see in the gallery woke up in
the morning during the elections and voted for us to work for them. If they
write to Ministers, they should be given responses … [Applause.] … whether
you are able to do that or not … ]

… but they deserve a response, whether we can manage or cannot manage. They
deserve information from government. Let’s not conceal it, because that is
the information they need.

Labo basebenzi abangazimiselanga ukusebenza ngicela ukuthi ngoMsombuluko
bapakishe amasudikesi abo bahambe bashiye labo abazimisele ukusebenza.
[Ihlombe.]

Okokugcina, uhlelo lwe-Municipal Infrastructure Grant kanye nolwe-Expanded
Public Works lwenzelwe lokho ukuthi abantu bakithi bakwazi ukuzuza
imisebenzi futhi bakwazi nokungena emnothweni. Labo-ke abathatha onke
amathenda ngoba benamathuba ake baqhele kancane banikeze abanye amathuba
okuthola amathenda.[Ihlombe.] Njengoba uMongameli wezwe eseshilo, uhulumeni
kazwelonke, ohulumeni bezifundazwe kanye nohulumeni basekhaya …
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Those officials who are not prepared to work should, on Monday - I am
asking them - pack their suitcases and go and leave behind only those who
are prepared to work. [Applause.]

Lastly, the Municipal Infrastructure Grant and the Expanded Public Works
Programme are there for our people to get jobs and be able to be part of
the economy. To those who take all the tenders because they have
opportunities, I say: Let them hold on for the time being and give others a
chance of getting tenders. [Applause.] As the President of the country has
said, the national government, provincial governments and local governments
… ]

… intergovernmental relations are quite important in that we must work
together in order to deliver the services on the ground. I thank you.
[Applause.]

UNDUNANKULU WAKWAZULU-NATALI(Mr S Ndebele): Mongameli, Sihlalo woMkhandlu
kaZwelonke weziFundazwe, Mongameli weRiphabhuliki yaseNingizimu Afrika,
baba uMzizi, sithi asikubongele nathi ngezindondo ezilokhu zizile nje
kubongwa umsebenzi owenzayo wokubumba lesi sizwe saseNingizimu Afrika, e-
Afrika yonke kanye nasemhlabeni wonke. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Mr S Ndebele): President, Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, President of the Republic of South Africa,
Mzizi, we congratulate you on the awards you received for the work you have
done to build a South African nation, Africa and the world.]

You have confirmed through your leadership that, indeed, South Africa is a
country of hope. You are that hope and through you the people of South
Africa have that hope.

Hlanga lomhlabathi, Silo samabandla! Ukuba khona kwakho kwenza
kungangabazeki ukuthi iqhaza leNdlunkulu likuphi ekubumbeni isizwe
nokugqugquzela intuthuko nokuthula. Siyabonga kakhulu, hlanga lomhlabathi,
ukulokhu unathi nje. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[His Majesty the King! Your presence surely confirms the role played by the
Royal House in building the nation and the promotion of development and
peace. Thank you very much, Your Majesty, for always being here with us.]

We are meeting, colleagues, members of the NCOP, Chairperson of Salga,
members all, in a province that understands that there can be no better
tomorrow if we are always thinking of yesterday. Our yesterday was one of
racism . . .

Sekuzanyiwe eNingizimu Afrika. Yilona lodwa leli zwe elezwa umuzwa
wobandlulo. Saze sabiza nabantu abaqhamuka ngaphandle. [Attempts have been
made in South Africa. This is the only country that has experienced
apartheid. We even went to the extent of calling in people from outside.]

We have tried and perfected it. Nothing based on racism has not been tried
in South Africa. We have tried it for many years and many decades and
racism failed. Similarly we have tried tribalism. It is a distortion of our
own evolution.
Tribalism failed. We have also tried, as men, to move on the premise that
man was created in the image of God and God is not a woman, and therefore a
woman is not a human being. It is wrong and has failed. Therefore we say,
truly we will create nonracial, nonsexist democratic order… [Applause.] It
is not because there are several options such as a racist one, or a sexist
one and we have chosen one of the options. Nonracialism, and nonsexism are
the only option. There is no other option. We were not responsible for
where we are, for getting down, but we are responsible for getting up.

There are two ways of getting up. There is democracy and there is
democracy. There are democratic systems in the world based on . . .
[Inaudible.] . . . President Bush has done so, or other democracies do
that. After those four years, the majority of the people play no role
whatsoever in the development of policy. The South African way is
different. We are a government not only of mass support, but of mass
participation, where the mass of the people are not only spoken to once
every five years. We can then continue with our business, we will support
or disappoint and only know after five years. In South Africa we said that
we would create a government of mass participation and people felt that was
not possible. There is it today. Thousands of our people are here, waiting
for us to talk to them. They want us to talk to them. The previous speaker
put it eloquently. Mass participation therefore says . . .

. . . abantu bakithi bayohlala njalo beneqhaza ekusebenzeni kukahulumeni
ekuletheni intuthuko nokuthula nasekwenzeni ukuthi intando yeningi igxile.
Leyo ntando yeningi-ke ithi uma sikifile kwaDlangezwa noma Obuka olwabuka
ihlangu yafa, abantu – uma kungabantu ngeke kube amadoda nje kuphela futhi
ngeke kube abadala nje kuphela nabancane nje kuphela kodwa kuyoba khona
abesilisa nabesifazane – siyokhuluma nabo ngokuthi nansi intuthuko. Yiliphi
isu elingcono esingalenza ngoba abekho ongqondongqondo laphayana
ePhalamende abakwazi ukucabanga yonke into bese befika bethi nakhu thatha
noma ushiye. Akuyena uhulumeni wokuthi uthathe noma ushiye lona kodwa uthi
asisebenze ndawonye sisukume sisakhe lesi sifundazwe nale Ningizimu Afrika.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[. . . our people will always play a significant role in ensuring that the
government brings development and peace and to strengthen democracy. When
the said democracy reaches Dlangezwa or Obuka – that gazed at the reedbuck
and died - when we talk about people, we don’t refer to males only, we
don’t refer to adults and youth only, but references include both women and
men, and we will say to them there is development. What is the best plan we
can put into effect, because there in Parliament we lack people who can
think of everything and tell you what to take and what not to. This is not
the government of taking and leaving, but tells us to work together to
build this province and South Africa.]

Yesterday we were in Durban, where a new organisation has been formed. That
organisation is called the KwaZulu-Natal Chamber of Business. By forming
that organisation others are dissolved. We dissolved the white chamber of
business, the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut, a separate Nafcoc, because we
said that KwaZulu-Natal business is the business. It shall speak in a
united voice and act in a manner that is to the benefit of all of us.
[Applause.]

We have also established a forum of religious communities. Religious
leaders from the Christian faith, from the African faiths, from the Jewish
faith, from Islam and from Hindu have formed this forum that interacts
directly with government. They are part of the organs of mass participation
and we said that they should not be ignored. That forum has been formed.
[Applause.]

We have also established KwaZulu-Natal Women in Dialogue, formed on the
basis of SAWID, where women are in the majority. Men are becoming extinct,
particularly here in KwaZulu-Natal. Women comprise 53% of the population
here. In some districts women comprise 57% of the total. It is quite a
serious matter. [Laughter.] The people who have always been at the
forefront of establishing peace have been women. They suffer more, whether
there are faction fights or whether there is political violence on taxi
violence. Therefore women have come together and said: Yes, we might be
Catholic, we might be Zionist, ANC or IFP, so what? We are women first of
all and we must unite and put forward those issues that are very relevant
to women, namely peace and development. [Applause.]

Similarly, the youth has come together as well. It is something that I can
be proud of here, because we issued a challenge to the youth of KwaZulu-
Natal in June. We said to them that it does not matter whether they
understand what Umsovombu does, or what the Youth Commission does, but they
as the youth of the province, mostly in the ANC and the IFP, must know that
government will make available anything from R2 million to R10 million and
say: Go and establish a business enterprise together, and then you can say:
This is what we built together. Forget what the past was like and let us
move on. They say that the business plan is coming together slowly and so
forth. We say that process must move forward.

Sengivala, ukubiza kwethu izimbizo kuyaqhubeka. [In conclusion, calling of
imbizos will continue.]

These imbizos have been attended by thousands of our people in Mazizini and
Mgungundlovu. We are going to Inkandla next time and it will be ongoing.

We say we support this mass participation and with our people being part of
government. The NCOP started well because it started in KwaZulu-Natal to
make sure that it goes to a province where it cannot fail. [Applause.]

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU OMELE IZIFUNDAZWE: Angikubonge Ndunankulu. Uyabona
umuntu uma esekhaya, uvele athathe konke nesikhathi. [Uhleko.] Siyabonga
baba ngokusendlalela ngokuthi kwenzekani KwaZulu-Natali. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, hon Premier. When you
are at home, you take everything, including time. [Laughter.] Thank you
very much, Premier, for your address concerning what is happening in
KwaZulu-Natal.]

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Mr E Rasool): Thank you very much,
Chairperson. Mr President, His Majesty King Goodwill Zwelethini, Premiers,
MECs, members of the NCOP, guests present, I think today has been a very
important moment as the President begins to redefine the role of the NCOP.
He does so particularly in the light of how local government can play its
role in fulfilling the promise to create a people’s contract to create work
and to fight poverty. We do so in a context where there is increasing
clarity regarding the role of local government and we do so as we begin
seriously to address the capacity constraints of that sphere of government.

Mr President, if I can speak to the debate that you have opened, and open a
further debate about the role that provinces can play, not only in
developing our developmental state, but in fulfilling the promise of the
people’s contract, both to create work as well as to fight poverty. I think
we take as the fountainhead the state of the nation address that you
delivered earlier this year and we take as a further follow-up to that, the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement by Mr Manuel in Parliament last week.
It is therefore obvious to all of us from both those addresses that we have
a coherent development package to fulfil our people’s contract to create
jobs and to fight poverty.

The national development package pivots around three closely interrelated
thrusts: Firstly, ensuring growth and development in the first economy and
increasing its possibility to create employment and jobs for our people;
secondly, a battery of programmes to address the challenges facing those in
the quagmire of the second economy, and thirdly, building a social security
network to ensure poverty alleviation while we expand the capacity of the
economy to absorb all in our society. It is this focused agenda which is
underpinned by the expansive programme to reorient the very mechanisms and
the instruments of the state through, amongst others, Batho Pele so that
the state, its staff and its budget are truly equipped to implement these
thrusts of our people’s contract.

Mr President, as you are well aware, our intergovernmental system is not
yet fully geared to deliver on this approach in a coherent and effective
manner. The recently debated Intergovernmental Relations Bill that you
referred to provides a giant leap forward in resolving some of the key
problems therein. However, what I believe remains lacking, despite the
advance at an institutional architectural level coming through in the IGR
Bill, is a more nuanced understanding of our intersphere governmental
system in terms of building this developmental state that we have referred
to.

Therefore, I think that what we need to do is to understand that we are
indeed a unitary state that has to deal with the deep historical legacies
of colonialism, slavery and apartheid. We must all acknowledge the
importance of a strong national centre that can define policy direction
with the benefit of a macro perspective, especially in the context of
intensifying globalisation.

The national programme of action as led by you, Mr President, stands
testimony to the fact that national government has taken this role
seriously and is dispensing that role vigorously and effectively. It has
redefined a comprehensive gamut of policies and programmes. More recently
this has been defined further through the scenarios exercise by the
Presidency to force us all to think about what kind of future we want, what
we are doing now and how we imagine South Africa 10 years from now, 20
years from now, 30 years from now. As you have pointed out, Mr President,
excellent national policies will dissipate in the actions of effective
implementation on the ground, where our people struggle to eke out a
sustainable livelihood in a context of structural unemployment and deep
poverty. This is where the local government sphere comes into play, as you
pointed out. At its core, the developmental role of municipalities is to
ensure the concrete delivery of appropriate goods and services to our
people in a manner that cements our people’s contract at community level.
It is also around these community delivery imperatives that local
government can be a vital access point for the exercise of democratic
citizenry, the mass participation that we have spoken about, by shaping,
through partnerships, the content and the speed of local delivery
programmes.

By definition, municipalities focus on their jurisdictional boundaries,
which is a source of strength as well as a source of weakness; a strength
because it allows a tactile engagement with ordinary citizens and
organisations and creates the participation that you have referred to. It
can become a weakness, Mr President, when it takes on the form of
parochialism and many of our development strategies and programmes require
taking a broad view to understand the complex interrelationship between
economic, social, environmental and logistical factors that are at play at
various geographical locations.

On this note, let me introduce this discussion on what I want to call the
meso level or the meso scale of development, the scale between the micro
and macro; the role that provinces can ideally begin to play. Provincial
government is the interlocutor between that macro and micro by focusing on
the meso factors in our national development effort, provincial governments
fulfil a vital role in translating the national development agenda into a
contextualised provincial framework.

An axiom of sustainable human development, as we all know, is that
development must be context specific if it is to succeed. If it is
abstracted, decontextualised, if it is blueprint-driven, those development
frameworks simply will not work. A key role of provinces is therefore to
ensure national consistency in our development efforts, but at the same
time set the frameworks for localization and integration. I am obviously
getting to the area of institutional systems that underpin our
developmental state. I raise this because I believe that the absence of an
understanding of the institutional linkages in the national development
planning system can lead to false dichotomies between spheres of government
on the one hand, and areas of development on the other.

We can end pitting economic growth versus poverty reduction, when these
should be two sides of the same coin. To make this more concrete: If we
look at the area of economic growth and development, it is clear that
national government sets the macroeconomic framework and the supply side
support mechanisms, municipalities through LED strategies activate these
support mechanisms for small and emerging businesses so that they can
migrate from the second economy into the first. However, in between these
spheres, provinces must set sectoral growth strategies that can speak to
the natural growth points that tend to spread across particular regions.
The sectoral strategies work in terms of the national macroeconomic
framework and simultaneously inform LED strategies.

The question is: Are provinces being empowered in resources, as well as in
its mandates to fulfil this vital role and I believe that the answer is not
always. Since this is a serious contention, allow me to qualify this
assertion by referring to the bruising process of, for example, the Medium-
Term Budget allocations. As you are aware, the formula for the equitable
share has been revised. It boils down to 3:1 in terms of poverty to
economic growth. Are we saying that economic growth becomes less important
than the imperative to reduce poverty and are we pitting the two against
each other and not seeing it as two sides of the same coin? The point is
that as provincial budgets are reorganised, it is increasingly spending
more and more of its money on health and education and, for the meantime,
welfare services. If this begins to take up 90% of the budgets and
activities of provinces, can we speak of provincial government? Or are we
speaking of increasing our provincial administrations or even agents of
national policy?

Let me not make this case through lamentation but demonstrate rather what
the dangers are if we are embarking on such a path. The implementation of
the National Spatial Development Plan that emanates from the Presidency is
vital to refer to. The four principles of that plan would simply be:
Economic growth is a prerequisite for the achievement of other policy
objectives, key amongst which would be poverty alleviation.[Time expired.]

The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms D Peters): Thank you, Chairperson. Mr
President of the Republic, His Majesty the King, Premiers, Chairperson of
Salga, hon members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, I stand here firmly
believing that our visit to KwaZulu-Natal is a small spark that ignites a
powerful reaction to create light and hope. When it is dark, there is fear
and uncertainty and despondency. The spark is the intuition, vigour, faith,
and determination to convert darkness into light and the impossible into
opportunity. The person to ignite that spark is none other than our
President, hon President Mbeki.

Some of the people of South Africa look on our province, the Northern Cape,
and feel sorry for a sparsely populated province with long distances and
what appears to be an insignificant budget. Yes, the province presents
itself with unique challenges but it will take more than commitment and
determination to overcome some of those challenges. The indicators on a
variety of issues in our ten-year review show how the transformation
process has changed the lives of our people in the Northern Cape for the
better. The province built more houses per capita in the country than
anywhere else. The province obtained the highest immunisation coverage,
over 100%, therefore leading the country. It is more than tripled the
number of health professionals in all disciplines and we obtained the
highest matric pass rate in the country. [Applause.] This is confirmation
of a province that seeks to be a trendsetter in improving the lives of all
the province’s people.

In 2004 we entered into a people’s contract to fight poverty and create
jobs. It is our contractual and moral obligation therefore to create jobs
and bring new hope, that of a better life for our people in the Northern
Cape. We have since April 2004 appointed more than 600 nursing assistants
on learnership training programmes, recruited 464 new police officers for
training, 300 social auxiliary workers and more than 1 328 catering
assistants to handle food for learners during breaks, so that the teachers
could be relieved to do what they have been appointed to do and to teach
our children. [Applause.] We have also employed 398 early childhood
practitioners and more than 200 graduates were employed as interns to gain
experience in government departments. The importance of this intervention
is to ensure that our young people gain the necessary experience, because
every time we go to imbizos our young people will tell you how they apply,
apply, apply and don’t get confirmation or appointments, because they would
always be told that they lack experience.

Some 200 community development workers are in training and 117 are already
deployed in various communities. In line with our Expanded Public Works
Programme approximately
1 878 new houses would be built and 2 017 homes currently under
construction will be completed. We have made the creation of jobs our
priority and all departments, plus partners, will use their existing
budgets and resources to maximise job creation. In line with the Expanded
Public Works Programme we took a decision, as the Northern Cape, that we
are going to create more than
9 030 jobs in the first year. Already at this time, Mr President, we have
reached the 5 000 target and we wish to continue at an accelerated pace to
reach the 9 000 mark. [Applause.]

We are under no illusions about the challenges we face and we recognize
that large parts of our population remain vulnerable to the devastating
effects of lower levels of the provincial economic growth and job creation.
There can be no doubt that improving the performance of our provincial
economy and in particular its capacity to generate new sustainable jobs
must be our main priority. Thus we have just hosted our provincial growth
and development strategy summit to focus and systematically identify areas
of potential growth and how to maximise opportunities presented by these
areas. After all, it is only through the achievement of sustained economic
growth, in tandem with structural change and economic transformation, that
we can in truth reduce the marked differences that define the gap between
the first and the second economies in our province.

Our efforts to promote new investments in our provincial economy will
continue. We have been carrying out an exercise designed to identify those
constraints to economic development that would improve the investment
climate. We must remind ourselves every time that there is no time for
procrastination. Our people are exposed to humiliation and suffering,
therefore we need to act today and not postpone anything for tomorrow. All
our endeavours have to seek to better the lives of our people and some are
forced to beg for a livelihood.

We are facing a number of challenges in the Northern Cape. Firstly, I need
to indicate that we have the highest unemployment levels per capita in the
country. And that is why the issue of creating work is such an important
priority. Secondly, two thirds of our province is facing a devastating
drought that is adversely affecting our agricultural sector and household
water supply. The hardest hit area is the Namaqua district, where we are
unable to provide the six kilolitres of free basic water and we even have
to give our households two kilolitres per household, instead of the
required numbers given. Farmers have been given drought relief grants but
it has proven that it is not enough, because the drought conditions are not
abating. The difficulty of delivering services to small pockets of
communities in the Northern Cape, especially in the far outlying areas,
some distances of the Northern Cape being more than 1 400 kilometres, like
between Alexander Bay and Kimberley, which is the centre of government. Our
ambulances and service transport don’t last long because of these
distances.

The downscaling of mining operations in some areas like Concordia and
Aggenys and some other areas in the province increases the unemployment
rate even further.

There is also the serious challenge of the number of people receiving
disability grants. We are told in some instances of people who are buying
positive sputum of people infected with TB, because they want access to TB
grants. And that is why this province has the highest per capita positive
TB smears in the country. Our budget is consumed by these disability
grants.

We are the only province in the country that saw a negative population
growth. We try to check where our people are going. One colleague from
KwaZulu-Natal said that he might have a solution for the population problem
of the Northern Cape and I will engage my colleague to see what the
solution is. It is time for us and our continent to re-emerge and solve
those problems created by years of colonization and oppression. Sooner or
later we will not have apartheid or colonisation to blame. I believe that
with your support as the NCOP we will succeed in turning these challenges
into opportunities. The sun always rises in the Northern Cape and we are
focused with a clear vision to better the lives of our people.

It is when we are clear about our political imperatives as outlined in our
growth and development strategy that we have to create administrative
systems and strategies that would expedite their implementation. The sun
always rises in the mist of our hopeless detractors who see nothing good
that this government does. We hope the sun blinds them. The sun shines on
the faces of our people suffering of hunger and burdened by diseases. Their
faces brighten as the rays of hope lighten them to diminish the darkness of
poverty. We are all in this together for a better, brighter day is here. We
must all continue to try harder, and we as the Northern Cape people and as
government say, we will stay focused and work together with our partners to
bring a better life to the people of the Northern Cape. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, Your Excellency the hon President, Your
Excellency the King, hon members and other dignitaries, nomphakathi
waseMpangeni ngiyanibingelela [and the community of Empangeni, I greet you
all.]

The last time I had the pleasure of addressing this House in the presence
of our hon President was at the inauguration ceremony in May this year.
This was shortly after the opening of the National Assembly, where the
leader of the DA, Mr Tony Leon, extended a hand of friendship to the
President and his government. In my address I expressed similar sentiments
and said that we wanted to help the government find solutions to the many
challenges facing our beloved country.

Today, in debating the challenges facing us in addressing the enormous
problems of unemployment and poverty, I want to reiterate my party’s wish
to assist in finding solutions, and indeed underline our constitutional
right and duty to do so. We need to be forthright and candid in our
approach in building on successes and recognising failures, as well as
neglected areas. I want to agree with the hon Deputy Chairperson of this
House, but please allow me to continue. We need to be forthright and candid
in our approach to building on our successes. Let me state upfront also, Mr
President, that you have initiated many laudable programmes coupled with
equally many successes.

This initiative of the NCOP, for instance, of bringing Parliament to the
people, is certainly such a move in the right direction. We as public
representatives were able to observe at, first hand, the heartbreaking
plight of so many people. The people themselves were able to be part of a
little bit of Parliament, where they could thank government for what they
perceive to be positive, but also alas to give testimony of the many
shortcomings, broken promises and, indeed, corrupt actions of those who
have been elected to serve them. This is a big wound that needs to be
cauterised properly, before it goes completely septic.

Yes, you do read of the odd case here and there, where illicit actions of
elected representatives are investigated and punished – but that is just
not enough. It is like dressing untreated wounds. We must rid our
structures of these types, once and for all. This week we have just heard
far too many accusations against councillors that boil down to no less than
extortion. What are we trying to do, Mr President? Are we allowing a sort
of mafia to prosper in South Africa? I think not. Whilst therefore
applauding this week’s programme, I must tell you, however, that far too
much time had been spent in allowing dignitaries to portray government and
party policies from this stage, while those who should have been heard
properly, do not have all the time that they needed and were continuously
cut short and interrupted. The people really need to be heard properly. Let
us keep the rhetorical campaigning for the elections.

I must also acknowledge that the Expanded Public Works Programme holds many
possibilities and we have been able to observe some very successful
programmes in operation. I for one was very impressed with the road-
building project in the Limpopo Province. Much needed road links are
improved, whilst many people have a chance of employment and subsistence,
even if it is temporary. Part of the success of this project, however, is
undoubtedly the concessions allowed in regard to minimum wages. The workers
are paid only R30 per predetermined task, which means that the vigour and
determination of the individual will determine his or her daily income.
Those that are happy with only R30 will complete only one task per day,
whilst the more enterprising and energetic can earn R60 or R90 or even
more. We can find no fault with this as it creates new opportunities, but
we do believe, Mr President, that these labour law concessions could and
should be extended to the public sector. Just think how many more people
would be employed, clothed, fed and helped, if we allow a company like
Highveld Steel in Witbank to apply the same terms of employment as those
applied to the road-building project in Limpopo.

The adverse living conditions of the ever growing squatter camps along the
M4 Maputo Corridor will improve overnight and the shacks will
systematically be replaced by owner-built houses. The cherry on the top is
that it will not cost the government a cent. The DA today therefore calls
on the President to initiate one such pilot project in partnership with
industry and to measure the outcome before wiping the proposal off the
table. I wish I had more time, but I am running out of time.

Let me hasten also to share with you a good story that has emanated from
this visit to KwaZulu-Natal. On Monday we visited one particular school,
where abject poverty was the order of the day. They have child-headed
households, teenage pregnancies, school buildings that are dilapidated, no
toilets to speak of, far too many children per teacher and for the
classrooms available and help is direly needed. One of our members of the
DA, Ms Chen from Gauteng, who is also a businesslady, was so touched by the
plight of that school that she made a decision there and then and announced
that she wanted to adopt that school and would help them financially.
[Applause.] I end where I started, by saying what the leader of my party
said to the President: Please listen to us. We want to help you. We are
rivals and not enemies. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF MPUMALANGA (Mr T S P Makwetla): Hon Chairperson, President
of the Republic, Your Majesty the King, fellow members, allow me to join
those who have congratulated the President on the occasion of being
conferred one of the awards by the University of Cape Town for his
outstanding leadership role on the continent and beyond. The sitting of the
NCOP has in a unique way accorded us a valuable opportunity to pause
briefly, assess and reflect how our provinces have executed our duties in
beginning the programme of the next five years to create work in order to
fight poverty in the context of Vision 2014. Quite evidently in our
province, just as in other provinces, the challenge to further promote the
emotional integration of our people must be continuously addressed with
vigour. In this regard we have understood the need, among others, to attend
to the problem of politically improper names that many places and objects
still bear in our province. This reality fits the unfortunate conflictual
identities of the past and a fractured national heritage we still bear. We
all agree to celebrate 10 years of freedom and to consolidate our nonracial
democracy we must change the complexion of our province in this respect and
relieve it of the many offensive names of yesteryear.

Still, the biggest challenge that we face as a province and as a country
remains the socioeconomic transformation of millions of lives in this
country and that cannot be denied. It is proper that coming from Mpumalanga
we must be among those in this Chamber who are vocal about the need to
change and transform the socioeconomic conditions of our people. This is
so, because in spite of boasting one of the regions with a relatively
better infrastructure and strong economy, the our province of Mpumalanga’s
GN coefficient is below the national average. In our province, South
Africa’s sharp contrasts of a modern and developed economy, which exists
alongside an underdeveloped economy, could not be more pronounced. Ours is
a region with some of South Africa’s best farms and of the wretched
illiterate farm labourers who resemble the unfreed labour of the long past
life of bondage. We are a region of acclaimed mines and industries and poor
workers. We have a strong belief that our region’s economic potential has
not been optimally exploited. Therein lies our confidence that Mpumalanga
can phenomenally increase its growth rate. Key to this economic expansion
is the popular view that the province must promote the downstream
beneficiation of our primary products in all sectors.

Secondly, the competitive advantage offered by the Maputo Corridor
initiative to exporters, in particular those in heavy industries, must be
realised. Since we assumed our duties following the elections, we have been
involved in a series of meetings to interact with key economic role-players
in our province to understand their challenge and to forge a common
perspective for our province. It is encouraging and inspiring to report
that we are all of one mind, that what we are talking about is something
more than economic growth. The challenge that Mpumalanga faces is that of
growth combined with change. The process of economic growth that we clamour
for must be managed as such that while the region realizes an increase in
the real per capita income over a period of time, the number of people
below the poverty line does not increase, but progressively decreases. This
will firmly keep us on a course towards the goals of the 2014 Vision, that
of reducing poverty and unemployment by half, 10 years from now. What we
seek is much more than the simple acquisition of industries as it were.

We need a combination of forces whose inner logic will reveal a desire for
an upward movement of the entire social system, characterized, among
others, by a rise in productivity and technology, social and economic
equity, and improved institution and attitude from among those who are
doing business. It is especially in relation to the accomplishing of the
latter goals that this august House is destined to be a valuable partner in
delivering the 2014 Vision by our provinces.

The Expanded Public Works Programme is being rolled out with a lot of
excitement. There is no doubt that a lot of benefits are going to accrue
for our community from this programme and many valuable lessons will be
learned in taking development to the people. It is important to remember
that the endemic poverty in our community is the result of many factors,
including colonial conquests, which led to the systematic removal of our
people from their land.

To reverse this destituteness within many communities, we must put as many
as possible of these families back on the land. The vital role played by
local government in service delivery cannot be overemphasised.

Project consolidation has provided us with the critical management
information, which we require to deal with the numerous incapacities of our
municipalities in the delivery of services. In the long term one vital
aspect, which will further add to improved service delivery in our
municipalities, is the decision to allocate competencies to the different
spheres of government more decisively.
A few weeks ago Mpumalanga had the honour of hosting the national launch of
the local economic development learnerships by the local government, water
and related services Seta. On that occasion we made it known that we are
proud and excited about the launch of the LED learnerships, because it was
a development, which would complement our efforts to promote a growing
provincial economy, in order to improve the lives of our people,
particularly in the areas where they live. We also believe that the LED
learnerships will address the urgent human resource development challenges
facing our province and the capacity of managers and implementers of
government policies within the public sector. The issue of the lack of
capacity has been mentioned for many years as a reason for poor service
delivery.

As the Mpumalanga provincial government we have a vested and biased
interest in efforts that are aimed at supporting and deepening the
improvement in human resource capacity within local government. This we
believe has the potential to dramatically improve service provision and
development in our province as a whole. Learnerships are important in the
deepening of the smart partnerships in the province, both across spheres of
government and between private and public institutions for skills
development, service delivery and the economic growth of our province. It
is through LEDs in partnerships with other provincial economic development
initiatives that we will see the transformation of our areas, both rural
and urban, into areas that are attractive to investors.

These areas can lead to the injection of much-needed funds that can promote
both employment prospects and the ability of our people to access
livelihoods. At the same time, a growing local economy will be accompanied
by growing revenue for the municipalities, which will enable them to be
more effective in developmental interventions. We need to emphasise that
municipalities should try at all times to maximise their revenue base,
including correct billing and collection of moneys owed to them.
Municipalities should strive for the efficient and effective use of
resources at their disposal in a manner that would address the needs of the
people. Thank you very much for the opportunity.

In conclusion through partnership a better life is indeed realisable in
conditions that speak to the efforts of all of us today. [Time expired.]

Mnuz M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, angibonge kuMongameli wezwe, Luhlanga lwezwe!
Bayede! Namakhosi akhona, oNgqongqoshe bezifunda nezifundazwe, abafowetho
nodadewethu siyanibingelela nonke. Angisike elijikayo ngoba sincane
isikhathi enginikezwe sona lapha.Ngihalalisela uMongameli ngomklomelo
esibone eklonyeliswa wona izolo komabonakude laphayana eNyuvesi
yaseMpumlanga Koloni. Sithi nje kuphela unwele olude Mongameli uma
imisebenzi yakho ikulandela beyibona banye wena mhlawumbe ungayiboni.
Unwele olude! (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Thank you, Chairperson. President, His Majesty the King,
Bayede! Traditional leaders present, provincial Premiers, Ministers, ladies
and gentlemen, I greet you all. I won’t say much, because the time
allocated to me is limited. I would like to congratulate the President on
the award he was given on national television yesterday by the University
of the Eastern Cape. We are saying to you: Long live, President, because
your work follows you. People are recognising you. You might not have been
aware of that. Long live!]

Chairperson, no political democracy can survive and flourish if a great
majority of the people under its governance are still imprisoned by poverty
and depravation. Today, 10 years into our democracy, our people have grown
weary of empty promises and rhetorical phrases and a better life that never
materialise. It is therefore most critical that the agenda we set, the
promises we make and the policies we formulate should, as a matter of
precedence be turned into a tangible and workable solution that yields
tangible results. One of the major challenges we face in terms of improving
the quality of life of our people is that of forging greater co-operation
among all levels of government, underpinned by the principle of democracy
in this respect. No level of governance should be viewed to be functioning
in isolation from a whole structure of governance. We need therefore to
forge acceptance of a democratic principle of transparency and
accountability between the NCOP, the provinces and local government.

There has to be an adequate understanding about what our role and
responsibilities entail for optimum desired results, as we are also bound
by the principle of a democracy not to interfere with one another’s roles
and responsibilities, but not as far as oversight, abuse, power and
accountability are concerned. It therefore has to be maintained that any
sphere of government that does not agree with the ethic of accountability
only seeks to embody undemocratic principles that are related and reckless
abuse of power and positions for personal gain.

We need to pay more attention to getting rid of this political arrogance,
which often shifts the focus from serving our people to that of our
political egos and power control, as well as exclusionary forms of decision-
making that do not at all benefit our people on the ground. This is not a
call for the abandonment of principles. It is a call for allowing the
process of constructive engagement to take place at all levels and
governance, and basing decisions on soundness, instead of basing them
entirely on who has the power to make the final decision. This requires
acceptance that democracy opens up the platform and opens up communication.
It is about acceptance of the existence of a public life and a government
and governments where there is no truth but many opinions competing against
one another. The competition of viewpoints through constructive debate for
the best alternative is what a true democracy is all about. We should not
lose sight of focusing on finding the best alternative through constructive
debate.

Mongameli, angisike kwelijikayo. Ezindaweni esizihambele bekungekuningi
esikubonile kodwa kukhona okungihlabe umxhwele uma sifika endaweni
yaseMangwe Care Centre okuyindawo lapho okunakekelwa khona asebagula
ngendlela yokuthi umthwalo ususobhokweni abasekuphinda emuva, sithole
benakekelwe kahle kakhulu. Nokho, okubonakalayo lapho ukuthi sengathi
kunezinqinamba eziphathelene nokungabi bikho kwezimali kahle ukuze bawufeze
lowo msebenzi uphumelele. [Ihlombe.] Okunye okuye kwangithinta kakhulu
kuthe uma sesifika ezindaweni ezingaphandle lapho khona kukhona laba
abavolontiyayo ezindaweni ezisemakhaya, ngathola umama obengaphakathi
endlini umbona naye ukuthi-ke umthwalo ususobhokweni akusekho ukuphinda
emuva. Ngizwa sengathi kuthiwa usenezingane azibhekile kanti akukho kwababa
ekhaya. Angazi umkhandlu wesifunda salapho uthini. Ukhula ulubona selungena
ngewindi selufika nasemnyango. Abaningi omama bangena phakathi. Thina
madoda asingenanga kodwa kuya kwafika enhlizweni ukuthi usizi luseluningi
futhi lumi lodwa ezweni. Kuyadingeka ukuthi uhulumeni azihlinzekele lezi
zinto. Mhlawumbe kuzofanele sibhukule futhi sizifikele mathupha sonke kube
uhulumeni wezifunda, owasekhaya kanye noMkhandlu weziFundazwe zikaZwelonke.
Kufanele sibhukule impela sibone ukuthi yini engase yenziwe ukuze uhulumeni
akwazi ukuletha izinsiza kubantu abantulayo ngoba phela uma ugula usuke
ungasenamandla. Yilokho nje Mongameli engithi angisike elijikayo
kwesikubonile.
[Time expired.]](Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[President, I would like to say a few things. We have seen many things at
the places we visited. However, something interested me when we reached the
Mangwe Care Centre, which is a place where those who are terminally ill are
cared for. They are being looked after in a very dignified manner. There
were signs of financial problems that hampered the efficient performance of
that work. [Applause.] I was touched when we visited the rural areas where
volunteers are working. There was a woman one could tell was terminally
ill. I heard that she had children to look after and that she had no
husband. I wonder what the local council has done. The grass has grown
high, it reaches up to the door, and is up to window level. Many women got
inside. We as men did not get inside. It came to my mind that suffering is
still rife and we have a long way to go. It is incumbent upon the
government to plan for this.

It is important however, that local and provincial government and the
National Council of Provinces should work hard. We have to work hard to
ensure that the indigent are provided with basic necessities, because if
you are sick you don’t have the strength to do something. That is all I
wanted to mention to you, President, some of the things we have seen. [Time
expired.]]

The PREMIER OF LIMPOPO (Mr S Moloto): Chairperson, hon President, His
Majesty the King, my colleagues the Premiers of other provinces, the
Chairperson of Salga, hon members, in April this year the people of South
Africa gave the ANC an overwhelming mandate to implement our policies,
programmes and strategies for the second decade of our freedom. They
identified job creation and the elimination of poverty as being at the top
on the national agenda. What is important about the April result is not
only the fact that the ANC extended its national majority, but that we have
achieved this in each of the nine provinces independently. The result is
here for all of us to see, collectively united behind a common banner and a
shared programme of action.

The major challenge awaiting us is how we are to strengthen our resolve
practically to bring about the ideal of a better life for all South
Africans. How do we give practical meaning to the mandate given to us to
proceed on the path of growth and development?

The recently published Ten-Year Review highlights the tremendous progress
we made in the past decade to deliver services to our people. It also
underscores the fact that local government is indeed that sphere of
government closest to communities and thus reflects the service delivery
point. The people therefore have the right to demand of the elected
representatives in towns and the hinterlands to deliver quality services
and to deliver it in time. There can be no excuses for public
representatives at local government level not to be fully informed and
responsive to the needs of their people.

As representatives of our provinces, we are also keenly aware of the many
challenges that still exist in local government, especially in rural areas,
as ably explained by the President in his opening remarks. One of these
challenges is a major skills handicap, an issue that is experienced within
the broader economy, but especially felt within the local governance
sphere. This lack of skills has an impact on our ability effectively to
meet the major developmental challenges and basic needs. We are delighted
that Project Consolidate is meant to deal with these deficiencies and
challenges. We are acknowledging the fact that we have succeeded in putting
in place a strong policy and regulatory framework. The weakness has been,
as the President explained, that our implementation mechanisms have been
found wanting. This is an area that we are supposed to be focusing on.

One of the primary duties of this House is to reflect the views of the nine
provinces and to integrate this into the broader national strategies and
programmes. We also believe that this House has an opportunity to consider
the broader issues of service delivery and to study and debate options on
how to allocate resources, including human resources, to ensure sustainable
development on a national scale. This is an issue that has also been
discussed in representative forums and working groups, including Salga and
Nedlac. We believe that the time has come to put in place effective and
responsive senior management in local government structures throughout our
country and to stop relying on crisis management and stopgap measures.

As the national government departments transfer the bulk of their budgets
and allocations directly to these local authorities, it is incumbent on our
municipalities to ensure that these funds are spent in a more efficient and
effective way. We are proud of the significant progress we have made over
the past six months of our second decade of freedom. In building on the
achievements and successes of the first decade of our democracy, we
convened sectoral summits in our province for two reasons: To canvas views
from all the stakeholders and secondly to mobilise and canvas buy-in by all
these stakeholders.

These summits culminate in the provincial growth and development summit
that adopted a strategy that will certainly enable us to expand our
economic basis and create more opportunities for job creation and the
development of local skills bases. We concluded our provincial summits with
a renewed sense of hope and optimism about our future and it is with a
similar sense of hope that we are participating in this debate and
listening to what is happening across the country. We trust that this forum
will continue to play a meaningful and decisive role in the broader
national engagement and that the decisions taken here will assist us in
achieving our national goals to create employment opportunities in order to
combat the scourge of underdevelopment and poverty. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J D THIBEDI (North West): Chairperson, Your Excellency the President,
His Majesty the King, Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson, the Premier of
KwaZulu-Natal and other provincial Premiers here today, members of the
NCOP, fellow South Africans, please allow me to begin by saying that I am
humbled by this opportunity to address this meeting of the NCOP. On behalf
of organized local government, kindly allow me to make a few comments on
the challenges and successes of local government in the process of building
a caring society, guided by the principles of democracy, nonracialism,
nonsexism and the quest for a prosperous society.

The December 2000 local government elections marked the beginning of the
final stage of restructuring and the development of local government in
South Africa. At times we do not fully appreciate the extent of our local
government dispensation and how well this sphere of government compares
with other counterparts elsewhere in the world. Local government in South
Africa is recognised both in the Constitution and in various relevant
pieces of legislation. In the face of enormous difficulties, municipalities
have delivered services and have been able to grapple with worrying issues
with success. One can speak here of urban renewal, the fight against
corruption and poverty and various other initiatives. Our role as organised
local government is not only to ensure that the voice of local government
is heard, but also that we help to build capacity among member
municipalities and share best practices among ourselves as municipalities.
We have an additional challenge, to build Salga into a powerful instrument
capable of being placed in the hands of municipalities to help build a
better life for all our people.

The Constitution outlines the objectives of local government in section
152, as has been explained by the President. Let me, however, emphasise
that, firstly, local government is local democracy in action. This refers
to both representative democracy and participatory democracy. To
municipalities we say yes to regular and periodic elections. Do govern with
the full mandate given to you by the electorate and the citizens of the
municipalities, but do also pay attention to the need to engage communities
in an ongoing manner. This refers to, amongst others, building a vibrant
democracy by involving the masses of our people and the numerous civil
organization societies out there, even though their voices may at times
appear to be out of tune in matters of governance. Let there be a sense
that their voices are also being heard.

Secondly, local government is also about economic development and social
development. Local government is about an economic role-player at the local
level and a social development partner with communities. Chairperson,
individual municipalities are faced with numerous challenges. These range
from poverty and unemployment, social delivery and water and sanitation,
the question of housing, the delivery of roads, ensuring safety and
building safe communities at the local level, as well as ensuring that
public representatives remain ever engaged with the masses of our people
and the various organisations of society.

As we move further into the future, we need to ensure the following:
Enhance and deepen the involvement of people in the RDP processes. This
would not only ensure that each municipality has the actual needs of its
people at its fingertips, but in addition, it will also assist a great deal
in ensuring that priorities are properly identified. This will also make
local economic development a reality in various localities. As we move into
the future, we need to focus our attention on getting the basics right.
This will include, amongst others, correcting the billing system, raising
and collecting all the revenue due to individual municipalities, fixing
leaking pipes, especially in relation to water, and ensuring that all
unaccounted for water becomes a problem of the past. Indeed, traffic lights
in a local area need to function properly, especially in the cities. The
programmes of Salga should be fully implemented, including amongst others,
the whole question of ensuring that the core councillor training programme
is revived and strengthened so that we would be able to address the
question of skills capacity gaps amongst local public representatives.

We need to look at the Expanded Public Works Programme, which holds great
promise and hope for the creation of work at the local level. We need to
ensure the implementation of municipal infrastructure grants and that
indeed Project Consolidate becomes a reality at the local level. Let me
add, other similar initiatives should become a reality as we grapple with
these immense challenges and as we move into the future. The question of
partnership with communities is critical. Our understanding is that
government and government alone, acting in isolation, will only do so much
and achieve so much but together we indeed stand to gain more. Indeed, we
stand to achieve much more.

Finally, let me salute the President of the Republic for putting local
government at the centre of governance. We believe, as Salga, that this is
where local government belongs. The debate is very timely. We find your
work both encouraging and inspiring. South African municipalities stand
foursquare behind this conception. Let me assure you that organized local
government and member municipalities are indeed looking forward to a
meaningful engagement with both the NCOP and Parliament. [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Ms F B Marshoff): Mr President, Chairperson
of the NCOP, His Majesty the King, hon Premiers, members of the NCOP, the
Chairperson of Salga, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, since
1994 the lives of hundreds and thousands of people in our country have
changed for the better. Many have benefited from social security safety
nets, free comprehensive health care, as well as access to education.
Thousands of the poor and marginalised now have roofs over their heads,
access to free basic water and electricity. We can truly say with pride
that together, as a collective, we have strived and continue to do so, to
give effect to the people’s contract to create jobs, to fight poverty and
underdevelopment.

While we understand where we want to be, and how we want to get there, our
path is riddled with obstacles. As you know, the Free State is largely a
rural province and the bulk of the people who have been previously
marginalised are hidden on our farms, as well as in the former Bantustans.
Most of these people still do not have access to free basic water services.
Most of our people do not have access to services such as the most basic
thing, when a child is born, not having access to services such as the
registration of the birth of the newborn child. In this regard, our
provincial government is working hard, together with local government, to
address these backlogs that we have identified and also to continuously
improve on the quality of life of the people of the Free State.

Every day we are delivering a little bit more to our people. And we are
saying constantly to our people that what we have today is better than what
we had yesterday. We also commit ourselves to continue to improve on what
they can look forward to for a brighter tomorrow, a brighter future, a
brighter Free State that will be able to address their needs.

Recently our provincial government has had to deal with this discontent
among our communities. All of us, I am sure, still have in our minds the
issue around Ntabaswe and Harrismith, where the local municipal offices
went up in flames. Whilst we are confronted with these challenges, whilst
our people had the courage to stand up and say to us that we had not
delivered on some of the most basic services promised to them, as a
province, as a local authority that has been affected in this regard, we
have also been able to say to our people: We are aware that they are having
difficulties, but as a provincial government we are hard at work at trying
to solve those problems.

We were humbled by the realisation of the extent of the appalling living
conditions of some of our fellow South Africans. It came to us as a very
harsh reality, whilst we were under the impression that we had already
delivered on the most basic of our promises, that there were some critical
areas that were still outstanding. What we have also realised was that at
the core of this problem was the lack of capacity to deliver by our
municipalities.

A report by the Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) was handed over to
us just two days ago states clearly that whilst we are addressing the
backlogs, we have not been able to address all the backlogs, especially
with regard to water, sanitation and electricity delivery. Whilst we have
made some strides in regard to refuse removal, others are still lacking.

Chairperson, as the President has so rightly said in his address this
morning, we have to strive towards a more effective and efficient local
government and a delivery system that will be able to respond to the needs
of our people. We are working very hard to achieve that. The issue of
capacity within our municipalities is also a very complex one. We have
municipalities that are struggling financially. When you look at the report
and also at the areas that have been identified in the report that has been
delivered to us by the Department of Local Government and Housing, more
than 60% of municipalities in our province are very cash-strapped. They are
struggling financially. They do not have the capacity to deliver to our
people and they also do not have the human capacity to unblock those
blockages that have been identified. It is our humble belief that through
Project Consolidate we would be able to do justice to ensure that we
unblock those blockages and that we are in a position to deliver to the
people in our province. To this extent, we have already put support teams
in some of these struggling municipalities with the assistance of the
Department of Local Government and Housing and as we are speaking here they
are working on a strategy to ensure that those critical areas are
addressed.

We cannot also outmanoeuvre or downplay the role that consultants play in
addressing some of these issues. What we have found is that when you send
in some of the support teams and you send in consultants, they only do the
minimum. They are not in a position to transfer skills. They are not in a
position to leave the capacity behind. When they leave the municipalities
they also bring about a collapse in the system put in place. For us it is
very critical, when we introduce a strategy to address the problems and the
shortcomings in our municipalities, that we make sure they do address the
issue around leaving some capacity behind. Some of the other challenges
that we have is that the officials in these municipalities are sometimes
not adequately skilled to interact with the communities. Communication
strategies do not exist. Sometimes our elected representatives are not in a
position to communicate effectively with the communities that they are
serving. We are saying that in order for us to address these areas and to
turn around the problems that we have in these municipalities, we need to
address those shortcomings as a matter of urgency.
Sometimes we also pick up in some of our municipalities that there are no
bottlenecks or constraints, but just an issue of ideological differences,
so that they are unable to serve our communities. We are addressing this.
To us the bottom line is that we have to serve our communities. We have to
ensure that we are able to restore the dignity of our people and if we are
not in a position to improve on service delivery, to improve the quality of
life of our people, we would have failed the people of the Free State in
addressing their concerns. We have made a commitment to the people of the
Free State, the contract they signed with us after the general elections,
that we will work very hard to ensure that we fulfill our promises made to
them. We will not allow a situation to continue where we dissociate
ourselves from the communities that we are supposed to be serving. We will
not allow a situation to continue where we are not in a position to
effectively interact with the people that we are serving. And we will not
allow ourselves not to be able to communicate with the people whom we are
serving. [Applause.]

INKULUMBUSO YEPHONDO LE MPUMA KOLONI (Nkskz N Balindlela): Mandithathe le
mbeko ndibulise umongameli wethu wesizwe, ndibulise kuso isilo samabandla,
ndibulise kongqongqoshe bonke abakhoyo nakubo oonduna-nkulu bazo zonke
iziphakula zamaphondo esisuka kuwo, ndibulise nakumalungu epalamente kaNdlu-
nkulu awamaphondo nangokukunjalo koomeya nooceba babo. Ndikhawulezise ke
presidante ndithi . . . (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The PREMIER OF THE EASTERN CAPE (Ms N Balindlela): Let me take the honour
to greet the President, His Majesty the King, Cabinet Ministers, Premiers,
members of National Assembly, members of the National Council of Provinces,
mayors as well as councillors. Just quickly . . .]

. . . I would also like to say on behalf of the Eastern Cape we
congratulate you sincerely for the award that you have just received. We
were very proud of you where we saw you on television and I think what made
us more proud was your beautiful smile. [Applause]. You know, President, .
. . kufuneka uyazi into yokuba unoncumo oluhle lomfana. [Appaluse] [. . .
you must know that you have a great smile, of a gentleman.]]
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

In the Eastern Cape we began our second decade of democracy with the
commitment to meet both targets for the first hundred days in August, with
over one hundred priority projects and programmes that were aimed at
service delivery, with clearly set targets. The projects were meant to set
a new pace, a new approach and a new tone of service delivery as envisaged
in our provincial growth and development plan. I am emphasising the new
pace, the new approach and the tone. Just as you have also noticed, that
has meant that we have to have the four o’clock in the morning meetings and
that has also been demonstrated by the recent Cabinet meeting which we had
on board the SAS Mendi. That is the commitment we have made to our people.

The programmes were launched on 5 May, when there was an assertion of our
resolve to practicalities, particularly when it comes to the concept of the
people’s contract. I would like to quickly share with our members here our
achievements as contained in our one hundred days report …

. . . esiyizisileyo apha ke ekhoyo esinqwenela ukuba wonke umntu okhoyo
apha xa edlula ngasemnyango ayifumane le one hundred days report.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] Size neebhokisi ezininzi. [. . . that we have brought here,
and we hope that everybody here will get a copy at the exit door.
[Applause.] We have come with many boxes.]

Just to share some of these achievements: We have a programme that is
called “Thetha norhulumente wakho” [speak to your government], where all
district municipalities and the metro can link with our departments, and of
course with government. The employment of the about 180 community
development workers in our municipalities has made a wonderful improvement
as far as the services and the information that . . . [Inaudible.]

“Apho sithe sathabatha amanye amakhaya ngenxa yokuba engenazo izinto . . .
“ [We have adopted some other homes because they did not . . .]

. . . one of those homes was the President’s home and we have used it for
about five years.

. . . singenayo iLibrary kodwa ngoku sinayo. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Ngoku lonto ithetha ukuba siyazibulela izinto ezinjalo ezithi, the
deliverables, apho zinako ukwenzeka khona zenzeke msinyane. [We did not
have a library, but we have one today. [Applause]. We are grateful for such
initiatives, so that delivery, where possible, can take place quickly.]

We are also very happy that 1 600 people are now back at work at Magwa,
where we have our Magwa tea scheme. We are also happy that we have 200
young people who have joined the youth entrepreneurship business centre . .
. “ . . . nabo bayasebenza ngokuzinikela”. [. . . are showing signs of
dedication.]

We have a very big megareserve called the Baviaanskloof Megareserve, which
has been listed during the 28th World Heritage Committee Convention in
China in July 2004. We are expecting more jobs to be created. Some 48 women
have been trained in house-building construction in the Chris Hani, Alfred
Nzo and O R Thambo Municipalities. These women have their contractors and
we are happy that they can now get into a preferential procurement policy.
[Applause.] This is, in short, what I want to say. We have now felt the
power of government at all levels. We are aware that without these “ . . .
besingasoze sikwazi siyanyanzeleka sisondele ebantwini.” [. . . we would
never have achieved that and we were compelled to come closer to people.]

It is therefore in that spirit that we now have launched a second PGDP plan
for the government. This PGDP plan . . .

“ . . . nantsi bantakwethu nayo size nayo apha kuni niyiphathe nisincedise
[we have also come up with it so that you could help us . . . ] to share
ideas on it.

It focuses on the specific and tangible deliverables that will impact
positively on the lives of the people of the Eastern Cape, whilst
strengthening the relationship between the three spheres of government. We
are very happy that this plan is a plan that undertook a consultative
process and all the mayors, and all the districts, we brought together
through our provincial growth and development plan and the IDPs.

Imnandi ke lonto kuba akukho mntu uzakuthi akalazi elenziwa linxele okanye
ikunene aliyazi eyenziwa ekhohlo.Xa ndiza kuqukumbela ndithanda ukutsho
ndithi . . . [It is a magnificent idea, as everybody would know who is
doing what and where. In conclusion, I would like to say . . .]

. . . we in the Eastern Cape are aware that without a proper monitoring
mechanism we are not going to get where we want . . .

. . . ngoba kaloku xa sihamba ezi mbizo sisiya kubantu basekhaya basibuza
besitsho besithi ingxaki nani rhulumente ninika imali iiprojects
ngeeprojects kodwa aniziqwalaseli anizazi iimali. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Batsho
besithi ke presidenti masingathi siyaqinisa ngemonitoring yethu.

Siyavuya ke ukuba . . . (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[When we attend community meetings, we are told that government gives money
for projects that are not monitored. [Applause.] People say we must improve
our monitoring strategies.

We are happy because . . .]

. . . we are now establishing a very strong monitoring barometer in the
Premier’s Office. We are also very grateful for the NCOP’s oversight
function. We have already felt your power when you visited our province. We
know that we are going to try.

“Xa ndigqiba ndifuna nje ukuthi . . .” [Finally, I want to say . . .] . . .
Mr President, we have promised the people of the Eastern Cape that we will
serve them with humility, with honesty and integrity. We are also using
your words of wisdom, which you have uttered on that wonderful day on the
eve of the election, that we shall not abandon the poor. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr F CACHALIA (Gauteng): Chairperson of the NCOP, Comrade President, Your
Majesty the King, the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal, Premiers, members of the
NCOP, members of the public, amandla!

I’d like to convey the apologies of our Premier, who is unable to be here
because his eldest brother is being laid to rest. This must be and indeed
is the first time in the history of our country that one of the Chambers of
the National Parliament meets here in the heart of KwaZulu-Natal, amidst
the rolling hills of Empangeni. It is also the first time in our history
that the President is here to address Parliament and the people of
Empangeni. [Applause.]

Comrade President, let me take this opportunity to express my dismay at the
statement that I recently heard on the BBC by one of the luminaries of the
Progressive Reform Party, the predecessor of the DA, Mrs Helen Suzman. She
has a reputation for being an opponent of apartheid. The statement she made
was that the old white parliament elected by 20% of the population was
indeed a more accountable parliament and that there was more accountability
then than there is today. I am sure that none of the people in Empangeni
believes that statement to be true. I am convinced that our people have a
deep reverence, value and celebrate the democracy that we have enjoyed for
the past ten years. Our people understand the difference between freedom
and oppression. [Applause.]

Our people do not judge this freedom only in material terms, because we
understand the value of human dignity. It is also true that over the next
10 years we must transform the lives of our people. We must accelerate
service delivery. We must end poverty. We must address unemployment through
job creation and development. If we are going to address this challenge of
development over the next 10 years, we must strengthen the capacity of the
state to deliver. Whatever our ideological opponents might say about the
importance of markets in any project of development, it can hardly be
gainsaid that they must be to strengthen the capacity of the democratic
state, in all spheres of government, all organs of state, to deliver. This
indeed was the challenge that the President identified for us today. If we
are to strengthen the capacity of the democratic state to deliver on
development, then indeed we must strengthen the capacity of the state to co-
ordinate and integrate. This will enable us to achieve greater policy
coherence and focus our scarce resources more effectively.

I want to agree, Comrade President, with the observation made in this
regard by the Premier of the Western Cape. We do indeed also have to look
at the resources available to provinces to address the challenge of both
economic growth and development. In a province like Gauteng we face growing
service delivery backlogs, because our population is increasing,
urbanisation is gathering pace and we have real concerns about whether the
resources that we have are going to be adequate to address the challenges
that we face over the next 10 years. But, we must recognise that within
existing resource envelopes much more can be done through better co-
ordination and integration to improve service delivery. We intend to meet
that challenge.

We must strengthen the policy-making process through more effective
monitoring of the implementation of policy. I agree with the assessment
that the basic policy frameworks are in place and that the challenge for
the next 10 years must focus on improving implementation. Thirdly, and
without question perhaps most fundamentally, we must increase popular
participation in the policy-making process, for the simple reason that
increased participation assists us to learn from our people, assists us to
learn from our experience, assists us as the state to improve our capacity
for problem solving and so many of the challenges that we face with respect
to service delivery is a question about slow incremental changes that
become possible by learning through experience.

I want to raise this challenge: What do we mean by popular participation?
Is it sufficient for us to meet only in the presence of our people? That
certainly is a positive step, but the real question we face is: How do we
ensure that our people have the resources for political participation in
decision-making? We know that poverty impairs not only the life chances of
our people, but also affects the capacity of our people to participate in
decision-making. I think the challenges for the NCOP but also for
provincial legislatures and for local government, and also for the NA, are
not only to open up by changing our Rules to facilitate public
participation, but to ensure that our people have the resources to
participate.

One of those resources the President identified in his speech was
information. How do we ensure that when we deal with Bills or other policy
matters in standing committees that people, through the NGOs and the CBOs,
and directly, particularly the poor, are able to articulate their interests
and perspectives in standing committees in the actual process of decision-
making? I am convinced that the NCOP can and should play a vital role in
the next 10 years in strengthening the capacity of the state to deliver,
precisely because of the uniqueness of this institution. As the President
pointed out, this is the only institution that represents all three spheres
of government: 294 municipalities and 9 provincial governments are
represented in this second Chamber. This institution not only occupies a
unique position in our system of government in South Africa but it is also
a unique institution internationally. There is no other second Chamber
anywhere in the world that is structured quite like the NCOP. [Applause.]
Because it represents all three spheres of government, it plays a vital
role as a point of convergence in our system, as a point of confluence for
assisting us to co-ordinate and integrate.

It plays a vital role as a feedback mechanism in the process of
implementation. It plays, as it has demonstrated today, a vital role in
ensuring that our people have the ability to participate. I want to say,
Comrade President, I am particularly pleased that you are lending your
support to this institution. The day should end when the NCOP is seen
simply as the small brother or the stepchild of the NA.

Comrade Chairperson, I thought if I praised the NCOP you would extend my
time. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Most unfortunately, your time has expired.

Mr F CACHALIA (Gauteng): Thank you, Chairperson, I am looking forward to
working with the NCOP over the next 10 years to meet the challenges we
face. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Cachalia, next time we will give you enough
time to praise us.

Nksz M N OLIPHANT: Sihlalo woMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe, Mongameli
wezwe ohloniphekileyo, iSilo samabandla, oNgqongqoshe, uSekelasihlalo
woMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe, amalunga ePhalamende nomphakathi,
namhlanje kuwumlando omkhulu endaweni yalapha Empangeni ngokuthi
iPhalamende lize kubantu bakhona okokuqala ngqa lapha KwaZulu-Natali.
Ngiyafisa ukwazisa le ndlu ukuthi ububha nenhlupheko eyadalwa ubandlululo
isabashikashika abantu bakithi. Okucasula kakhulu ukuthi kukhona
abangasafuni ukuthi iphathwe indaba yobandlululo ngoba bethi kade lwaphela
kodwa lube lusandla izindwani kuhle komfula ungenisa. [Ihlombe.]

Ngiyafisa-ke ukuthi kengichazele umnumzane u-Watson ukuthi azikho
izethembiso ezephulwa yi-African National Congress. Ngonyaka ka-1955,
uKhongolose wavumelana kuSomqulu weNkululeko e-Kliptown ngokuthi umnyango
wezemfudo uyovuleka ngokuthi uhulumeni axhase imfundo anikezele ngamathuba
emifundaze. Ngikhuluma nje uMongameli wezwe ngesikhathi ethula inkulumo
yakhe ngenyanga kaNhlaba kulo nyaka, wayisho yonke iminyango
enezinsizangqangi. Ngakho-ke intsha yakithi kufanele iwathathe lama thuba.
Izolo lokhu sibonile odokotela balapha eNingizimu Afrika bebuya e-Cuba kade
beyoqeqeshwa. Babeqeqeshwa mahhala ngenxa yokuxhumana kukahulumeni oholwa
yi-African National Congress nowase-Cuba. [Ihlombe.](Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon President of the
country, His Majesty, Ministers, Deputy Chairperson of the National Council
of Provinces, members of Parliament and the community, today history is
being made in this area of Empangeni in that Parliament has come to this
community in KwaZulu-Natal for the first time.

I wish to raise in this House that the poverty caused by apartheid still
exists under our people. What is annoying is that there are people who do
not want to hear a thing about apartheid because they say it is over, while
it still exists and occurs. [Applause.]

I wish to explain to Mr Watson that the ANC did not break any promises. In
1995, the ANC agreed with the Freedom Charter in Kliptown that the
Department of Education would be opened up if the government subsidised
education by giving scholarships. When the President of the country
presented his speech in May this year, he mentioned all the departments
with the resources to do so. Therefore our youth must take these
opportunities. Recently we have seen South African doctors returning from
Cuba, where they received training. They were trained free of charge,
because of the co-operation of the ANC and the government of Cuba.
[Applause.]]

Arising from the same clause, Mr Watson . . .

Kunomthetho owashaywa nguhulumeni wokuthi ayikho ingane eyoxoshwa esikoleni
uma ingenayo imali yokukhokha. Nokho-ke kufanele ukuthi abazali kube yibona
abazobikela othisha ezikoleni ukuthi banawo yini amandla noma abanawo,
ukuze kube namalungiselelo ukuthi lezi zingane zifunde mahhala. Ngiyafisa-
ke ukuthi abazali abasebenzayo bazikhokhele izingane zabo bangajezisi
ukuthi uhulumeni unikezela ngokuthi izingane ezingakwazi ukukhokha
ezikoleni zifunde mahhala nabo bese bethatha lelo thuba lokuthi
bangakhokhi. Uhulumeni ubhekelela ikakhulukazi abantu abampofu
nabangasebenzi.[Ihlombe.] Okudabukisa kakhulu-ke ukuthi ngesikhathi
kuphasiswa lo Mthethosisekelo, kukhona amanye amaqembu ayephikisa.
Ngiyafisa-ke ukuthi umnumzane u-Watson akabheke ukuthi ngabe akuyobna yini
i-DA eyayiyingxenye yalawo maqembu ayephikisa lo Mthetho. [Ihlombe.]

Siyabonga kungqongqoshe wezemfundo u-Ina Cronje ngokuthi aqinisekise ukuthi
othisha bazobambisana nabazali. Sibonga kakhulu futhi ukuthi ungqongqoshe u-
Ina Cronje uqinisekisile ukuthi ezikoleni ebebezivakashele noSihlalo
woMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe kuzofanele kuthi ezinyangeni ezintathu
amagumbi okufundela kuleso sikole ebesakhiwe kanye nendlu yomtapo
wezincwadi. Nokho-ke ngiyafisa ukuthi kusekhona ezinye izikole ezifana
neNdesheni ezalinyazwa wudlame nezingakalungiswa. Ngicela ukuthi nazo kube
ezinye zeziphambili ezizolungiswa ngokushesha. [Ihlombe.]

USomqulu weNkululeko ubuye uqhubeke uthi abasebenzi basezimayini
nabasezindlini kanye nabasemapulazini bayoba namalungelo njengabo bonke
abasebenzi. Ngesikhathi kuphasiswa lo Mthetho ePhalamende, i-Da yiyona
eyawuphakamisa kodwa namhlanje umnumzane u-Watson uzothi kufanele ukuthi
sisebenzisane ne-DA. Sizosebenzisana kanjani nabantu abaphikisa imithetho
ebhekelele amalungelo abantu abahluphekayo? [Ihlombe.] Ngiyafisa-ke futhi
ukusho ukuthi namhlanje laba basebenzi sebengakwazi ukuthi bathole imali ye-
UIF noma ngabe bayayeka emsebenzini. Siyethemba futhi nokuthi abalimi
sebeyekile ukukhokhela abantu umholo ngethotho ukuze badakwe bacabange
ukuthi imali
ebebeyiholile ilahlekile kanti bebengatholanga ngishi uzuka kuleyo mali.
[Ihlombe.]

Sibonga umlimi okwathi ngesikhathi uMongameli ehlaba umkhosi ngo-1996
wokuthi osomabhizinisi kufanele ukuthi basebenzisane nohulumeni ukwenza
izimpilo zabantu zibe ngcono, naye wabamba iqhaza kuleyo ndawo. Kunesaga-ke
esithi uma ufundise umuntu wesifazane ufundise isizwe sonke. Namhlanje
iPhalamende lilapha KwaZulu-Natali. Umuntu wokuqala oqale ukusebenzisa lolu
hlelo umuntu wesifazane umhlonishwa uNaledi Pandor. Namhlanje luholwa
unkosikazi Kgaoli naye ongumuntu wesifazane. [Ihlombe.] Lokhu kukhombisa
ngokusobala-ke ukuthi uma ufundise umuntu wesifazane ufundise isizwe sonke.
Yingakho nje mhlonishwa Mongameli silapha.

Sithole ukuthi kunanepulazi elisetshenzwa abantu besifazane elingolokuqala
ngqa ukufuya izinhlanzi. Umhlonishwa-ke uNdabandaba ngiyacabanga wesaba
ukuthi abantu besifazane bazothatha amandla wase ecela amadoda ukuthi nawo
awabe yingxenye yokuthi abe nepulazi lokufuya izinhlanzi. [Ihlombe.]
Ngokuthi-ke i-African National Congress ayinamona, izobafundisa futhi
ibasize nalabo abasafuna ukwenza njalo.

Singabantu besifazane-ke kuyofuneka sifinqe iziketi ukuze sakhe
izinhlangano zomsebenzi ngoba uhulumeni usinikezile imali. Uma nikhumbula
enkulumeni kaMongameli, wathi kunezigidigidi ezintathu zamaRandi eziqondene
nezinhlangano zomsebenzi. Simzwile uNdunankulu wesifundazwe umnumzane
uNdebele ethi kunemali ehlelelwe ukuthi abantu besifazane bakwazi
ukuzithuthukisa. Ngakho-ke asingabambezeli thina besifazane. Akube yithi
esisukumayo inqobo uma sizosebenza ngokubambisana. UMongameli wathi vuka
uzenzele; uNdunankulu uthe asisukume sakhe. Isinamuva likholwa yizagila.

USomqulu weNkululeko uyaqhubeka uthi abantu abadala, izintandane,
abakhubazekile kanye nabagulayo uhulumeni uyobanakekela. Mnumzane u-Watson
uhulumeni ukhipha izimali zesondlo abuye aholele abantu abadala
izimpesheni. Nokho-ke okubuhlungu kakhulu ukuthi kunongqeqe babantu
besifazane babelungu abamhlophe impela abahlupha abantu baseJabulani arts
and culture ngokuthi babenzele imisebenzi bese bebakhokhisa imali yokuhlala
kuleya ndawo. Sithole ukuthi abantu aabhola imali yempesheni ngoba
bekhubazekile bakhokha ama-R555 wokuthi bahla kuleya ndawo. Nokho-ke
naphezu kwalokho siyafisa ukubonga umnyango wezenhlalakahle walapha KwaZulu-
Natali oholwa yinkoso uNgubane okwathi mangabe umhlonishwa uGamede exhumana
nalowo mnyango, umnyango wathi uzothatha isinqumo sokuthi ukhokhele laba
bantu imali yokuhlala kuleya ndawo bese iba ngeyabo indawo bazisebenzele.
Akusho ukuthi ngoba bakhubazekile bakhubazeke nasengqondweni. [Ihlombe.]
Imisebenzi yabo abayenzayo ikhombisile-ke ukuthi izingqondo zabo kanye
nezandla zabo ziyasebenza, bengakhubazeka lapha nalaphaya. [Ihlombe.]
Sihlalo, ngiyafisa ukusho ukuthi kumhlonishwa uMongameli kanye noNdunankulu
bangabashayeli benkululeko yabantu baseNingizimu Afrika. Kuzokwenzeka
izikhashana nezikhashana kube khona abantu abakhuluma ngale ngaphandle,
kodwa kufanele nazi ukuthi imoto ehambayo ikhonkothwa yizinja emile
ziyayichamela. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[There is a law that has been made by the government that says no children
will be chased away from school if they did not have school fees. However,
it must be the parents who report to teachers whether they have the means
to pay the school fees or not, so that they could make arrangements for
those children to go to school free. I wish that working parents would pay
for their children and not reprimand the government because it gives free
education to those children who cannot afford to pay, but they take chances
and do not pay school fees. The government cares more for the poor and
those who are not working. [Applause.] What is sad is that when the
Constitution was agreed on, there were parties that opposed this. I wish Mr
Watson would check whether it is the DA, which was one of those parties
that opposed this legislation. [Applause.]

We thank the minister of education, Ina Cronjé, for emphasising that the
teachers must work together with parents. We thank the Minister for
emphasising that classes and a library will be built at each of those
schools that the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces visited.
However, I wish to say there are still schools like Ndesheni that were
violently vandalised. I request that they must also be the first ones to be
renovated quickly. [Applause.]

The Freedom Charter further states that mineworkers, domestic workers and
farmworkers have the same rights as other people. When this legislation was
made by Parliament, the DA was the one that proposed the draft, but today
Mr Watson will say we have to work together with the DA. How are we going
to work with these people who oppose the laws that protect the rights of
the needy? I wish to say that today these workers are able to claim UIF
when they leave their place of employment. We hope that the farmers have
stopped giving alcohol to employees to get them drunk and to think that
their salaries went missing, while they were not even paid a cent of their
salaries. [Applause.]

We thank the farmer who played a major role when the President made the
call in 1996 for businessmen to work hand in hand with the government to
better the lives of people, and he participated. There is a proverb that
says if you educate the women, you educated the whole nation. Today
Parliament is here in KwaZulu-Natal. The first person who started to use
this programme was a woman. [Applause.] This clearly shows that if you
educate women, you educate the whole nation. That is why we are here, hon
President.

We have found that there is a farm, run by women, which is the first to
keep fish. I think the hon Ndabandaba feels threatened that women will
acquire power, who might then ask men also to own fish farms. [Applause.]
Just because the ANC is not jealous, it will train and help those who are
willing.

As women, we need to pull up our socks to create business opportunities,
because the government has given us money. You may remember that in his
speech, the President said there were R3 billion for the creation of
business opportunities. We heard the Premier of the province, Mr Ndebele,
say that there is money for the development of women. Therefore we as women
must not drag our feet. We must be the ones who take a step forward, as
long as we work together.

The President said we must wake up and work, the Premier said we must stand
up and build. Procrastination is the thief of time. The Freedom Charter
furthermore says that the government will look after the aged, orphans, the
physically challenged and sick people. Mr Watson, the government gives
grants and pays the aged their pensions. However, it is sad that there are
clever Western women who cause people trouble at the Jabulani Arts and
Culture Centre by requiring them to perform certain duties and charging
them for accommodation. We have found that people who get the disability
grant pay R555 for accommodation. Over and above that we wish to thank the
department of social welfare in KwaZulu Natal, which is led by Minister
Ngubane, for - when the hon Gamede communicated with the department -
agreeing to pay the accommodation of those people so that they could own
the place and work on their own.  To be disabled does not mean that they
are disabled in their minds. [Applause.] They may be disabled here and
there, but the work they do show that their minds and hands work.
[Applause.] Chairperson, I wish to say that the hon President and the
Premier are the leaders of peace in South Africa. It will happen that from
time to time people talk outside, but dogs always chase a moving car and
urinate against a stationary car. [Applause.]]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Siyabonga. [Thank you.] I think it is
lunchtime. [Interjections.]

Sesilambile. Kusho ukuthi akufanele ukuthi ngithathe isikhathi eside. [We
are hungry. I am expected not to be too long.]

But I want to say, I am very glad, Chairperson, that we started with the
Deputy Chairperson and that the Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP said what he
did. Indeed the reason why we are meeting and the reason why we have this
council of provinces, the reason why we elect people to local government
and national government, to the provinces, is that we elect them so that
they should attend to the things that the Deputy Chairperson was talking
about. Those were the things that our people were talking about, whether it
is better schools or employment or water or sanitation, that is the reason
why we have been elected. Indeed all of our discussions here must respond
to this question: Are we responding as well as we should to all these
challenges that face our people?

I was very glad to hear the Rev Adolph from the ID. I agree with him that
indeed we need to act together to confront these challenges. Rev Adolph, I
owe your party leader, the hon Patricia de Lille, a meeting. Tell her that
I haven’t forgotten about it. [Laughter.] That arose from when were
discussing the state of the nation address and she said that the IDs would
be watching and assessing the implementation of the undertakings that the
government had made. When I responded, I said that it was fine. I think it
is something called oversight. I said that oversight was fine. I’d hoped
that the hon Patricia de Lille would also participate in making sure that
we achieve the challenges because if we fail, which we will not, then it
will be all of us who fail; then it won’t be people from particular parties
or people who serve in particular areas of government.

I very much agree with the Rev Adolph when he says that we must act
together and see what we can do in order to produce the results that all of
us want. I see that the hon Firoz Cachalia from Gauteng supported the
Western Cape. I don’t know if the Premier of the Western Cape knows Firoz
Cachalia, and whether he knew what he was going to say when he was stopped.
But he said that he supported you in any case about what you were going to
say. [Laughter.]

The Premier of the Western Cape raised an important point about the role
and the tasks and the place of provincial government. Unfortunately, he
started with a long introduction, as a result of which he ran out of time
before he got to the real thing that he wanted to say. But I have his
speech because I will want to have a look at that report and the points
that were raised about the place and the role of provincial government. It
is indeed a matter that we need to reflect upon.

It is always an inspiration to listen to members of the NCOP and listen to
the Premiers. When I meet the Premiers in other contexts, they are normally
very nervous. [Laughter.]

But I never get this opportunity, Chairperson, to hear what has been done.
I think that the work that is done by our Premiers is actually very good.
[Applause.] The reports that they gave here on what is done in the Northern
Cape, the Eastern Cape, Limpopo or in Mpumalanga, if we didn’t come to
these meetings, we would never have been able to find out that in fact our
Premiers are actually working. One sees them on television cutting ribbons
and so on, but they do actually work. I think that is very inspiring and I
am glad that our people are also getting a sense of what is happening. We
might be in our localities and feel that there is a problem there; there is
no movement and nothing has changed. One begins to think that nothing is
moving. Here you can see that even when nothing has happened, at least I
know that if this electricity is not there yet, it does not mean that it is
not going to be there tomorrow. It is coming, whether it is water or
electricity or sanitation. I am very glad that we’ve had this opportunity
to speak as we have done in the presence of the people.

I hope, hon Mzizi, that with regard to some of the things that you saw, it
would be possible to pass the specific information onto the Premier of
KwaZulu-Natal. I think the stories that you told were quite disturbing and
we need to consider them. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Mr President. I also want to thank
the delegation of the House of Traditional Leaders who has been with us
since Wednesday. My biggest thanks go to the government of KwaZulu-Natal.
Enkosi, Premier S’bu Ndebele. [Applause.] The government of KwaZulu-Natal
has been so kind to us that they participated in this programme throughout
the week, without fail. I would also like to thank the Speaker of KwaZulu-
Natal for the commitment that we have come to know about KwaZulu-Natal and
the provincial legislature in the NCOP. But what was interesting, Mr
President, is that all members of the legislatures, most of them,
participated with us throughout the week. Provinces have been sending them
in delegations to be part of this people’s parliament, which is a lesson to
all of us. The public has been so nice.

Siyawubonga umphakathi waseMpangeni. [Ihlombe.] Iqhaza lenu lisifundisile
ukuthi zikhona izinto ezibalulekile esizenzile emphakathi, futhi zikhona
esingakafiki kuzo. Sinethemba nanjengoba uMongameli eseshilo ukuthi
nangakuwe kuyoze kufike. [Ihlombe.] Sibonge ezimeyeni nakumakhansela ethu
ukuthi umsebenzi esibe nawo KwaZulu-Natali ube ngomkhulu kakhulu. Sibonga
nakubona ukuthi babambe iqhaza kulo msebenzi wokubambisana ukuze sibone
izimpilo zabantu bakithi ziphucukile futhi zingcono, njengoba savumelana
ngomhlaka-18 Ephreli 2004. [Ihlombe.]

Ngicela-ke kumphakathi wonke ukuthi uma sesiqedile siphume ngale ndlela
elandelayo: ithimba likaMongameli lizophuma kuqala, lilandelwe yiSilo bese
kuza amalungu ePhalamende alapha phansi. Sithi-ke lapho phezulu
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Empangeni community. [Applause.] The role you played taught us
that we have done important things in the community and that there are
those we have not reached yet. We hope, as the government said, it would
also reach you. [Applause.] Thank you to the mayors and councillors that we
had the most work in KwaZulu-Natal. We also thank them for their
participation and working together so that we can see the lives of our
people becoming civilised and better, as we agreed on 18 April 2004.
[Applause.]

I request the whole Chamber, when we have finished, to go out in the
following order: The presidential delegation will go first, followed by His
Majesty and members of Parliament on the ground level and those in the
gallery.]

Let us afford the leadership the respect of the House, so that we all move
. . .

. . . ngenhlonipho ukuze singanyathelani sonke sesifuna ukubona uMongameli.
Ngiyazi ukuthi wonke umuntu ufuna ukubamba isandla sikaMongameli.
UMongameli yindoda eqotho kakhulu futhi ethandwa yiwona wonke umuntu.
Bacishe bamthatha laphaya ngaphandle kodwa sakwazi ukumvikela. Mangithi
kumalungu oMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe … (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[. . . with respect so that we will not bump into one another in our desire
to see the Minister. I know that everybody wants to shake the Minister’s
hand. The Minister is a sincere man and is liked by everyone. They wanted
to hug him outside, but we were able to prevent that. May I say this to the
members of the National Council of Provinces . . .]

thank you very much, colleagues. The buses will leave  for the airport
soon. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 13:31.


