---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-08-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2004
                                    _____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.


                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, at the next Sitting of the House I
shall move:

That the House –

     1)  notes that Government’s R104 billion investment inflows and a 65
        000 new jobs figure flowing from the arms deal counter trade are
        increasingly ringing hollow and that the offsets justification for
        the programme are in question;


     2)  further notes that Government is considering giving a grace period
        for the arms supplies that have failed to meet the industrial
        participation milestone assessment targets, instead of exacting
        penalty payments for the failure to perform;

     3)   urges Government to take proactive steps, and that the Ministers
        of Trade and Industry and Defence must release the details of the
        NIP and DIP reports for public discussion;

     4)   also urges Government to name and shame the two companies that
        are in breach of their performance targets and extract penalty
        payments from them, given the balance of payments’ impact of this
        procurement;

     5)   in addition, the Auditor-General must conduct a special audit of
        the NIP and DIP programmes in the public interest and in pursuance
        of commitments he gave to this House during JIT report
        deliberations. I thank you. [Applause.]

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                         (The late Mr Wilton Mkwayi)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

Ukuba le Ndlu –

     1)  iqwalasela ngomothuko nangosizi olukhulu ukunduluka kobekekileyo
        uMnu Wilton Mkwayi, ngomhla wama-23 kuJulayi kulo nyaka umiyo;


     2)  ikwaqwalasela nokuba uBawo uMkwayi ebengumthandi welizwe lakowabo
        nothe bonke ubomi bobudala bakhe wabuchithela ekusebenzeleni
        nokulwela inkululeko ukuze kudaleke imeko yokuhlala apho kungekho
        lucalulo ngasini, kukho nentatho-nxaxheba ngabantu bonke kuMzantsi
        Afrika omanyeneyo nomnye;

     3)  ikhumbula nokuba wadlala indima ebalulekileyo nephambili
        kumzabalazo wokubhangiswa kwenkqubo yocalucalulo, i-apartheid,
        eyenye yeenkokeli ezazingoompondozihlanjiwe ngexesha le-Defiance
        Campaign, ephantsi kombutho wabasebenzi i-SA Congress of Trade
        Unions, ekwayiyo nenkumanda woMkhonto weSizwe, elilungu leSigqeba
        esiLawulayo seSizwe se-ANC;

     4)  iyavuma ukuba eli galelo libaluleke kangaka alenzileyo ukwalenzile
        nanjengelungu leBhunga leSizwe laMaphondo;

ivakalisa usizi olunzulu kwizihlobo nezalamane zakwaMkwayi, kwakunye nabo
bonke abantu abayamene naye, nakumbutho wakhe abewuthanda kakhulu, i-ANC.
Ndiyabulela. (Translation of Xhosa motion of condolence follows.)

[That this House –

1. notes with shock and sadness the death of the honourable Mr Wilton
   Mkwayi on 23 July this year;

2. further notes that Mr Mkwayi was a true patriot that dedicated all his
   adult life to the struggle against apartheid so as to have a +society
   that is free of gender discrimination with participation of all the
   citizens in a united  South Africa;

3. also remembers that he played a crucial and a key role in the struggle
   against the  apartheid system, and he was one of the outstanding leaders
   during the Defiance Campaign and he was under the labour union, SA
   Congress of Trade Unions, he was also a commander of Umkhonto weSizwe and
   a member of the National Executive Council of the ANC;

4. also recognizes this valuable contribution that was also shown in the
   National Council of Provinces;

5. expresses heartfelt condolences to the friends and relatives of the
   Mkwayi family and also everybody close to him and his organization, ANC.
   Thank you.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on behalf of the DA to support
this motion. The late Mr Mkwayi had a long and eventful life from the day
he was born in 1923. Although he was never a member of this House, those
who briefly worked with him in the old Senate, now the NCOP, remember him
as a deeply committed person who always spoke up on behalf of those he
represented.

It is clear from his CV, and the Chief Whip of the Majority Party has
indicated this very clearly, that from an early age he was involved in
fighting for a free and just South Africa. His long time in jail bears
testimony to his belief in his cause, a belief, certainly, which he always
carried in his heart.

Despite a failing health in his late years, he continued to work very hard
for his party and for his community. We offer our sincere condolences, not
only to his family and friends, but also to the ANC. It is clear that he
was a valuable and loyal member of the party, and it is indeed always sad
when we lose people of this calibre. We support the motion, Madam Deputy
Speaker, and wish his family, friends and the ANC well in their time of
loss. Thank you. [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Thank you, Deputy Chair. The IFP would also like to
support the motion of condolences, and pays tribute to the Mkwayi family
and the ANC on the passing away of one of its stalwarts, who leaves behind
a trail of lifetime achievements.

We acknowledge the suffering he endured in his early days of struggle. We
recognise his zeal and steadfastness, proven on the Island, and we note
with appreciation his contribution in the Senate Chamber during the first
Parliament of the democratic Republic of South Africa.

We had joyous times with Tata Mkwayi, living in Pelican Park, where he
shared with us his experiences before his incarceration and beyond. We bid
him farewell to the land of the unknown. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Hon Chair and hon members, it is always sad to bid
farewell to a fellow parliamentarian and democrat. We extend our sincerest
condolences to the late honourable Mkwayi’s family, friends and colleagues.
Our thoughts are with them during this difficult time of bereavement.

The honourable Mkwayi is remembered for committing his life to the ideal of
a democratic and free South Africa. Like so many others, his dedication was
not something that he cast aside after 1994, but he continued to
participate in the new political order. There is no doubt that he served
his party and his country very well. Irrespective of his party affiliation,
his dedication is an example and inspiration to the newer generation of
parliamentarians. As we honour his memory, we recognise that his life is an
example of what the core motivation behind our actions as parliamentarians
and politicians should be, namely service. I thank you.

Mr S SIMMONS: Deputy Chair and hon members, the NNP supports the motion
before this House. We note with sadness the passing of one of the bravest
veterans of the freedom struggle, the hon Wilton Mkwayi, who passed away on
23 July 2004.

Wilton Mkwayi dedicated his life to the betterment of all the people in
this country. He was a people’s hero in the truest sense of the phrase. His
greatness was that he never wanted to be recognised or singled out from the
people.

Mkwayi entered resistance politics at the young age of 17 when his father
signed him up as a full member of the Eastern Cape branch of the ANC. In
the early 1960s he left South Africa and received military training in
China. He was arrested in 1964 and released from prison in 1989.

Mkwayi became the Eastern Cape MPL in 1996. He retired in 1999 and joined
the Eastern Cape’s veterans association. We acknowledge his achievements
and his commitment to the country he loved until the end.

His long list of political credentials does not have to be mentioned, as
they are well known to all of us. The NNP conveys its heartfelt sorrow to
the Mkwayi family members. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Chair, Wilton Mkwayi was born in 1923 in the Eastern
Cape and died on 23 July 2004 in King William’s Town, aged 81. He was one
of the seven renowned treason trial members who were sentenced alongside
former President Nelson Mandela to life imprisonment for treason in 1964.

He was born in a small village called Middeldrift on the spectacularly
beautiful Fish River in the Eastern Cape. Being the eldest of 13 children,
he left school to seek employment at the age of 12 after both his parents
died.

Mkwayi was a leader of various defiance campaigns in the Eastern Cape
against South Africa’s increasingly harsh race laws. He rose through trade
union ranks until he became treasurer of the SA Congress of Trade Unions.
When the ANC was banned in 1960, he became one of its underground leaders
in the Eastern Cape. On Robben Island Mkwayi was respected for his
humility, his love of Xhosa poetry and for his cooking. His prestige as a
chef was so high that the warders used to join the prisoners in picnic
lunches.

Former President Mandela recalls, and I quote:

  In 1973, in a smuggled newspaper, we read about the wedding of Princess
  Anne and Mark Phillips and the story detailed the bridal luncheon of rare
  and delicate dishes. The menu included mussels, crayfish and abalone,
  which made us laugh. Thanks to Wilton, we were dining on such delicacies
  everyday.

Mkwayi was freed from prison on 10 October 1989, after nearly 26 years on
Robben Island, paving the way for the release of former President Nelson
Mandela three months later. The rest is history.

So, today we pay tribute to this unassuming man, Wilton Mkwayi, who
sacrificed so much for his country in his own quiet way, and asked for so
little in return. We extend our heartfelt condolences to the ANC and to the
Mkwayi family.

The ACDP supports this motion of condolence for the late hon Wilton Mkwayi.
I thank you.
Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, we in the UCDP join millions
of South Africans in paying tribute to the late Wilton Mkwayi. According to
reports, he had the heart of a lion, yet he was simplicity personified.

When his comrades were arrested in Rivonia, he was mistaken for somebody
herding cattle and was left to himself, upon which he took over as the
commander-in-chief of MK. On the occasion of the trial in the Palace of
Justice in Pretoria, the security officers warded him away from the others
as they saw him as too innocent to be one of the treason trialists.

This is a sign of a man with substance; he presented himself to be
arrested, even though the police ignored him. His stature belied the
compassionate man he was. Try to imagine somebody sharing his meal with
birds that perched on the windowsill of his prison cell.

There is no doubt that the fallen octogenarian has left a void in the ranks
of the ANC. It will take time before the organisation can find someone who
will be a contender to fill his boots. The UCDP expresses its condolence to
the family and the ANC, and hope they will accept the inevitable. He fought
a good fight and ran the full distance in freeing the country. May his soul
rest in peace. Thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the PAC joins the House
in passing its salutations to the late Comrade Wilton Mkwayi. We wish to
pass our heartfelt condolences to his wife, the entire Mkwayi family and
the ANC on the loss of a veteran of Comrade Mkwayi’s calibre.

We in the PAC are better positioned as a liberation movement to appreciate
the impact and dimensions of this loss. He belonged to a generation whose
service, sacrifice and suffering generated the momentum that assured our
freedom.

The passing away of his generation is a loss to our country in terms of
accumulated knowledge and experience. His death is like the passing away of
a griot, the burning down of a living library for our youth.

It is a worrying, yet inevitable fact that our veterans, the
architects of our liberation, are passing on. We in the PAC have in recent
times had to lay to rest heroes of the liberation struggle in the persons
of Mmabatho Enoch Zulu in the Eastern Cape, Moseane Malatjie in Limpopo
and, incidentally, on the same weekend as Comrade Mkwayi’s burial, we were
laying to rest a fellow Robben Islander, John Dlevalile Ganya in Soweto.

Although not given to high-profile publicity, history does attest that
Comrade Mkwayi was a key cog in the work of the liberation movement. The
challenge of deepening and advancing the democracy that we have is left in
the hands of all of us. Comrade Mkwayi has done his share for humanity. Let
us continue from where he left off and make our country truly and genuinely
democratic with material or economic benefits for the African majority.
Comrade Mkwayi did not serve and sacrifice for less.
In the words of Comrade Smangaliso Sobukwe: “We are nothing but tools of
history. When we are gone, history shall find new tools.”

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is indeed a tragedy that brings us to the
podium today. We are most devastated to hear of the death of the hon Wilton
Mkwayi. He was a victor over the apartheid regime and fought for justice
and freedom for his people. This fine man was one of the determined
activists to attain freedom for our people and suffered imprisonment,
together with many other comrades.

We salute you, brother, for all that you have done for our nation and note
your contribution to our struggle for freedom and democracy. You served the
country well and shall always be remembered as an inspiration to humanity.

To the bereaved family, the MF brings its deepest condolence. May God be
with you in this most trying time. And to the ANC, we grieve with you for
the loss of the honourable member. Honourable Wilton Mkwayi, may you rest
in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Chairperson, the ID wishes to send its condolences to the family
and to the ANC. We support the motion. Thank you.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, Azapo wishes to join all those who knew
and associated with Comrade Wilton Mkwayi in expressing our heartfelt
condolences to his family and friends. Comrade Mkwayi will always be
remembered for his courage and dedication to the emancipation of our people
and our land. As a dedicated cadre of the ANC and its military wing,
uMkhonto weSizwe, he, together with other distinguished leaders of our
country, were jailed on Robben Island for many years, for their love of
freedom, human dignity and democracy.

His deep sense of commitment to the liberation struggle, his humility and
his simple way of life stand out as an example to all of us who are still
left with the task of liberating our continent from imperialism and
economic dependence. Comrade Mkwayi, Azapo salutes you. May your soul rest
in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Chairperson, the passing away of our gallant comrade,
revolutionary and patron, the late Wilton Mkwayi, was greeted with sadness
by those of us from whose ranks he came. In our grief, we were comforted by
the dignified manner in which he lived and was laid to rest.

Wilton Mkwayi, like many of his compatriots, was born into poverty on 17
December 1923 in Qwaru village in Middeldrift. Like many of his time, he
was passionate about righting the wrongs visited on the vast majority of
our people. He became a leader in the trade union movement in the early
50’s in Port Elizabeth. When the ANC embarked on the Defiance Campaign,
comrade Wilton Mkwayi was at the forefront. He travelled abroad to secure
international support for the ANC. He was one of the Treason Trialists. He
was arrested in 1964 and sentenced to life imprisonment on Robben Island.
Like other icons of our struggle, he spent more than 20 years on Robben
Island.

Thina babelulutsha ngelo xesha simkhumbula ngexesha lokuvalwa
kweentlanganiso eNew Brighton, eBhayi - yayikokokuqala ukuba kwenziwe oku
apha eMzantsi Afrika - ngexa wayekhokela amavolontiya esehla ngeCape Road
ebheka edoks. Wonke umntu wayedidekile esoyika ngenxa yefuthe lakhe
elalisithi asijiki naphantsi kwayo nayiphi na imeko. Wakwazi ukuba
abonakalise ukuba ngelo xesha sasele singxamele ukuba siphathe izixhobo,
silwe, sibe nokuzikhulula.

Wabonakalisa ngoko ukuba wayeyindoda ekhaliphileyo, eyayizimisele ukuba iza
kubakhulula abantu baseMzantsi Afrika. Waba kwiqela lokuqela elaphuma apha
eMzantsi Afrika lisiya kuqeqeshwa phesheya kweelwandle. Yiyo ke loo nto
waba ngomnye wabantu ababephambili ekuqeqesheni abantu ekhusini
ukubalungiselela ukuba bakwazi ukuphatha izixhobo, bakwazi nokutshabalalisa
izinto ezazibalulekile kurhulumente welo xesha wocalucalulo. (Translation
of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We, the youth of the era, remember him during the time of the banning of
meetings in New Brighton, Port Elizabeth. This was the first time this had
occurred in South Africa, and it took place whilst he was in charge of some
volunteers that were in a procession from Cape Road to the harbour.

Everybody was confused and in fear. It was as a result of his spirit that
we would not move backwards under any circumstances. He succeeded in
demonstrating at that stage our commitment to carry weapons and to fight to
liberate ourselves.

He proved then that he was a brave man, that was prepared to liberate the
people of south Africa. He was one of those amongst the first group that
left South Africa to be trained abroad. That is why he became one of the
leading people in training people underground, preparing them in the use of
weapons, to enable them to destroy things that were of importance to the
then apartheid government.]

He was elected to be the MEC of the ANC in 1991. He served his people
loyally and tirelessly. Wilton Mkwayi was honoured with Isithwalandwe – the
highest honour of the ANC. True to his unshakable faith in the movement
that nurtured him, he was amongst the first to step forward when called
upon to yet again serve his people and become a member of this House from
1994. He served with the same commitment, dedication and passion that
characterised his entire life. Even when ill health struck in 1997, he had
to be convinced to cut down on his schedule and he did so reluctantly.

We thank the Mkwayi family for the gift they so unselfishly shared with us.
We thank the movement that nurtured the patriot of the calibre of the late
Wilton Mkwayi – Isithwalandwe. We salute and honour the memory of Wilton
Mkwayi, a true fighter for change. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): Order! Hon members, I take it that
there are no objections to the adoption of this motion. The condolences of
this House will be communicated to the Mkwayi family.


                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS



                              THE DA’S POLICIES

                            (Member’s statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Chairperson, yesterday in this
House, a member of the DA expressed displeasure at the position recently
adopted by the NNP and its leader, the hon Marthinus Van Schalkwyk. The
views expressed by this DA member are, of course, shared by the party he
represents. They resent the fact that patriotic South Africans are prepared
to join the liberation forces to confront the terrible legacy of centuries
of white minority domination. [Interjections.] Their resentment stems from
their commitment to perpetuate the lie that liberation is equal to a vote.
They assert that what we now have is a normal democratic society, where
such democracy is threatened if our people across the colour and cultural
lines unite to fight poverty and advance reconciliation.

To the DA, anyone who benefited from white racist oppression and
exploitation, but who acknowledges the political imperative to restore the
human dignity of the victims of colonialism and racism, and who is prepared
to work practically to improve the economic and social status of the
victims of white minority domination, is regarded as an enemy of the DA. To
them, democracy is achieved if the beneficiaries of racist and oppressive
systems gang up to form a talk shop against true liberation and social
justice. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                    CORRUPTION IN KANNALAND MUNICIPALITY
                            (Member’s statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE(DA): Chairperson, the ANC local government Minister in
the Eastern Cape, Mr Marius Fransman, has promised action against the ANC
mayor and other councillors of the Kannaland municipality. This promise
follows the finding of the Dekker Commission of Inquiry into the affairs of
the Kannaland municipality. The commission found, inter alia, that Mayor
Donson  and Deputy Mayor Bartman allegedly misappropriated thousands of
rands from the mayoral funds for their personal use. Mayor Donson also
recently appeared in court, charged with rape and assault.

To date neither the ANC provincial Minister, nor the ANC itself, has taken
action against Mr Donson and his fellow councillors. This is despite the
recommendation by the Dekker Commission that the whole council be
suspended.

The ANC’s promise of swift action against any form of corruption is hollow.
Mayor Donson remains in office in Kannaland - a symbol of the failure of
the ANC to keep its promises. The people of Kannaland deserve better. South
Africans deserve a government that is tough on corruption. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]


                  DEVELOPMENT OF DOMESTIC TOURISM INDUSTRY

                            (Member’s statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Hon Chair, according to information released in
the quarterly report of the SA Tourism Index, a revenue loss of R1,7
billion was posted in tourism for the first quarter of this year, when
compared to the same period in 2003. Some of the reasons given for this
loss were increases in hotel rates, as well as the strong rand and the
change in the exchange rate. About R500 million was lost due to the
exchange rate.

The importance of attracting foreign tourists to South Africa is well
documented, but it is for the very reasons stated above that the local
tourism industry has to be developed. We cannot afford to cater exclusively
for and rely solely on foreign tourists at the expense of local tourists.
South Africans should be targeted and encouraged to travel and to enjoy all
that our beautiful country has to offer. It is with the above in mind that
we hope that domestic tourism…[Time expired.] I thank you.




                           THE NONALIGNED MOVEMENT

                            (Member’s statement)

Mnu S N NXUMALO (ANC): Sihlalo, Mphathisihlalo, umbutho wenkululeko, i-
African National Congress, ithokozela leli thuba lokwamukela abaholi be-
Nonaligned Movement abahlangene eThekwini kulezi zinsuku kuze kuyofika
kumhla ka-19 Agasti. Siyethemba ukuthi phakathi kwezindaba ezizodingididwa
yile nhlangano, udaba lokuhlupheka okubhekene namazwe asakhasayo luzobekwa
njengo luphambili. Kunamazwe athize anomkhutshana omubi wokugxambukela
ezindabeni zangaphakathi zamanye amazwe aphinde futhi lawo mazwe
angayihloniphi nenhlangano yezizwe, i-United Nations. Lokho kuletha usizi
kubantu abahluphekayo ikakhulukazi komama kanye nabantwana. Kuzomele ukuthi
inhlangano i-Non Align Movement izibheke lezi zindaba kanye nesidingo
sokuqinisa i-United Nations. I-African National Congress ifisela i-
Nonaligned Movement kanye nabaholi bayo izingxoxo ezinhle kanye nomhlangano
omuhle. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu member’s statement follows.)

[Mr S N NXUMALO (ANC): Chairperson, the freedom movement, the African
National Congress, celebrates this opportunity of welcoming the leadership
of the Nonaligned Movement that is gathered at eThekwini during these days
until the 19th of August. We hope that among other issues that will be
discussed at this conference will be the issue of poverty that is faced by
underdeveloped countries, which should be the first order of the day.

There are certain countries that have a bad tendency of interfering in the
domestic affairs of other countries, and those countries also do not
respect the United Nations. That creates problems for the people who are
needy, particularly women and children. The Nonaligned Movement should pay
attention to these issues and consider the need to strengthen the United
Nations. The African National Congress wishes the Nonaligned Movement and
its leadership the best discourse and a grand conference. Thank you.]




                        TREATMENT OF WHISTLE-BLOWERS

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr G D MADIKIZA (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM is appalled by the treatment of
Mr Glen Chase, the whistle-blower in the saga of John Block’s abuse of
power and taxpayer money. It now transpires that the department’s
disciplinary hearing is recommending that the whistle-blower should be
expelled from his work. We appeal to the national government to intervene.
It is this type of persecution of whistle-blowers that undermines any long-
term effort to root out corruption and fraud.

It happens with disturbing regularity that the very people who are
courageous enough to expose corruption are themselves pursued and
persecuted. Often they receive harsher punishment than the actual corrupt
official or politician. The message is clear to any person who might
consider exposing corruption: You do so at your own peril. There is a
dangerous aspect to this message. It says to the corrupt, or potentially
corrupt, that they can continue their crimes with impunity. The long-term
consequences on the Public Service will be devastating, because honest and
hard-working officials will seek employment elsewhere.

If the government is indeed serious about the fight against corruption, it
must ensure that whistle-blowers are protected, not just in law, but also
in practice. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                         CONFLICT BETWEEN DA AND NNP
                            (Member’s statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NNP): Thank you, Chair. For some time now the DA and its
leader have said that the New National Party is dead and that we are no
threat to them, blah, blah, blah …

For a so-called dead party we are certainly getting a lot of attention from
the DA. The hon member, Tony Leon, even took time out of his hectic
schedule to write about us in his weekly newsletter: “They used to fight
elections, but now they have turned and fled leaving the voters behind.”
Talk about the pot calling the kettle black. If I am not mistaken, is this
not exactly what the DA is doing with its coalition-for-change partner, the
IFP? After using the IFP to get black faces at their election rallies to
woo potential black voters, they are casting them aside. What about all the
promises that you have made to your voters? Some free advice to the hon
Leon:

Vee eers voor jou eie deur.  [First get your own house in order.]

The vision that the NNP shares with the ANC is clearly not for people like
the DA, who still long for the days of apartheid. Was it not a DA poster
that said: “Die NNP and die ANC is saam …” [Time expired.][Interjections.]

                      POLITICAL CHANGES IN SOUTH AFRICA
                            (Member’s statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, ek wil eintlik vir die agb
lid sê ek dink Paul Meintjes van Hertzogville het ŉ beter kans om op te
staan as wat die NNP sal opstaan. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Voorsitter, die VF Plus wens mnr Johan Jonck, DP-studenteraadslid by die
Universiteit van Pretoria, geluk met sy besluit om saam met 18 ander DA-
lede by die VF Plus aan te sluit.

Hierdie beweging van jongmense van die DA na die VF Plus, saam met talle
navrae wat ons tans van die NNP-lede kry, dui op ŉ politieke
herrangskikking wat tans in Suid-Afrika plaasvind. Jongmense is kwaad vir
die NNP en is ontnugter met die DA wat nie een van sy verkiesingsdoelwitte,
soos 30% steun, bereik het nie. Die jeug raak moeg vir valse
verkiesingsbeloftes en daarom sluit hulle al hoe meer by die VF Plus aan.
Dankie, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, I actually want to tell the
hon member that I think Paul Meintjies of Hertzogville has a better chance
of rising again than the NNP has of rising again. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, the FF Plus congratulates Mr Johan Jonck, DP student
representative council member at the University of Pretoria, on his
decision to join the FF Plus, together with 18 other DA members.

This movement of young people from the DA to the FF Plus, together with the
numerous enquiries that we are currently receiving from the NNP members,
point to a political rearrangement that is taking place in South Africa at
present. Young people are displeased with the NNP and are disillusioned by
the DA, which did not attain even one of its election objectives, such as
30% support. The youth are becoming tired of empty election promises and
that is why an increasing number of them are joining the FF Plus. Thank
you, Chairperson.]

                            FRAUDULENT MARRIAGES
                            (Member’s statement)

Ms H P MPAKA(ANC): Hon Chairperson and hon members, over the past few years
the Department of Home Affairs observed a dramatic increase in fraudulent
marriages. This led the department to commission an investigation into the
matter. It has been found that a number of South African women are married
to people they have never met, and in all the cases these marriages are to
non-South Africans.

It has come to the attention of this Parliament, and the Minister as well,
that some officials employed by the department worked together with a
syndicate in this scam. The hon Minister of Home Affairs, Mrs Nosiviwe
Mapisa-Nqakula, and her team decided to fight the scam tooth and nail. She,
together with the team, has launched a campaign called Check-your-Status
campaign. This campaign is launched within the broad strategy of fighting
corruption within the department. We call upon the women of the country to
heed the call by going to the Department of Home Affairs to check on their
marital status. We should work together to get to the bottom of this
corruption. The ANC commits itself to see that the Check-your-Status
campaign succeeds. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        PROTECTION OF WHISTLE-BLOWERS
                            (Member’s statement)

Mr K J MINNIE (DA): Hon Chairperson, members, I rise in support of the UDM.
 The ANC’s commitment to protect whistle-blowers who expose corruption in
government is another empty promise.

Moves by the Northern Cape’s transport department to dismiss Glen Chase for
exposing corruption in the department, specifically by former MEC John
Block who resigned in disgrace, are a slap in the face for whistle-blowers
seeking to root out corruption and maladministration.

The DA calls for an independent review into the dismissal process. Of
particular concern is the fact that the lawyer who presided over the Chase
disciplinary hearing, Dali Mjila, was not entitled to do so in terms of
Resolution No 1 of 2003, Amendments to the Disciplinary Code and Procedures
for the Public Service. Mjila is also alleged to be the legal
representative of Block’s former private secretary, who is apparently also
implicated in the corruption allegations. [Interjections.]

If this is true, this would represent an obvious conflict of interests.
Glen Chase acted in accordance with the Protected Disclosure Act, and the
decision to dismiss him is a flimsy pretext and is clearly motivated by
personal and political vendettas. I thank you. [Applause.]

                         THE SITUATION IN THE SUDAN
                            (Member’s statement)

Mr P H K DITSHETELO (UCDM): The present stand-off between the United
Nations and the government of the Sudan as a result of the prevailing
political situation, which led to the attack on predominantly African
people by their fellow Africans of Arab origin, has led to the displacement
of former African groups, putting the spotlight on the role of the African
Union.

The fact that the United Nations has threatened sanctions against the
Sudanese government is a serious matter requiring the attendance of all
role-players in bringing about a peaceful and long-lasting solution to the
problem. Now that the situation has gone out of control, what role has
South Africa played outside the African Union and the United Nations in
terms of ensuring that the situation in the Sudan could have been avoided,
or is there an initiative already? What is the status of such an approach
to the matter to ensure that the safety of refugees is guaranteed once the
Sudan agrees to protect the affected? I thank you. [Applause.]

                 ALLEGATIONS AGAINST SCHOOL GOVERNING BOARDS
                            (Member’s statement)

MR R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER:  Chairperson, in 1996 Parliament passed the South
African Schools Act which radically transformed our education system.
Amongst the objectives of that transformation process was the empowerment
of parents in the provision of education for their children. The school
governing bodies were given powers to facilitate the participation of
parents.

The recent media reports about alleged corruption within some school
governing bodies therefore are a cause for concern to the ANC. These
allegations relate to around the employment of teachers. It is alleged that
certain members of school governing bodies solicit bribes from job
applicants for them to be considered for appointments. According to these
reports, this has led to better-qualified persons being overlooked. The
African National Congress supports the investigation being undertaken by
senior officials of the Department of Education in the Western Cape. We
urge them to leave no stone unturned in their investigations. We also call
on the Ministry to ascertain the validity of these allegations to ensure
that the integrity of our education system is preserved. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                            FIREARMS CONTROL ACT

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Thank you, Deputy Chair. The Minister of Safety and
Security failed to ensure that the Firearms Control Act was able to be
implemented when he launched it on 1 July.

Many problems make it very difficult for members of the public to obtain or
renew firearm licenses. Firstly, the necessary trained personnel and
vehicles are not in place in many firearm-licensing centres across South
Africa. Secondly, most provinces do not have accredited training
institutions to carry out the training required for competency certificates
for the public to qualify for firearm licences. This is partially due to
the late announcement by the South African Bureau of Standards of criteria
for accreditation and also due to the lack of clear guidelines from
Government.

Sir, the cost of obtaining a firearm licence could be R740 to a R1000 per
weapon type. Competency training could last from two to five days. The
Minister must admit that the bureaucratic processes, time and cost will
disarm many law-abiding South Africans over the next five years.
Furthermore, the Minister must inform South Africans who they should hold
accountable if firearm licenses are being refused and they become victims
of crime because they are unable to defend themselves. The Minister
empowers criminals, instead of protecting law-abiding citizens. We believe
that he has set his sights on the wrong target. Thank you. [Applause.]


                            FIREARMS CONTROL ACT

                            (Member’s statement)

MR B W DHLAMINI (IFP): Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. I-IFP izwakalisa ukuthokozela
ukugubha kweNingizimu Afrika iminyaka eyishumi ithole inkululeko. Isizathu
esenza ukuthi ngikusho lokhu namhlanje kulesi sitatimende ukuthi iNingizimu
Afrika iqinisekise ukuthi yonke imisalela yobandlululo siyigqiba nezimpande
zayo ngokuqinisekisa ukuthi iNational Party iyaphela nya.

Kuyisipho iNingizimu Afrika ne-IFP efisa ukuhalalisela ngaso iNingizimu
Afrika ukuthi sikwazile eminyakeni eyishumi sikhululekile ukuthikonke
okuhambisana nobandlululo sikungcwabe ngokuphela kweNNP.

Sifisa nokuqinisekisa abantu baseNingizimu Afrika ukuthi i-IFP njengeqembu
elalikhona, elikhona futhi elisazoba khona, akuzukuba lula kulabo
abanesifiso sokuligwinya ngoba bazoqumba. Njengoba nizwile emaphephandabeni
angeSonto ukuthi omakhelwane bami bangasesandleni sokudla sebezama
ukukhafula ngoba kunzima ukusigwinya. Ngakho-ke sizohlala sikhona
siqinisekisa ukuthi ipolitiki yaseNingizimu Afrika iba yile nto esiyifunayo
ngoba kunomsebenzi ongakaqedwa osafuna ukuthi uqedwe, oqalwe yisizukulwane
soButhelezi noMandela noTambo, okufanele thina IFP ne-ANC sisebenze kanzima
ukukuqeda lokho abakuqala.

Ngiyathokoza! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu member’s statement.)

[MR B W DHLAMINI  (IFP): Thank you, Chairperson. The IFP congratulates
South Africa on the celebration of ten years of democracy. The reason for
saying this in my statement is that South Africa must ensure that all
remnants of apartheid are completely buried with their roots, and that the
National Party comes to an end.

South Africa and the IFP wish to give a present to South Africa in its
celebration of ten years of freedom by ensuring that everything associated
with apartheid is buried by the coming to an end of the NNP.

I further wish to ensure South Africans with regard to the IFP as a party
which was there, is still there and always will be there, that it won’t be
easy for those wishing to swallow it up, because they will become
constipated. I hope you’ve heard from the Sunday newspapers that the
neighbours to my right are now trying to spit us out because it’s difficult
to swallow us. Therefore, we will always be there to ensure that South
African politics is what we want it to be, as there is unfinished business
to be completed which was started by the generation of Buthelezi, Tambo and
Mandela, thereby requiring the IFP and the ANC to work hard in order to
accomplish what they started.

Thank you! [Applause.]]


                  WOMEN APPOINTED AS COMMANDERS OF PLATOONS

                            (Member’s statement)

Ms I W DIREKO (ANC): Chairperson and hon members, the transformation of  our
country is unfolding in all aspects of our lives. Women continue to  advance
towards, hopefully, total emancipation. Before 1994 critical areas  of  work
were reserved for men only. Women  were  deemed  incapable  of  doing  those
jobs. That mentality was inculcated by the old regime.

Fire fighting within the emergency services was one of those areas that  was
reserved for men. It was an exclusively white boys’  club,  but  today  that
department is rapidly transforming. Recently, two women  were  appointed  to
the position of commander of platoons. This entails leading  groups  of  10.
For now, it will probably be just men, but in time  the  position  will  and
must change. The ANC salutes Ms Liezel Delport and Ms  Karien  de  Lange  on
their achievements. Once again, they have proved that women are  capable  of
handling any job, given the opportunity.

Phambili abafazi, phambili. [Ihlombe.] [Forward women! [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): Hon members,  given  that  the  other
parties did not  utilise  the  time  allocated  for  questions,  I  want  to
recognise the following parties in this order. Oh,  please  excuse  me,  hon
members. I am being corrected here. Are there any ministerial  responses  to
the statements? No.

The House adjourned at 17:43.

                                 ----------


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                               ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly:

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development and to the Portfolio
         Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration. The
         committees must confer and the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture
         and Land Affairs must report:

         Petition submitted by the Mophate Restitution Petitioners for the
         extension of the deadline for land restitution claims.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications for consideration and report:


         (a)     Decisions of the 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal
              Union (Final Text of the Acts signed at Beijing), in terms of
              section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Decisions of the 1999
              Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union.


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
         Government:

         Appointment of a Chairperson and Members to the Financial and
         Fiscal Commission (FFC), in terms of section 221(1) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), section 5 of the
         Financial and Fiscal Commission Act, 1997 (Act No 99 of 1997), and
         section 5 of the Organised Local Government Act, 1997 (Act No 52
         of 1997).


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Government Notice No R788 published in Government Gazette
              No 26521, dated 30 June 2004: Exemption in terms of section 74
              of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
              2001).

         (b)     Government Notice No 722 published in Government Gazette
              No 26510, dated 25 June 2004: Commencement dates of certain
              sections of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
              Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (c)     Government Notice No 1261 published in Government Gazette
              No 26513, dated 28 June 2004: Draft Treasury Regulations
              published for public comment in terms of section 78 of the
              Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

         (d)     Government Notice No 773 published in Government Gazette
              No 26511, dated 1 July 2004: Delays and exemptions in terms of
              section 177 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
              Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (e)     Government Notice No R749 published in Government Gazette
              No 26487, dated 21 June 2004: Exemptions in terms of section
              74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38
              of 2001).

         (f)     Proclamation No R24 published in Government Gazette No
              26231, dated 1 April 2004: Commencement of the Government
              Employees Pension Law Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 35 of 2003).

         (g)     Government Notice No 569 published in Government Gazette
              No 26324, dated 31 April 2004: Statement of the National and
              Provincial Governments' revenue, expenditure and national
              borrowing as at 31 March 2004 in terms of the Public Finance
              Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) and Division of
              Revenue Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

         (h)     Proclamation No 36 published in Government Gazette No
              26522, dated 30 June 2004: Commencement of section 46(2) of
              the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
              2001).


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry:


         (a)     Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the
              Clanwilliam Irrigation Board, Magisterial district of
              Clanwilliam, Western Cape Province, into the Clanwilliam Water
              User Association, Water Management Area Number 17, Western
              Cape Province in terms of section 98(6) of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (b)     Government Notice No 825 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Vanderkloof
              Water User Association, Magisterial districts of Philipstown,
              Hopetown and Herbert situated in the Province of the Northern
              Cape and Fauresmith situated in the Province of the Free
              State, Water Management Area Number 13 in terms of section
              92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (c)     Government Notice No 826 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the Koppies
              Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Koppies, Heilbron,
              Province of the Free State, into the Renoster River Water User
              Association, Water Management Area Number 9, Free State
              Province in terms of section 98(6) of the National Water Act,
              1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (d)     Government Notice No 827 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Stella
              Water User Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North
              West Province, Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of
              section 92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
              1998).

         (e)     Government Notice No 828 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the
              Tosca/Molopo Water User Association, Magisterial district of
              Vryburg, North West Province, Water Management Area Number 10
              in terms of section 92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
              No 36 of 1998).

         (f)     Government Notice No 829 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552, dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the
              Louwna/Coetzersdam Water User Association, Magisterial
              district of Vryburg, North West Province, Water Management
              Area Number 10 in terms of section 92(1) of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence:


         (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following
              letter dated 2 July 2004 to the Speaker of the National
              Assembly informing Members of the Assembly of the employment
              of the South African National Defence Force in Sudan.

         (b)     The President of the Republic submitted the following
              letter dated 21 July 2004 to the Speaker of the National
              Assembly informing Members of the Assembly of the employment
              of the South African National Defence Force.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
         Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 108-
         2004].


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs for consideration and report:

         A letter, containing the names of recommended candidates, received
         from Justice A Chaskalson, Chief Justice of South Africa and
         Chairperson of the panel constituted in terms of section 6 of the
         Electoral Commission Act, 1996 (Act No 51 of 1996) to select
         candidates to be recommended to the committee of the National
         Assembly charged with nominating Electoral Commissioners.


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
         President's Fund for 2002-2003 [RP 84-2004].


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Defence:

     Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments Corporation of South
     Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.



