---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-12
---

FRIDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2004

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 09:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – See col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I give notice
that at the next sitting of the House I shall move:

   That the House resolves that-

        1) in terms of section 2(1) of the Remuneration of Public Office
           Bearers Act, 1998 (ACT No 20 of 1998), and having due regard to
           the criteria listed in that subsection, the salary and
           allowances payable to the President of the Republic of South
           Africa be determined at seven hundred and ninety-two thousand
           three hundred and thirty-nine rand, eighty-one cents (R792
           339,81) and two hundred and sixty-four thousand one hundred and
           thirteen rand, nineteen cents (R264 113,19) per annum,
           respectively, with effect from 1 April 2004; and


      (2)   in terms of section 2(2) of the said Act, the amount of
           forty thousand rand (R40 000) per annum be determined as that
           portion of the remuneration of the President to which section
           8(1)of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962), shall
           apply.



   Agreed to.



                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS


                         THE DEATH OF DR NEIL WHITE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms Z A KOTA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC notes with great sadness
the passing away of Dr Neil White, who was an associate professor at the
UCT medical school. Comrade Neil has contributed in the struggle to bring
about democracy in our country. He was one of the dedicated and committed
comrades during the dark days of apartheid. He attended to many combatants,
including Comrade Oscar Mpheta.

Many will remember Comrade Neil for his fight against asbestos and
assisting mineworkers who were affected by those working conditions. This
gallant fighter departed having seen the fruits of his hard work. The ANC
sends its deepest sympathy to his wife, Comrade Justine, an activist who
was one of the delegates at the Codesa gender advisory committee, and their
two sons. We commit ourselves to picking up his fallen spear.

                 SALE OF THINTANA SHARES TO ELITE CONSORTIUM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA (DA): Thank you. The DA considers the sale of Thintana’s
remaining 15,1% in Telkom to an elite government-aligned consortium an
opportunity lost for broad-based empowerment; an unusually unfortunate
example of crony capitalism. The transfer of equity to a well-connected few
at the expense of ordinary South Africans has become the empowerment
pattern, under this government’s BEE policy. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, please.

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA (DA): It is crony capitalism. Here crony capitalism has
been taken to new levels. The deal includes Smuts Ngonyama, who is an
active official of the ruling party, and Andile Ngcaba, who has only
recently vacated a director-generalship of the Department of
Communications.

The consortium will be entitled to appoint two members of the Telkom board.
It is not as if an alternative, without the burden of the ANC heavyweights,
was not on the table. The DA proposed a people’s consortium, which could
have included beneficiaries numbering in the millions through stokvels and
burial societies. [Interjections.]

The Minister should reject crony capitalistic deals, and go for real, broad-
based empowerment. [Applause.]

                          MATHS AND SCIENCE SURVEY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, according to an independent
study conducted by a policy research and advocacy programme there are 50
000 high school pupils around South Africa at any given time who could pass
maths and science, but their schools discourage them from taking these
subjects, fearing a low pass rate.

What is even more discouraging is that according to the survey 3 700 of the
50 000 pupils could have passed the subjects on higher grade. Also revealed
in the survey was that although enrolment in senior certificate maths for
grade 10 to 12 nearly doubled, the enrolment in higher grade maths
decreased significantly. Very worrying is the fact that only 14,7% of
educators teaching maths and science have been found to have the minimum
prescribed qualifications. Maths and science are subjects that are required
to obtain entry to tertiary institutions for a number of courses. It is
therefore essential that the department takes note of the findings of the
study, as well as its recommendations, and tries to find ways of increasing
the number of pupils who take maths and science. Pupils should be
encouraged to take these subjects, and not discouraged from doing so. I
thank you, ma’am. [Applause.]

                    INTERNATIONAL DAY OF DISABLED PERSONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on 3 December South
Africa will be joining the family of nations in celebrating the
International Day of Disabled Persons. The world programme of action
concerning disabled persons was adopted by the UN General Assembly on 3
December 1982. This programme of action jolted the international community
into action to give full recognition to rights of persons with disabilities
to equal opportunities and full participation in the economic and social
life of their communities.
The ANC supports multilateral institutions and initiatives aimed at
promoting a world based on human rights values, including the UN Standard
Rules on the Equalisation of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities,
to further promote the rights of persons with disabilities among member
states.

The ANC commitment to the advancement of the rights of persons with
disabilities, even before it came into power in 1994, has led to the many
achievements that we have realised in the first ten years of democracy.
Among these achievements is a notable increase in the number of members of
Parliament with disabilities, especially from the ANC, as well as the
establishment of the OSDP at national, provincial and local levels. May I
invite this House and all South Africans to join all people with
disabilities in celebration of the International Day of Disabled Persons on
3 December. I thank you. [Applause.]

                           HIV AND AIDS AWARENESS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): The UDM would like to make use of this opportunity as
the last sitting of this House before Aids Day on 1 December to raise again
the matter of HIV and Aids. In the past few days we have witnessed a number
of painful reminders of the presence of HIV/Aids in our country. On Sunday
we lost an artistic giant when Gibson Kente passed away. We salute his
courage and campaigning for greater HIV/Aids awareness.

On Tuesday the SABC reported that the Department of Health has announced
that 37,5% of the population of KwaZulu-Natal are HIV-positive. This is a
staggering number of people in need of urgent assistance. We urge all South
Africans to conduct safe sex, remain faithful to their partners, and make
responsible sexual choices. I thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                COOLING-OFF PERIOD FOR SENIOR PUBLIC SERVANTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ID supports a call
for a cooling-off period for senior public servants when they leave office,
as well as for public representatives. This is needed in order to prevent
conflict of interest and the use of undue influence via their political
connections to further their business interests.

The Telkom case provides but one example of how bureaucrats used office and
development of policies to their own benefit. This reflects on the broader
picture of crony capitalism occurring in most of these deal-making
activities. This type of activity, especially in the Telkom case,
artificially inflates the share price which means more debt to service loan
payoffs, etc, and does not reflect and underlie the value of core
businesses.

The ID reinforces the call for broad-based BEE incorporating, amongst other
things, employee share options. I thank you. [Applause.]


                   STIFLING OF DEBATES ON IMPORTANT ISSUES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ACDP is extremely
concerned that Parliament is deteriorating into a farce, where every word
the opposition speaks has to be vetted by the ANC with constant censoring
under the pretext that statements are unparliamentary. [Applause.]

It would be a joke; only it is no longer funny. First we are censored by
time and now we are told what we can and can’t say. It is extremely
disturbing when the governing party tries to stifle debate on important
issues, like the choice of termination of pregnancy, as was witnessed in
the House yesterday.

Also, the triumphalism and celebration that followed the chairman of the
health committee’s declaration that 280 000 children had been terminated
since the Act was first passed – actually that figure is way less than the
real figure – was frankly nothing less than nauseating.

The public are totally disrespected as their representatives are strangled
by procedure. Attempts to pretend that the CTOP Bill is not about abortion
amount to treacherous deception: Whether a baby is terminated or aborted it
dies, and it dies a violent death.
The Deputy Minister of Health’s claims recently during question time
amounted to the perception that a vote for the ANC was a vote for abortion,
and MPs vigorously applauded her. Yet, contrary to the ANC’s claims that SA
women want abortion, the HSRC survey show that 70% believe aborting babies,
because you can’t afford them is always wrong. In fact, the number rises to
74% for black South Africans. Thank you. [Time expired.][Applause.]

                      SA CONSTITUTION AND HUMAN RIGHTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M P MENTOR (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, 10 December is International
Human Rights Day. It is also the day on which the first president of the
democratic state, the former President Mandela, assented to the
Constitution in 1996.

The Constitution of South Africa, which is internationally acclaimed, is
the supreme law of our country and is founded on human rights and the rule
of law. As the Preamble of the Constitution proclaims, South Africa should
continue to recognise the injustices of our past, to honour those who
suffered for justice in our land, and to respect those who have worked to
build and develop our country.

The ANC calls on Parliament and the people of South Africa, based on the
Constitution, to work towards the following: healing the divisions of the
past; establishing a society based on democratic values, social justice,
and fundamental human rights; improving the quality of life of all South
Africans; laying the foundation of an open society in which government is
based on the will of the people; and building a united, democratic South
Africa that is able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the
family of nations. Amandla ngawethu! [Power is ours!] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I know that this is the last day that we
have a plenary. There are too many meetings going on, which I would
encourage to continue, but outside the Chamber so that we continue business
and are able to hear one another.

I really respect that people have those meetings so that they take one
another’s details and continue communicating outside the House, but I am
sure the business can be taken elsewhere, and it will be much better
outside where no-one will call you to order.
I am just trying to say that we should respect the people participating
this morning.

                  PLIGHT OF THE CAREGIVERS OF THE DISABLED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H WEBER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, December is recognised as a month
for the disabled, when we should be addressing their plight. It should be a
month of giving and goodwill when we give an extra thought for those less
advantaged than we are.

To care for the disabled takes great dedication. Fortunately, we are
blessed with many such people, but unfortunately their time is taken up by
fundraising to keep the doors of such institutions open. Many institutions
place their hope on the Lotto for a donation to survive.

I urge the Minister to take cognisance of the many institutions that are
run by NGOs and are in danger of closing their doors. It is common
knowledge that funding by government to NGOs has almost dried up. I would
urge government to speed up the criteria for funding these valuable
institutions, which government is unable to provide. Thank you. [Applause.]

                      EVICTIONS IN PROTEA GLEN, SOWETO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Deputy Speaker, the PAC is disturbed that within a
short space of two months the residents of Protea Glen in Soweto are again
being evicted and are losing their property to sheriffs, who have always
pounced on them like vultures upon helpless chickens.

The situation occurs with regular monotony despite the fact that these
Protea Glen residents were assured that there would be intervention with
the bank regarding sheriffs. A number of residents are unable to pay their
bonds because of the high rate of unemployment. Many have lost their jobs
through retrenchments.

The PAC appeals to those who wield power to wield it in favour of the poor
and the powerless. The PAC has long advocated a moratorium on land
evictions. It is a shame that those who were dispossessed of their land
continue to be victims of land evictions, rain or no rain, cold or no cold.
Land evictions are often executed in the name of development; development
must develop people, not destroy them for the rich and the powerful. Land
repossession; not land evictions.  [Applause.]




                     DA MEMBER IMPLICATED IN CORRUPTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M SOLO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, yesterday in this House the hon
Chief Whip of the DA read a statement informing us about some member of the
DA who is implicated in corruption. We hope that the hon Gibson, Spinnekop,
[Spider] and the DA will learn what we have been telling them all the time.


We have said, time and again, corruption knows no colour or party
affiliation. It is a social problem that arises out of our complete
historical reality, characterised by the centuries of...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member!

Mr W J SEREMANE: On a point of order. This is getting very serious and out
of hand.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order, sir?

Mr W J SEREMANE: Is it parliamentary to refer to an hon member with
epithets such as “spinnekop” [spider]? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, did you refer to any hon member as
“spinnekop”?

Mr B M SOLO: No, I can’t remember. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He didn’t.

Mr B M SOLO: Whether the DA likes to hear this or not is another matter. We
note the DA’s failure to deal with their latest corruption scandal.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member!

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam Deputy Speaker, would you give a ruling on what the
question was over here.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked the hon member, and if an hon member says that
he did not say that, I have to take his word. [Interjections.] Hon member,
continue.

Mr B M SOLO:  Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I heard it clearly. He did say that.


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will check the record, but for now we take his word.
If indeed he did utter the word “spinnekop”, we’ll come back to the House.
[Interjections.]

Mr B M SOLO: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. We hope the hon Gibson and
the DA will learn what we have been telling them all the time. We have said
time and again that corruption knows no colour. It knows no party
affiliation. It is a social problem that arises out of our concrete
historical reality, characterised by centuries of illegitimate colonial and
racist rule.

Whether the DA likes to hear this or not, is another matter. We note that
because of the DA’s failure to deal with their latest corruption scandal,
the DA now tries to draw the names of other parties into the matter. Again,
we must tell the DA that this approach to handling corruption of DA members
is not going to work. They must stop trying to appease certain sections of
our communities and start contributing to the national effort to rid our
country of corruption. I thank you.


             DRAFT PREFERENTIAL PROCUREMENT EXCLUDES WHITE WOMEN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the new draft preferential
procurement regulations were published for comment on 4 October and exclude
white women and white disabled people from receiving preference. Should
they replace the current regulations, it may be an embarrassment when South
Africa next has to report to the United Nations committee on the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

Article 3 of that convention states:

      State Parties shall take in all fields, in particular in the
  political, social, economic and cultural fields, all appropriate
  measures, including legislation, to ensure the full development and
  advancement of women, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the exercise
  and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms on the basis of
  equality with men.

The convention deals with all women and not only women of a certain race.
South Africa ratified the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women without reservation and is legally bound to
put its provisions into practice.

In the new draft regulations the prescribed balanced scorecard now applies
only to black people, meaning Africans, coloureds and Indians. This means
that white women and white disabled people who currently receive preference
points when they tender for contracts will in future be excluded and will
probably, in many instances, fall out of the race for government contracts
altogether. So the DA appeals to the ANC government to reconsider these
regulations. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]




             INCLUSIVE EDUCATION FOR LEARNERS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, discrimination in any form is
totally unacceptable and does not have any place in society. It is
therefore very unfortunate and sad when disabled people or people with
special needs are discriminated against. It is inexcusable for people to be
excluded from or to lose their place in society simply because they are
disabled or have special needs. Poor people and people in rural areas are
particularly affected by this.

We are therefore greatly encouraged by the Department of Education’s
efforts to implement inclusive education in terms of which learners with
special needs will be included. We are particularly interested in the
Minister’s plans to implement inclusive education in rural areas, as these
learners have for far too long been excluded because of their special needs
and disabilities.

Inclusive education has the potential to make a positive difference to the
lives of many people. We therefore hope that plans to implement it are at
an advanced stage. I thank you.


              EMPANGENI POLICE COMMENDED FOR POSITIVE ATTITUDE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SIKAKANE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise to pronounce my
appreciation for the attitude of the police of Empangeni and for the
service they are rendering to the community.

The communities around Empangeni police station are proud that they never
leave the police station unattended and that they get prompt attention.
Surely the Batho Pele spirit is working in this police station. We urge the
communities to reciprocate by showing the police respect and to co-operate
with them. We hope that all police stations in the country will emulate the
Empangeni police. I thank you.


                             MINISTERS’RESPONSES



   PROBLEMS REGARDING BOND REPAYMENTS, ILLEGAL EVICTIONS AND PROTECTION OF
                               PROPERTY RIGHTS




                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Deputy
Speaker. In response to the statement made by the hon Pheko, I would like
to respond as follows.

If one looks at the mechanisms that have been put in place by the Ministry
and the Department of Housing to assist those communities or members who
have difficulties with regards to the payment of their bonds, one would
recall that an entity known as Safcon was put in place, whose task it was
to assist members who may not have been able to pay their bonds and find
them alternative accommodation.

However, part of the challenge is that many people in our communities are
either not aware of this or sometimes find it difficult, because such
alternative accommodation may mean a place that is smaller than what they
are used to. This is a matter, in my view, in which members of Parliament
themselves can assist so that we can indeed ensure that those people who
have difficulty paying their bonds are not left on the street.

I quite agree with the hon member when he says that land evictions are not
acceptable. However, we need to appreciate that this House has put two
pieces of legislation in place to ensure that no illegal evictions take
place. The Extension of the Security of Tenure Act is one such piece of
legislation. The Prevention of Illegal Squatting Act is another piece of
legislation that balances interests - as some people may actually invade
land unlawfully - to ensure that people do not affect the property rights
of others. However, it does stipulate that the landowner also has a
responsibility to report and take action as soon as such invasion takes
place.

I think these safeguards were put in place to ensure that you protect, on
the one hand, the citizen’s property rights, while, on the other hand, that
you are conscious of vulnerability in terms of landowners who illegally
evict individuals willy-nilly. I trust that these mechanisms, coupled with
other programmes of government such as land reform and the housing
programme, are intended to secure the security of tenure of all South
Africans. Thank you very much, Chair.




              CONCERNS REGARDING MATHS, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to draw
your attention to the fact that two issues were raised by two members and
to take this into account in terms of my response.

Regarding the concern that was raised in relation to mathematics, science
and technology, we raised this concern prior to the release of the report,
and we do agree that this is a matter that we do have to be attentive to.

In 1991 we started a mathematics, science and technology initiative in
terms of which we established 102 Dinaledi schools. These schools were
dedicated schools for mathematics and science. The 102 schools constituted
1,5% of the Grades 10, 11 and 12 cohort of learners in the country.

Over the years these schools have contributed more than 30% of students at
university doing mathematics and science. We, however, recognised certain
things already a few months ago, and when we discussed the matter with the
portfolio committee we identified certain issues that had to be taken note
of.

The first was the psychological barrier that was created when children or
learners were told that mathematics was difficult. We believe this is the
first step that has to be taken is to break down the barriers in terms of
mathematics and science.

In terms of our engagement with the portfolio committee and the review of
the strategy, we also recognised that it was important that we ensured that
there was sufficient capacity amongst teachers in order to be able to teach
the subjects. A teacher who has the ability to motivate, and who is aware
of the content of mathematics and science, would obviously contribute
meaningfully or enhance the results in mathematics and science.

We also raised the concern that it was not sufficient or adequate that we
provide quantitatively more learners doing mathematics and science, but
with too few learners doing so in higher grade. It was therefore important
that we raised the bar in terms of the registration of learners doing
mathematics and science in higher grade. It was also important to take into
account that ICT had a particular role to play in the development of
mathematics, science and technology and, therefore, we would ensure that we
did so in a creative and innovative way.

What was also important was to recognise the roles of universities and
universities of technology in terms of ensuring that they assist and
support the initiatives of government regarding its national strategy. We
have already engaged with certain institutions, and they are looking very
carefully at how they can accelerate development in these areas.

So, the concerns that have been reflected in the report are concerns that
we share, which we were aware of long before the release of the report and,
certainly, we will be attentive to those recommendations.

With regard to the issue raised by the hon member in so far as inclusive
education is concerned, I would like to thank him for his sentiments.
Indeed, the Department of Education has a policy in terms of inclusive
education. The policy is based on the fact that education for children with
special disabilities was predominantly provided to members of the white
race. The facilities by and large in the past, were also located in
Pietermaritzburg, Cape Town or Johannesburg. We thought that we had to turn
that around and make sure that these institutions were accessible to the
entire population.

The approach of the Department of Education and the Ministry has been that
one does not look at disability or inclusive education on the basis of an
individual deficit but, rather, in a very systemic way. For this reason, we
have set about initiating elaborate pilot projects to ensure that we can,
in a very systematic way, determine what the most useful approach is. The
framework within which we intend working is a period of 10 to 15 years.
Obviously, you will understand, hon member, that it will require enormous
resources.

As a first phase we have recommended that provinces convert at least 15
schools into resource centres in each province. Where they cannot convert
the schools, they might well establish new schools. These schools would be
feeder schools to other institutions where children have disabilities.
There would be resource centres that would be able to provide capacity in
terms of teaching, in terms of the development of content, etc.

This initiative has already taken place, and it will be expanded
progressively and incrementally. Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.
[Time expired.]




                        ABORTION AND INFORMED CHOICE


                            (Minister’s Response)

IPHINI LIKANGQONGOSHE WEZEMPILO: Phini likaSomlomo, ngisukumela ukuphendula
inkosazana, umhlonishwa uDudley, ngesitatimende asenzile khona maduze nje.
Isitatimende sakhe, ngeshwa, sigcwele okuningi okungesilo iqiniso. Ngesintu-
ke sithi: ngamanga nje aluhlaza cwe. Izolo besiphasisa uMthetho ...
[Inhlokomo.]  (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, I stand up to respond to
the hon Ms Dudley with regard to the statement she has made. It is
unfortunate that her statement contains many things that are untrue. In my
language we say “blatant lies”. Yesterday we passed the Act ...
[Interjections.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The Deputy
Minister indicated in her response that our member told blatant lies. I
think that is unparliamentary and I would like you to ask the Deputy
Minister to please withdraw that. [Interjections.]


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think it’s a problem of language. I will tell you, Mr
Green, how I understood it. What the Deputy Minister said was, “ukhulume
izinto ezingelona iqiniso” [she spoke about things that are not true] and
she actually went on to say that, in her language, that would be referred
to as blatant lies.

Mr L M GREEN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I just heard the interpretation,
“lies”.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a context to that. Deputy Minister, will you
please continue.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I ask you on a
point of order: If I were to say, in my language, that something is blatant
lies, would that be parliamentary? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, much as I speak and understand
isiZulu very well, we have a problem that we must address, especially now
when members leave, and that is the interpreting service. Regarding what
comes through in most cases, people have complained that it is not actually
what a member said. The impression that is created is that, I’m told, in
fact, you were referring to blatant lies, “amanga aluhlaza”.

I think you have made your point by saying that the hon member gave the
House an untrue statement. If you are comfortable with it, I would ask you
just to withdraw the part of your; language... [Interjections.] What is
wrong with hon members; why do you get so excited? It’s not fair. We have
been dealing with this thing of disrespect for the Chair and it continues.
Hon members, I think we should rise to the occasion and be hon members.

In terms of isiZulu, there is nothing wrong in what the hon member has
said. She is not responsible for the poor interpretation service. We are
just requesting her, for the purpose of this sitting, to withdraw if she is
comfortable with that because she has not said anything wrong in terms of
her language. IsiZulu is one of the 11 official languages. It is our
problem, as Parliament, to make sure that we have people who will give the
right interpretation service.

In the middle of a ruling – as happened yesterday – I have this
intervention. I think it is wrong and does not actually augur well for some
of us that you are so disrespectful. Any time when a person interjects you
are already intervening as if we here just don’t even have brains. I think
that is disrespectful and I take this thing very seriously. Hon members,
I’m getting annoyed, I must say. I really take exception to this kind of
behaviour, Mr Douglas, that continuously as I try to make a ruling I will
always be assisted when I have actually said that when I seek assistance I
will do so. Thank you. Qhubeka-ke mama. [Continue, hon member.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank very much, Deputy Speaker, for your
ruling. But, before I withdraw, what I want to say is that the languages we
speak in South Africa are rich in idioms, proverbs and expressions that may
seem colourful to others who don’t understand these languages. So I would
urge them to actually try and learn our languages...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Much as I respect what you are saying, Deputy Minister,
I am going to take this as part of your allocated time.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you. I was responding to a statement
and I was interrupted on a point of order by a member whose party says the
ANC is stifling debate.

The issue that we were discussing yesterday on which we passed an amendment
is an issue that has been debated very widely in this country. When we
passed the law there was a very positive response to it, not only from the
members of this House, but also from a large majority of women outside who
were disadvantaged and discriminated against in that they were not given
the same right that had been given for many, many years to white women in
this country.

The hon member said she wants a debate. I’m saying that we’ve had the
debate. We have passed the law and it is supported by a large majority of
South Africans.

However, having said that, I just want to say that, in terms of the law
that we passed and in terms of the policy of the ANC, clearly, the ANC
would not like to see a situation where children are aborted. What we have
said is that there are circumstances and conditions under which women need
to make an informed choice. This is what this law is about. It says: Give
them the information, give them power and let them decide on what happens
to their bodies. We’ve had this debate. The hon member comes with
statistics from the HSRC... [Time Expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Deputy Minister, the time has expired now. There
is time left for you to withdraw.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: What I would like though, Madam Deputy
Speaker, is to give the hon member an opportunity to come and discuss
issues that seem to continue to bother her. You know, we can’t impose our
religious beliefs on this House or on the people of South Africa.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: There is a ruling and
the Minister must respond to it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have given the ruling and I’ll make sure that before
the Deputy Minister takes her seat she does exactly that. I also want to
advise Mrs Dudley and the Deputy Minister that I think there is lot of
talking that has to go on between the two of you because the Minister is
inviting you for a discussion. I think you should take that opportunity.

Now, Deputy Minister, will you please withdraw the phrase, “amanga
aluhlaza” [blatant lies].

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Deputy Speaker, I started there...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t want a speech.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: I did withdraw it, it but I said.
...[Interjections.] I did. Anyway, what I said, and I repeat, is that the
richness of our African languages is that they are full of idioms and
proverbs. [Interjections.] But, for the sake of this debate, I will
withdraw what I said.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: The fact is that the member has misled this
House. I will make a statement if she wants me to make a statement that
will explain what I did say to this House, which she is continuously
misquoting, and she has misquoted it here as well.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: That retraction was
qualified and the Deputy Minister again said that I was misleading the
House, just as she misled the House about the debate...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There’s nothing wrong with the phrase, “misleading the
House,” as long as people can substantiate what they mean by saying that.
The only thing that I wanted the Deputy Minister to do was to withdraw the
words, “amanga aluhlaza” [blatant lies].

Mrs C DUDLEY: But she qualified her withdrawal. It needs to be an
unqualified withdrawal.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Minister, will you please withdraw those words
unconditionally, without qualifying your words.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Well, I withdraw them.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thanks.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: But I would still like to have an
opportunity ... [Interjections.] This is a different subject – I’m saying
that I would still like an opportunity ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, will you please respect the Chair
and the Chair’s ruling.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, I said I withdraw it
unconditionally.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you. Before I was interrupted, I was
just explaining to the hon member that it is not right ...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Minister, I thought I had ruled regarding time.
I did say your time had expired but I gave you time to respond to the point
of order that was raised, and you have done so. Thank you very much.




                   NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members,
in 1996 the National Small Business Act was promulgated for the purpose of
creating an institutional framework to implement the government support
strategy for small businesses. The Act allowed for the establishment of
Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency as a national small business development
agency, as well as the National Small Business Council as an advocacy body
for small businesses. The principal Act was amended for the first time in
2003 to remove the provisions of the National Small Business Council, which
was liquidated in 1999.

In the last 10 years various reviews of the strategy for implementation of
small enterprise development support services were conducted. The strategy
reviewed and highlighted challenges that arose during that period. These
included the need to streamline the institutional framework for small
enterprise development so as to eliminate or reduce duplication; achieve
optimal use of existing resources through an integrated service delivery
network; maximise the outreach and the impact of small enterprise
development programmes; achieve a coherent and comprehensive response to
the needs, capacities, opportunities of the small enterprise sector; and to
ensure that the roles of all stakeholders are well defined.

Against this background the Department of Trade and Industry believes that
the establishment of a new legal entity responsible for implementing the
government’s 2004–14 small, medium and micro enterprise strategy is in the
public interest and will significantly advance the all important and
critical objectives of small and medium enterprise development.

In the process of conceptualising the small enterprise development agency,
the department had consultations with a wide range of stakeholders
including the National Treasury, the Department of Provincial and Local
Government, MECs and provincial governments, the boards of Ntsika and
Namak, all general managers of provincial manufacturing advisory centres as
well as a range of small enterprises and service providers in the different
provinces.

Proposals made at the hearings were also taken into consideration. The
primary objective of the establishment of the new entity is to increase the
capacity of government to deliver support services to small enterprises in
a manner that will improve programme outreach, achieve our desired impact
on small enterprises, provide a single access point for small enterprise
support, be inclusive of all relevant stakeholders, leverage resources and
service delivery, and align it with government strategy of integrated
service delivery.

The Bill is intended to amend the National Small Business Act so as to
repeal all provisions pertaining to Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency; to
provide for the establishment of the Small Enterprise Development Agency,
or Seda, as a juristic person; to make provision for the incorporation of
Ntsika Enterprise Promotion Agency, the national manufacturing advise
centres and any designated institution into the agency to be established;
and also to provide for the necessary transitional arrangements to this
effect.

The Seda will be established with the purpose of implementing government
policy for small enterprise development. It will therefore be responsible
for designing and implementing enterprise development support programmes of
a nonfinancial nature, develop a service delivery network that will
increase the contribution of small enterprises to the South African
economy, oversee the functioning of the institution and ensure that it
remains aligned with national priorities. A board of directors, consisting
of not less than seven members and not more than 15 members, will be
appointed by the Minister of Trade and Industry. The board will serve for a
period of three years after having obtained approval from Cabinet.

The chief executive officer of Seda will be appointed by the Minister of
Trade and Industry on the boards recommendation. To ensure that the new
institution is adequately resourced so that it is able to deliver on its
mandate, its funds will consist of money appropriated by Parliament,
grants, donations, bequests and money lawfully obtained from other sources.
The CEO will be the accounting officer and the Auditor-General will audit
the accounts and the balance sheet.

To ensure co-ordinated service delivery, the Bill provides for the design
and implementation of a standard and common national delivery network that
will be uniformly applied throughout the Republic in respect of small
enterprise development, integrating all
government-funded small enterprise support agencies across all spheres of
government. The agency will also establish provincial structures to ensure
the effective implementation of its functions at provincial level.

It is important to ensure that the agency remains accountable to and in
touch with all its stakeholders and beneficiaries. To this effect the Bill
requires the board to hold consultative meetings with beneficiaries,
provincial representatives and other relevant stakeholders, at least once a
year to discuss the functions and performance of the agency.

I would like to thank the members of the portfolio committee for their
inputs and speedy consideration, processing and support for this Bill. I
thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, in keeping with the
developmental agenda of the ANC government to broaden and stimulate
economic participation, and in accordance with His Excellency the
President’s announcement in his state of the nation address in May this
year, the Bill before the House today provides the legal framework to merge
Ntsika and the National Manufacturing Advisory Centre to create the new
Small Enterprise Development Agency.

Furthermore, in line with the ANC’s  contract with the people to fight
unemployment and poverty and to create work, the government seeks to
promote sustainable, decent work for all through a range of immediate
interventions, which include small enterprise promotion and development.

The main objective for the establishment of the Small Enterprise
Development Agency is to increase the capacity of the government to deliver
support services to small enterprises in a manner that will, amongst other
factors, eliminate the poor co-ordination of small enterprises and improve
programme outreach and service delivery; secondly, provide single access
points for small enterprise support; thirdly, reduce the costs of service
delivery; and fourthly, eliminate the duplication in service delivery.

The Portfolio Committee, in keeping with its oversight mandate, looks
forward to seeing the Small Enterprise Development Agency providing greater
levels of business support to small enterprises, and also playing an
important role in improving the capabilities of small enterprises, as it
will be primarily responsible for implementing the government’s 2004–14,
small, medium and micro enterprises strategy.

Whilst it is a fact that unemployment and poverty remain major challenges
in South Africa, it is also important to note the government’s approach to
these challenges. Two fundamental strategies underpin the government’s
approach: firstly, the government seeks to increase economic growth so that
the number of net new jobs being created will begin to exceed the number of
new entrants into the labour market; and secondly, to improve the education
system so that the workforce is able to take up the largely skilled work
opportunities economic growth will generate.

In pursuance of these critical objectives, the core function and focus of
the Department of Trade and Industry is to promote job creation, economic
growth and equality. It is in this context that small enterprise promotion
in general, and the development of black-owned small enterprises in
particular, remain crucial components of job creation in the economy.

This will require a number of measures, including, amongst other things,
access to capital and ongoing entrepreneurial training. As South Africa
remains an integral part of the global competitive economy, it is thus
necessary for us as a developing nation to ensure that our enterprises,
both big and small, are able to compete effectively. The ANC supports the
passage of this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we continue with the debate I want
the House to join me in congratulating Mr Ben Martins who has added an LL M-
qualification to the many degrees that he has. [Applause.] I happened to be
close to him when the University of Cape Town confirmed that information
yesterday.  [Applause.]

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the background section of the Bill
details a number of problems that the Small Enterprise Development Agenda,
Seda, will have to address. Among these are, widespread regional and local
differences in policy absorption and a weak entrepreneurial culture in the
country.

It is thus clear that the Bill seeks to lay the basis for the establishment
of a single small business support agency and to co-ordinate and integrate
the myriad of small business support agencies and programmes that exist in
our country. The DA has repeatedly called for this. Accordingly, it will
welcome any initiative by government to streamline, co-ordinate and
integrate small business support service delivery into a coherent and
effectual strategy. Thus, to the extent that the Bill does this, it has the
support of the DA.

Unfortunately, the Bill has too centralist a flavour containing prescripts
that could stifle local initiative and innovation. Happily, the word
“tier”, used in an earlier draft, has been replaced by “sphere” at the DA’s
insistence, but that it featured at all in a proposed piece of legislation
fills my chest with angst. It certainly was a sleight of hand, a Freudian
slip and an irreverent poke in the eye of our intergovernmental arrangement
- a sleight of hand because it sought to bring in the centralisation of
power through the back door; a Freudian slip because it revealed
unwittingly the national government’s intention to foist a unitary system
on an unsuspecting citizenry; and an irreverence because it was
contemptuous of our Constitution.

My concern is, of course, more than semantic. It goes beyond what some in
this House might consider a non est. I am concerned that all
subnational spheres of government - provincial and local - will have to toe
the line. None can, not even with own resources or an equitable share,
implement programmes best suited to their local conditions. Realpolitik and
expediency might perhaps require Parliament to divest the provincial sphere
of its constitutional, if residual, discretionary power over its own
revenue and equitable share.

The national government has already done this, and posterity will judge
whether expediency is a valid reason for tinkering with legislation. The
Bill poses the danger that it might emasculate and lock the local sphere
into a centralist straightjacket, which will be manifestly unconscionable.
For one thing, it will defeat the very raison d’être of local government.
In fact, our Constitution envisions an entrepreneurial local government,
and for this reason it grants a much greater degree of autonomy than a
provincial administration.

It is true that the Constitution requires all three spheres of government
to co-operate, but there must be something suspicious about co-operation if
it results from legislation and not from free will. For most of our
municipalities much of local economic development, Led, is about small
business development. If the Bill becomes law a mayor of a municipality, in
so far as his or her Led programme relates to small business development,
will have to be answerable to a bureaucrat in Pretoria, not his or her
electorate. I doubt that this was ever the intention of the framers of our
world-famous Constitution.

Moreover, the Bill does not address the challenge of widespread regional
and local differences in policy absorption, which, it rightly points out,
calls for a more bottom-up approach. The centralisation not just of policy-
making but also of implementation, far from being a bottom-up approach,
represents a top-bottom approach par excellence; nor does the Bill signal a
strong strategic commitment to promoting an entrepreneurial culture. It
does not even assign Seda the promotion of an entrepreneurial culture as a
strategic objective. Job creation, equity and suchlike enjoy this
privilege. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms E S CHANG: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, it is well known that
small businesses are a highway to wealth creation, asset ownership and
economic growth. In order for SMMEs to thrive and succeed there is a need
for risk capital, but coupled with financial viability. There has to be
social benefits, profitability and sustainability of these SMMEs.

SMMEs cannot be subjected to a one-size-fits-all approach, as they need to
have measurable outcomes. I want to stress the fact that enterprises must
be owned by the community, especially by women and the disabled. The IFP
believes that it is critical that the vision and objectives of the agency
become real. In essence, we need to ensure that these structures work for
our people.

Let us not forget that the debate affects the whole economic debate and the
whole debate on poverty. Finance marketing, management skills and
technological skills are four vital elements that are needed for any
business to succeed.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, please take your seat. Hon members,
she has not completed her speech. I don’t think that you even heard what
she was saying. Hon members, have those conversations, but please be
mindful that there is business before the House because I can’t even hear
the hon member. Will you please continue.

Ms E S CHANG: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I am trying to speak louder so
that I can cover their voices. We believe that the government is on the
right track and is making progress with regard to these four elements and
that this will assist in increasing productivity, as well as reducing the
costs that businesses incur. This will lead to greater success for small
businesses.

The recent actions of the Industrial Development Corporation, or IDC, must
be applauded for their positive approach to their subsidiary, Forskor. Not
only have they increased the loan to Forskor from R99, 5 million to R544
million, but the IDC has also converted this loan from a 14,6% interest-
bearing loan to a zero-interest loan. This is a positive move from the IDC
in preventing job losses. The government could perhaps take a leaf out of
this book.

If SMMEs are to survive and thrive costs have to be reduced. At the moment
SMMEs have to pay interest at 17% to 29% per annum on their loans. This is
a heavy burden for poor people who desperately need our help.

Dear hon Minister, these SMMEs - particularly women, disabled people and
people from rural areas - are in need of some sort of incentive scheme.
Should they be exempt from paying the loan application and yearly renewal
fee? Should the interest rates be reduced, or could they maybe be exempt
for a period of at least three to five years? This is the period in which
small businesses are most vulnerable and still finding their feet in our
very competitive global market. With positive government agency support
SMMEs will be the future of our country, the Republic of South Africa. The
IFP supports the amending Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, I must
say that I am surprised that the DA finds it necessary to heap irrelevant
vituperation on this Bill. It seems that if they fail to find real points
to criticise, they are forced to put up their own dummies to shoot down.

The establishment of the Small Enterprise Development Agency is an
important new initiative in the development of small enterprises in the
country. Neither Ntsika nor Namac realised anywhere near their full
potential for assisting the growth of small businesses. It is trusted that
the amalgamation of their functions and efforts in the new agency will
achieve what they did not.

The amendment of the name of the main Act to that of the National Small
Enterprise Act also signifies a welcome new approach to economic activity
in the country. The Bill moves away from the narrow perception of economic
activity as being essentially business. It widens the horizons of the
agency to include a much greater array of economically valuable
associations of people.

It is in many ways thus a precursor of legislation that is yet to come. It
foresees the co-operative movement, which will gain much momentum during
next year, and it recognises the valid and valuable economic roles of NGOs
and CBOs. The UDM supports the Bill as amended by the committee. I thank
you. [Applause.].

Ms N P KHUNOU: Chairperson, Deputy Speaker, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and
hon members of Parliament, the National Small Business Amendment Bill,
which is to amend the National Small Business Act of 1996, is an important
piece of legislation. It incorporates Ntsika Enterprises Promotion Agency
and the National Manufacturing Advisory Centre, Namac, into a new agency
called the Small Enterprise Development Agency, Seda.

Ntsika’s mission was to render nonfinancial support services to the SMMEs.
Some of its key functions were entrepreneurship, development, marketing and
business development services. Most SMMEs complained about the inefficiency
of this agency. Although it delivered it was ineffective because most SMMEs
were not developed. On the other hand, Namac’s role was to supply high
quality advisory and information services to new and existing SMMEs to
ensure improvement in their quality, competitiveness and productivity.

The merger of these two agencies into Seda will reduce costs and eliminate
duplication in service delivery, as this has always been our concern in the
committee. It will improve access points in local communities, as Seda will
be based in all nine provinces. It will also improve the impact of service
delivery networks and accessibility, and I am passionate about this matter.


This initiative by the government is highly appreciated. That is why we all
need to support this Bill. The ANC is committed to reducing poverty,
encouraging growth and promoting equality. The President, in his state of
the nation address, said that Namac and Ntsika would be merged into a
single agency. He also said that we needed to bridge the gap between the
first and second economy. The ANC is committed to its people’s contract and
halving unemployment and poverty by 2014.

It has been proven by many countries in the world that SMMEs help to create
jobs and increase GDP. In South Africa small business absorb more than half
of the people formally employed in the private sector and contribute about
42% of this country’s GDP.
Presently, in Malaysia the small and medium industries account for more
than 80% of the total manufacturing establishment in that country. In
Singapore small and medium enterprises have played an important role in
that country’s economic development. They employ about half of the working
population and contribute close to a third of total value added. In
Thailand the SMMEs create millions of jobs, generate additional income that
is significant to many poor and disadvantaged families, and generate a high
proportion of their countries’ wealth.

My colleague, Dr Nkem-Abonta of the DA, said he had never heard of any
businessperson opening a company to create jobs. This proves to me that his
party is always blindfolded and refuses to see growth and development in
this country. [Interjections.]

Enterprise development is key in this department. It shows the commitment
of the department regarding business and growth in the South African
economy and the creation of jobs. The Department of Trade and Industry has
certain sectors and youth internship programmes in its information and
communication technology strategies. This was started in May 2002 and aims
to reduce youth unemployment and create ITC skills. We need to have more
skills development and the youth should take part.

The annual report of the Department of Trade and Industry 2002-03 lists 835
SMMEs, and 223 of these are black-owned. We need to see more improvement.
There are 180 women-owned businesses and two for the disabled. That is very
good. If you teach a child you invest in the future, and if you educate a
woman you educate a nation.

The committee has stringent measures relating to the operation of the board
because we don’t want to see challenges anymore. We want to see SMMEs
developing. When the Minister appoints the board the members must have
business knowledge and experience in trade, industry and finance. This is a
non-negotiable issue. The board must at least once a year hold consultative
meetings with its stakeholders, beneficiaries and provincial
representatives to discuss activities and the performance of the agency. We
also had public hearings, and the contributions of Cosatu were helpful.
This is our commitment to equality and job creation.

Fa ke feleletsa, ke ratile gore Tona ya Lefapha ke lona le le tlhopang
Boroto. Ka jalo o nale matla a go tlosa leloko la Boroto fa le sa
fitlhelele dintlha tsotlhe tse di umakilweng mo karolong 13(c). O
tshwanetsi go dira se morago ga go buisana le Boroto. Redumellane re le ANC
gore Boroto le Tona ke bona ba ba tshwanetsing go kgeta CEO e e tla
tshwarang marapo dingwaga tse tlhano. Molao o fa pele ga rona, re o
lebeletse ka matlho a bolegileng re le ANC.

Ke batla go feleletsa ka gore a pula ele nele lotlhe. Fa re boa ongwageng o
tlang, a re ne melomo ya bao ba ba sa kgoneng go ipuelela. Ke a leboga.
[Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, the Minister appoints the board. He has the power to remove
a member who does not abide by the rules as set out in section 13 (c). He
must do this after having consulted the board. We agreed as the ANC that
the board and the Minister are the ones who are supposed to appoint the
CEO, who will hold the position for five years. The Bill before us will be
looked at critically by the ANC.

I wish to end by wishing everyone well. When we return next year, let us be
the spokespersons for those who are unable to speak for themselves. I thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr A HARDING: Mr Chair, the previous National Small Business Act provided
the impetus to incorporate small business activities into the mainstream of
the economy. Subsequent to this we have seen many changes in SMME strategy
because many entrepreneurs did not receive adequate and relevant products
and services delivered by the various DTI agencies. Part of the problem is
that many of the initiatives were supply-driven and not what the target
market needed. As a result we have seen poor performances by Ntsika and
other agencies.

The amending Bill makes provision for the establishment of the Small
Enterprise Development Agency, which essentially is a merger of Ntsika and
Namac Trust. Through this agency’s support measures it is envisaged that
small business will be competitive internationally and that nonfinancial
support services rendered through intermediaries will be streamlined.

The agency, once operational, should immediately address problems of
fragmentation, duplication and resource scarcity linked to a defined
delivery mandate. The ID supports the amending Bill.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairman, Minister, when we deal with small business we must
keep it simple and get the basics right. We support the legislation, but I
think it is good that we should get back to basics. The basics are social
stability, honesty and reliability, a free market and access to capital at
relatively low interest rates, which means low inflation - small business
can’t support micro-lending rates, Minister – a fair legal system that
recognises and can enforce contracts and protect physical and intellectual
rights, and the teaching and fostering of entrepreneurship.

Stimulating small business isn’t rocket science. The techniques are well
understood. The principle is that if we cannot help people, we must not
hinder them. Our ability to help is limited. We need to protect freedom and
provide security everywhere.

Minister, the First World economy of this country didn’t grow under heavy
regulation, it grew under deregulation. The old Transvaal was cowboy
country and almost anything went. So the same is true about other
economies. We can’t now stifle the Second World at birth with
overregulation. [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the African small businessmen selling or
producing mala-mohodu and tjontjobina farming were excited when Ntsika
Enterprise Promotion Agency was formed during the promulgation of the
National Small Business Act in 1996. They thought things were going to
change for the best. The changing of names alone does not solve our root
problems in small business. Local business centres supported by both Ntsika
and Khula did not bring about a change of fortune to small business.

Four years ago a local business service centre in Botshabelo, Free State,
changed its name to Botshabelo Entrepreneurial Development Centre. Both the
Free State and Flemish government, including Shell Petroleum, supported the
project. Equipment for panel beating and spray-painting, wheel alignment
and balancing worth R1,5 million was purchased. Today, it lies unused. The
Central University of Technology in the Free State was roped in later, but
with no success. [Time expired.] Otherwise, we support this Bill.

Mr S J MAJA: Chairperson and hon members, today we are introducing the
National Small Business Amendment Bill. The Minister of Trade and Industry,
the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, and the
hon Khunou have already indicated the aims of the Bill, that it is meant to
try and improve the structures of service delivery to our people,
especially in the previously disadvantaged areas.

We recognise the fact that Ntsika has not delivered to the maximum
requirements. The Bill therefore repeals the provision pertaining to Ntsika
Enterprise Promotion Agency, and provides for the establishment of the
Small Enterprise Development Agency. It also makes provision for the
incorporation of Ntsika and Namac.

Modulasetulo, ANC e re bophelo bjo bo kaone mo batho ba dulago gona. Ntsika
e be e sa kgone go fihlelela batho ba rena gabotse fase, ka kudu
makeišeneng a rena a bathobaso le dinagamagaeng. Go a tsebagala gore mo go
dulago batho ba ga bo rena, bophelo bjo bo kaone ga bo a hlwa bo ba
fihlelela gabotse, kage seemo sa gona se sa hlwa se re kgotsofatša. Mmušo
wa peleng wa kgatelelo, o hlokišitše mafelo a re bolelago ka ona gore
ditirelo di be gona, le gore bophelo bjo bo kaone bo be gona. Meetse,
mehlagase, thuto ye kaone, kabelo ya mengwako, le tša boitšhidillo le tše
dingwe tše re di tsebago, ga sa hlwe di enela ka mokgwa wa tshwanelo.

Seo o bego o se tseba ka kudu, e be e le gore ba ikemišeditše fela go ka
šala bao ba rego bona ke balwela-tokologo morago. Ge re dutše re kitimišana
re ngangišana le bona, ba butše nthoba ka mo bosenyi ke bjo bogolo. Ke bona
ba re baketšego mathata, ke bona ba baketšego mafelo a mathata, kage ba be
ba sa a hlokomele.

Dikgwebopotlana tšeo di lego gona mo makeišeneng a go se hlokomelwe le
dinagamagae tšeo e lego gore ga ba ka ba di šetša, ge rakgwebopotlana a
nyaka go šomiša thekenolotši ya sejwalejwale, kage mohlagase o se gona, o
tlo šitwa. Dithekenolotši tša bjale dikolong tša rena moo bana ba rena ba
swanetšego ke go ka di šomiša, le gona ba šitwa gore ba ka di šomiša.

Bao ba boletšego pele gaka magagešo ba laeditše gore maikemišetšo magolo a
go phetlolla Molawana wo le go o fetola, ke gore ditirelo di kgone go fihla
ga bonolo setšhabeng. Ntsika le Namec di tlile ka rena, ra bona gore ga di
fihlelele batho ka mokgwa woo re nyakago ka gona, kege rena gape re bowa,
re phetlolla gore di kopane di kgone go direla batho tše ba di nyakago.

Kage ba tla be ba fihlelela metse ya magaeng ga bonolo, le mafelo ao e lego
kgale a gateletšwe, bao ba nyakago go dira dikgwebo ba tla holega le kgwebo
tšeo di bego di goga ka sefega, di tla holega. Ba tla ruta batho ba gore
naa kgwebo e dira bjang, e sepedišiwa bjang, pele ba ka kgona go ba adima
mašeleng a gore ba itirele dikgwebo. Digole, baswa, basadi le ba bangwe, ba
tla holega ka temana ye. Le bawo ba rekišago ditseleng le mekgotheng, le ba
bangwe gape bao ba bapatšago mebele ba gwebago ka yona, le bona ba tla
holega ba tlogela go ka gweba ka mebele, ba hwetša tše bonolo tšeo e lego
gore ba tla itirela dikgwebo tša bona.

Mmušo wa ANC o išitše ditirelo tše dintši tše kgolo setšhabeng ka mengwaga
ye lesome, go feta ka mokgwa wo mmušo wo wa go feta o ileng wa di iša ka
gona makgolo a mararo a mengwaga, ba šita ke go phetha ditirelo tše di kago
go tlala seatla. Ge mmušo wa ANC o iša ditirelo metseng, mekgatlo ya rena
ya kganetšo yeo e lego ka letsogong le, ... [Nako e fedile.] Ke a leboga
ANC e thekga Molawana wo. (Translation of Pedi paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the ANC wants a better life for our people where they stay.
Ntsika was unable to reach our people properly, especially in the townships
and rural areas. It is well known that where our people reside, a better
life has not yet reached them, as the situation is not yet satisfactory.
The previous oppressive government denied a better life and services to
people in these places that we are talking about. Water, electricity,
better education, housing distribution, gymnastic equipment and other
things that we know, are not yet there.

What the previous government knew well was to let those who were freedom
fighters suffer. While we are running after them and arguing with them
there is a big hole on the other side and crime is worsening. They are the
ones who caused problems for us; they are the ones who caused problems for
these places, as they were careless.

Small businesses that are there in the townships and rural areas are being
ignored, and when the business owner wants to use modern technology, he or
she will fail, as there is no electricity. In our schools, where our
children are supposed to use this modern technology, they are failing to
use it as there is no electricity.

Those who spoke before me, my people, have shown that the main aim of
changing this Bill is for services to reach people easily. Ntsika and Namec
were formed by us, and we have realised they do not reach the people as
much as we want them to, and so we have come back again and changed this so
that they can come together, and so that they can serve the people.

As they will be reaching rural areas easily, and other places that have
been oppressed for too long, those who want to do business will benefit and
the businesses that were struggling will benefit. They will teach these
people how to run a business before they lend them money to start their own
business. Disabled people, the youth, women and other people will benefit
through this. And street vendors and others that are advertising their
bodies, prostitutes, will benefit and stop prostitution, and find easier
things to start their own businesses with.

The ANC-led government has brought a huge amount of services to the nation
in a decade, more than the previous government did in three hundred years;
they only fail to deliver just a few services. When the ANC government
brings services to communities, our opposition parties, on the other hand
... [Time expired.] Thank you; the ANC supports the Bill.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you very much, Chair. I would
like to thank all the members for participating in the debate, and for
their support of the Bill.

There are just a few issues that I think it is important to respond to. The
hon Nkem-Abonta, I do not know if he is still here, makes the assertion
that the Bill has a centralist flavour. I want to remind him of an issue I
raised in the NCOP earlier this year, during the Budget Vote debate, where
I said that we have seen the proliferation of a lot of investment promotion
agencies across the three spheres of government.

I asked the question then: Where do investors who want to invest, let us
say in Coega, go? Do they go to the Department of Trade and Industry, the
Coega Development Corporation, or the Eastern Cape department of economic
affairs? The point was raised that we need to streamline the way in which
we deliver those kinds of services.

This Bill also makes reference to the need for us to deliver services in an
integrated way. It speaks more to the way in which we must function, rather
than taking away the powers that are constitutionally assigned to local
authorities. It is important to understand that distinction. This body,
Seda, is a national board that we are establishing, but it is going to be
highly decentralised in the way that it is going to function, because the
idea is that we must create access points for our people in a whole range
of localities.

This entity is going to function through a network of NGOs and other
service providers. So to create an impression that this is some structure
that will sit in Pretoria, and that people will have to go to Pretoria in
order to get information about and support for small enterprises is really
not what is intended in the Bill.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS – HEARINGS
                    ON ADVERTISING AND MARKETING INDUSTRY

Ms M SMUTS: Chairperson, this exercise was started three years ago by the
previous chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Communications, because
there was some evidence to show that advertising spend was not reaching
audiences with all of the right income and other credentials, when those
audiences were seen as black. Media planners therefore simply did not know
them and they didn’t receive the ad spend that they ought to have done. In
other words, the market mechanism on the face of it was not operating as it
should have.

A lot of work and time has gone into considering all the relevant factors
in the marketing and advertising value chain of industries. There have been
benefits from this process, interestingly especially in respect of
government’s role as an advertiser. At the start of this process government
tended to use traditional media instead of always reaching the right
audiences. It has also been discovered that the way that government
departments handle advertising tenders tends to impact negatively on small
emerging black companies.

So, there have been benefits and we certainly do not object, as is proposed
in the report, if government reports annually to us on transformative
practices. But it is time to leave the private sector industries alone, so
that they can go and help grow the economy, which is what they are there
for and we are not really strictly here to exercise oversight over them.

I must say that there are signs of real transformation fatigue setting in.
The advertising industry has put a scorecard in place and they say that it
is quite frankly not the time to wait for yet another broader scorecard.
The marketers are the ones who are blamed for not co-operating, but it is
their money to advertise their products that we are talking about for which
they want to see returns, and quite rightly so. And in addition they form
part of bigger organisations, which also have other obligations under the
finance charter and the ICT charter and so forth.

It seems to me there just isn’t enough time and energy to go around for all
the transformation obligations as well as to make the economy grow. There
are also simultaneously signs that some participants in this process are,
in my view, beginning to think that they can interfere in the free
operation of the market mechanism, which was not what we set out to do, to
achieve their own ends - social ends, economic ends, political ends - and
that will not do.

When I asked the GCIS CEO, Mr Joel Netshitendzhe, what he thought of the
Department of Communications’ commissioned research that measured ad spend
against audience colour, I was very relieved when he said that content
determines target. Then your advertising is efficacious and it reaches the
target market. Let’s all agree that that is the way it should be and I
suggest that we now leave the industries to get on with their work and to
help grow this economy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson and colleagues, the IFP is fully committed to
social and economic transformation throughout South Africa. The IFP, along
with all citizens who have a conscience and a sense of social justice,
supports policies and programmes that will constructively address the
imbalances and the socio-economic distortions caused by apartheid.

The IFP also, as one of its founding principles, supports free enterprise.
We believe that it is only an enterprise-driven economy that can
fundamentally assist in helping us to achieve the transformation we all
seek.

So it is in this context that the IFP approaches the content and the
context of this report relating to the advertising and marketing
industries. The IFP is sensitive to the complexity of these industries and
we acknowledge and applaud the attempts made to date to right the obvious
wrongs and to attend to the training and representation required within
their ranks. And we applaud the outstanding creative talent these
industries reflect throughout what is called their value chain.

We therefore can only hope that the very individual creativity which drives
these industries can be applied by its practitioners to creatively ensure
growth and development, while being sensitive to the obvious transformation
we all - industry members included - wish to see emerging sooner rather
than later. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Chairperson and hon members, the ID is a party that is
committed to transformation bridging the divides that were created because
of the legacy of apartheid and realising the full potential of this
country. As such we are fully in support of any initiative that is geared
towards realising these ideals, and in particular the initiatives of the
transformation of the marketing and advertising industry.

The ID encourages organisations, institutions, and in this case, sectors of
our community to deal with the problem directly and transform by
themselves. Government has an active and monitoring role to play in these
processes. They should encourage through their position of advantage of
ability to spend large amounts of money on ad placement.

In addition, where industry fails to self-regulate and transform,
government has a responsibility to become more actively involved, but only
after - and I stress only after - the industry has been given a chance to
change. One area of concern for the ID in this current transformation
process is the lack of attention and almost a complete failure to deal with
women and people with disabilities. I thank you.

Mr M K LEKGORO: Thank you, Chair. The people of South Africa have ushered
in a new political order. In 1994 they gave government a resounding mandate
that their lives in all spheres of endeavour must change for the better. In
accepting the mandate we had at the outset acknowledged that through their
popular vote we had only achieved political freedom.

The dawn of that freedom marked the beginning of a long walk to redoing the
economic landscape of the country. Issues of equal salary for equal work,
black personnel in management, executive positions and issues of ownership
came to the fore. That is the reason the transformation of all industries
is a topical issue in our society today.

In locating today’s discussion within that ongoing mandate from our people,
the question before us is: Has the marketing and advertising industry
transformed in line with our national mandate? The intention of the
committee, in bringing this matter to the House, is to put this industry in
the public spotlight so that the electorate can be our judges as we
continue to seek transformation in this industry.

This is an industry that goes to the core of the values of our society.
What they produce and put out to the public tells us who we are. It tells
us how we are socialised as a people. In short, it depicts our norms and
values. The world sees us through what this industry depicts. So, connected
to the transformation of this industry is the desire that it must tell a
true South African story, as opposed to an American or a European story
imposed as if it’s our own.

Our portfolio committee has since 2001, through a response to the
complaints about patterns of advertising spending, sought to interact with
the industry by urging it that, in light of the new dispensation, it cannot
be business as usual in our country. We did so well aware that there are no
statutory instruments at our disposal to impose any change in this
industry.

However, we honestly held the opinion that South Africans in all their
endeavours from across all racial lines would in all probability embrace
change. It was in that spirit that we have over the years engaged with the
industry.

We are comforted by the fact that at least on the theoretical level members
of the industry, through their representatives, express their appreciation
that in order to meet the expectations of consumers in the modern-day South
Africa, the industry has to transform. What still remains to be seen is the
actual act of the industry transforming.

Some amongst us have warned that we are being overoptimistic in imagining
that an industry rooted in the past and driven by profits can willingly
transform itself. We take that caution very seriously, and hope that for
the sake of us all we achieve the desired results.

We are able to report that the industry, since our interaction, has put
together a values statement embodying the values and goals of
transformation; that a monitoring and steering committee, with
representatives from the industry bodies across the advertising and
marketing value chain, including both the public and the private sector,
was established to lead the transformation process; and that a process has
been initiated towards the establishment of an industry-wide broad-based
black economic empowerment scorecard that will provide a common framework
for the whole of the value chain.

Further, there has been an improvement in the relation between the pattern
of expenditure and the composition of media audiences, more so in the case
of government advertising. The top 10 advertising agencies have set
remarkable benchmarks for black economic empowerment, with some having
upped the stakes to 51% and more. Sadly, this impressive movement is
lacking in the creative area and media planning, for example.

As much as we can attest to movement from one form to the other, on behalf
of the committee we wish to submit that the industry could do more and
better. Coming from different political persuasions in this House, we might
not agree on what transformation is, the pace at which it should happen and
how far we could stretch it.

Classical liberals, as they are known in contemporary politics - and who,
by the way, lest we forget, in the terminology of our movement are referred
to as reactionaries - will continue to say that we must leave these
processes to the market. We must simply treat their concerns as immaterial.
The material issue is that there are people, and for that matter the
majority of the people, who mandated us to change their lives for the
better.

Thus we wish to take this opportunity to urge the industry to do everything
in its power to forge ahead and take strides in this transformation
process. And finally we wish to serve notice that we have no intention of
burdening our next generations with the inequalities of this industry. This
transformation must happen and be achieved in our lifetime. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

                         Report accordingly adopted.

    PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTIONAL DEMOCRACY AGAINST TERRORIST AND RELATED
                               ACTIVITIES BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson and colleagues, the hon
members of this House, the short title of this Bill speaks about the
protection of our constitutional democracy. It is therefore no surprise
that the drafting processes, which led to the product that is before the
House for consideration, reflect exactly those values as enshrined in the
Constitution.

Even the consideration of the Bill last week by the NCOP in Empangeni in
KwaZulu-Natal, as part of the project to bring Parliament to the people,
was a most fitting step towards the conclusion of the constitutional
processes. I must say that it was the most vibrant experience to address
the House in KZN, with so many people from the province itself in the
gallery.

Today, therefore, we can truly say that with the consultation on and
drafting of the Bill, we let the people speak. But more than that, we can
truly say that government had listened to the people.

The nature and the topic of this Bill, viewed against the backdrop of our
country’s history, was enough reason to be cautious and to expect some form
of vigilance from our people on what should be contained in the Bill. How
can we forget that our own struggle for the liberation of our people was
referred to as terrorism?

Clearly this Bill is expected to reflect in all respects the values and
principles in our nascent democracy, whilst at the same time to provide the
necessary tools for law enforcement to protect those very democratic values
and principles.

When we embarked on a process to draft counterterrorism legislation for the
Republic we knew that it would not be and easy process, in view of the
history of security legislation under the apartheid regime that
institutionalised third-degree interrogation, indefinite detention without
trial, the banning of organisations, restrictions on the media, banning of
persons and severe restrictions on gatherings and demonstrations; and of
course you will remember that even funerals fell under that category.

That is therefore the reason that the Bill followed the elaborate
consultation processes through the South African Law Reform Commission,
elaborate public hearings and every other step in the parliamentary
process. The concerns raised regarding the Bill ranged from objections
against its name - as you remember it was initially referred to as The Anti-
Terrorism Bill - to some political and religious concerns. The labour
federation Cosatu was worried the Bill might interfere with the exercising
of their constitutional rights related to industrial action. There were
also concerns from the media that the Bill might suppress their freedom.

We have listened to each and every voice and every possible step was taken
to address every legitimate and reasonable concern. This was our attitude,
not only in the processes and Parliament. We also engaged people outside of
those processes to give as many as possible role-players an opportunity to
discuss whatever concerns they had.

During the South African Law Reform Commission processes, the number and
variety of persons and institutions commenting on the discussion paper and
draft Bill reflected the wide interest on the matter. Responses to the
discussion paper of the Law Commission were received from the judiciary,
the magistracy, side-bar societies, the National Prosecuting Authority,
attorneys, advocates, human rights organisations, government departments,
religious organisations and other organisations, and from no less than 62
individuals.

Not only respondents who were interested in doing so, but numerous others
were allowed - during the elaborate public hearings of the Portfolio
Committee for Safety and Security, assisted by the Joint Standing Committee
on Intelligence, the finance committee, the foreign affairs committee and
the justice and constitution affairs committee - to air their views and
concerns with the widest possible media coverage. Some persons and
institutions even had several bites at the cherry by appearing before the
committee, wearing different hats and representing different institutions
or organisations.

Also in the NCOP the utmost leniency was evident during deliberations, by
again listening to practical concerns voiced even at a very late stage. Let
it be to our credit that we have done everything humanly possible to meet
all reasonable concerns regarding the Bill.

I wish to thank members of this House again for the valuable role they
played in finalising the text of the Bill. I am convinced that we have
obtained the best possible version of the Bill, enabling the Republic to
comply with our international and national obligations in respect of
combating terrorism.

I also wish to thank the Office of the Leader of Government Business, the
Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, the Portfolio
Committee on Safety and Security and this House for ensuring that this Bill
is being finalised during the present session of Parliament.

I move that the House approves the report of the Portfolio Committee on
Safety and Security and adopt the Protection of Constitutional Democracy
against Terrorist and Related Activities Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Bill, as amended by the Committee on Safety and Security, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.





                   DRAFT NOTICE FOR DECLARATION OF AMNESTY


                   (Consideration of Request for Approval)

There was no debate.


Draft Notice for Declaration of Amnesty approved.




    DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE DETERMINING THE RATE AT WHICH SALARIES ARE
   PAYABLE TO CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES ANNUALLY, WITH EFFECT
                              FROM 1 APRIL 2004

                   Consideration of Request for Approval)

There was no debate.

Draft notice and schedule determining the rate at which salaries are
payable to Constitutional Court judges and judges annually with effect from
1 April 2004 approved.

    DRAFT NOTICE AND SCHEDULE DETERMINING THE RATE AT WHICH SALARIES ARE
        PAYABLE TO MAGISTATES ANNUALLY, WITH EFFECT FROM 1 APRIL 2004

                   (Consideration of Request for Approval)

There was no debate.

Draft notice and schedule determining the rate at which salaries are
payable to magistrates annually with effect from 1 April 2004 approved.


            ALLEGATIONS OF NONDISCLOSURE BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT

     (Consideration of Report of Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’
                                 Interests)

Mr L T LANDERS: Chairperson, the content of our report speaks for itself.
Therefore, I will not refer to it, except to allude to it in the statement
I am about to make. The Code of Conduct for members of Parliament allows
MPs to hold financial interests, but also requires that they disclose these
interests. This allows members to pursue their financial interests in an
open and transparent manner.

The report before this House indicates that many of the
nondisclosures by members were as a result of misunderstanding the Code of
Conduct, particularly with regard to the disclosure of dormant companies.
We do want to stress that in none of the cases dealt with by the committee
was there any evidence or implication of corruption or conflict of
interests on the part of the members concerned. Indeed, we reiterate what
is contained in the conclusions of our report, namely that no member
withheld any information from the committee or deliberately tried to
mislead it.

The reprimands and sanctions meted out to members are in accordance with
the Joint Rules of Parliament. This allows Parliament to enforce its own
rules, and further it views the nondisclosure by members in a serious
light. Parliament will always ensure that when there is a breach of the
Code, it invokes the penalties laid down in our Rules and applies them
consistently without fear or favour.

However, there is a need continuously and effectively to raise awareness
amongst MPs about the requirements of the Code, the importance of
disclosure and the updating of the register, as well as the serious
consequences for failing to do so.

Members of Parliament are elected public representatives, and cannot be
seen to be in violation of the Rules of Parliament. Therefore, the
committee must be seen to be acting to ensure compliance, and has
accordingly issued these sanctions to demonstrate its serious intent to
enforce our Code.

At this point, as we always do, we humbly request this House to adopt our
report, and we ask that the findings and recommendations contained therein
be implemented speedily. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, let me start by
questioning the procedure. I thought that the affected members would be
given an opportunity to say something - if you find it correct, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): They will be given an opportunity
after the adoption.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I then move for the adoption
of the Report.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Mr Chairperson, the DA agrees with the convictions of the
hon Mr M T Goniwe, Chief Whip of the ANC, the hon Mrs N B Gxowa, Deputy
Minister N E Hangana, Deputy Minister R L Padayachie, Mr N A Ramathlodi and
Deputy Minister L M Xingwana for failing to declare their directorships in
companies following reports in the Mail and Guardian. Whilst agreeing with
the conclusion reached by the committee in clearing Deputy Minister D A
Hanekom, the hon Adv S P Holomisa and Deputy Minister S Shabangu of all
charges, the DA strongly disagrees with the decisions to exonerate Ms J L
Kgoali, Chairperson of the NCOP, Mrs M L Ngwenya and Ms M A A Njobe on
similar charges.

Ms Kgoali’s failure to declare a directorship in respect of All Pay, a
separate company from Sediba sa Basadi, ought to have led to a conviction
for failing to declare a directorship in All Pay. She declared a
directorship in Sediba sa Basadi, an empowerment partner of All Pay, but
failed to do so in respect of All Pay.

The DA is of the view that her failure to have done so renders her unfit to
continue to occupy the important and prominent position of Chairperson of
the NCOP. [Interjections.] In the instance of Mr M Goniwe, the Chief Whip
of the ANC... Interjections.]

Mr M DIKO: Chairperson, on a point of order: The Mail and Guardian
apologised to Mr B Holomisa for the error that it made when it published
that article. The member mentioned him when he read the list of names.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Sir, that is not a point of order.
It’s a response to a point. So, please proceed, sir.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chair, in the instance of Mr Goniwe, the Chief Whip of the
ANC, the fine of R1 000 each for two breaches of the Code of Conduct for
failing to declare his directorships in two dormant companies is totally
inadequate, considering his position. He should set an example as Chief
Whip, and a heavier sentence ought therefore to have been imposed by the
committee.

The imposition of a penalty of R2 000 for his failure to declare his
directorships in two companies is tantamount to condoning such failure. The
example set for other members who are tempted to conceal their assets is
appalling. They will know that the penalty for failure, even a wilful
failure, which is not relevant here, is so slight that dishonesty pays.

The DA therefore calls upon Parliament to impose a heavier sentence on the
Chief Whip, Mr Goniwe, as well as overturning the finding of not guilty
relating to Ms Kgoali to one of having contravened the Code of Conduct by
failing to declare her directorship in All Pay. Her immediate removal as
Chairperson of the NCOP should then follow. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC of Azania carefully went through the
report. We approved the findings of the committee and hope members will
adhere strictly to Parliament’s rule regarding members’ ethics and members’
interests. The problem we are faced with in our country is to merge African
and Western attitudes of dealing with issues.

In the African way most things are done by way of a gentlemen’s agreement,
whilst in the Western way it is by way of written contracts and binding
rules. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP acknowledges that in many instances
members have been unclear in terms of their duty to disclose businesses
that are defunct or not operational. In some instances this is due to the
fact that a note, which refers specifically to dormant companies, is not
found in the Code of Conduct, but on a sheet of paper, which is separate to
the Rules booklet.

We do, however, believe that it is important to set an example whereby
members of Parliament are expected to uphold their own Rules. Of course
there is a difference between technical offences and genuine dishonesty,
corruption and undue influence being exerted, and this distinction must be
drawn.

The ACDP supports efforts by the Ethics Committee to treat these issues
seriously and to apply penalties, which will help enforce a culture of
attention to detail when it comes to ethical conduct of MPs. Thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, ignorance of the law or ignorance of a rule is
no excuse. Members must read instructions. Note 3 and its explanatory note
states that all directorships and partnerships must be disclosed, including
those in dormant companies.

Members are also advised personally to ensure that the information held by
the Registrar of Companies is correct. That places a responsibility on
members of Parliament. They must accept responsibility for their business
interests. They must also declare such interests before the cut-off date.
They should not wait for a media report to raise a company, and only then
run and declare the company. The cut-off date sometimes gets extended for
months to allow members to comply.

For the committee to say that because a company is dormant, therefore it is
not a serious offence, really contradicts our own Code, and we should be
looking more seriously at this. Breach of the Code of Conduct really means
that you did not declare your dormant company or business interests before
the cut-off date. That is the breach, because it is not in the register. We
can’t begin to qualify what is a breach, because then we are going to run
into serious problems.

Once again, the ID requests Parliament to come up with legislation that can
give effect to the Code of Conduct. Otherwise the way we are dealing with
the Code of Conduct now makes a mockery of the Code of Ethics, and
certainly the ID will not accept this report. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr D GUMEDE: Chairperson, allow me to put this report into context. We see
dormant companies as companies that have never operated at all. We do not
mean that these companies have been temporarily inactive, but they have
never operated at all. They are just registered and have listed directors.


So, when we talk about dormant companies, we are talking about these cases.
That is the first point. The second point is that we found no conflict of
interest between the positions the accused held and the type of interests
that it was alleged they possessed.

Thirdly, some organisations mentioned, like Malibongwe, are not for profit.
Instead, the accused members pay their own money to assist them to operate.
These interests are not financial, and the Code is clear on this, namely
that if the purpose of the organisation is to assist communities to be
members of a club and so forth, where the member does not derive any
financial interest, it is out of the ambit of this Code.

Lastly, the Code of Conduct is written in formal English. The Constitution
acknowledges, and I think there is a reason for it, 11 official languages.
This Code of Conduct is only in English. Firstly, we would plead with
Parliament to give the necessary support to all the members in the line of
clarifying and simplifying the Code. Secondly, members should be assisted
with access to the Internet and be given information that is readily
available on the Internet. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M T MASUTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order: During the course of
these deliberations hon Schmidt made a statement to the effect that an
official of this Parliament, Ms Kgoali, is unfit to hold the office which
she currently holds. I am of the opinion that this is in violation of Rule
66, in terms of which statements such as those cannot be made without a
substantive motion. We would like him to withdraw those comments.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, may I address you on that
point of order. The very matter that we are discussing and considering at
the moment is Ms Kgoali’s conduct, and an expression of opinion like that
is perfectly in order. This House is being asked to impose a penalty on Ms
Kgoali, and on that basis to suggest that you are not allowed to discuss
the matter is just nonsense, with respect.

THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P Nhleko): Gentlemen, could I ask you to take
your seats. Firstly, I think we need to correct this. The matter under
discussion is not the conduct of Ms Kgoali. We are discussing a report from
the committee. I think we have to be very clear on that specific question.

The second one is that we would also need to be given an opportunity from
our end to study the record in terms of what exactly were the utterances
and expressions of the hon member Schmidt. Thereafter I think we would be
in a position to give a ruling to this House.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

AYES-202: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E;
Baloyi, M R; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J;
Bhengu, P; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Cachalia, I M; Chalmers, J;
Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cwele, S C;
De Lange, J H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M;
Direko, I W; Dlali, D M; Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gaum, A H; Gerber, P A;
Gillwald, C E; Godi, N T; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling,
C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hanekom, D A; Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C
B; Hogan, B A; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B;
Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kholwane, S E;
Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota,
Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T;
Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A
N; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madumise, M M;
Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahote,
S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloyi, P D N;
Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S; Mars, I; Martins, B A D;
Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B
L; Masithela, N H; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M
H; Maunye, M M; Mbete, B; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli,
H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R;
Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D; Morobi, D M; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mpontshane, A
M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G;
Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, B T;
Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M V; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G;
Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, M
M; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N;
Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M
G; Phala, M J; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Schneemann, G D;
Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibande, M P;
Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sibuyana, M W; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S;
Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R;
Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Van den Heever, R P Z;
Van der Merwe, J H; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vundisa, S S; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E
T; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu, N E.



NOES-43: Batyi, F; Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S; Burgess, C V; Camerer, S M;
De Lille, P; Doman, W P; Dudley, C; Durr, K D S; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H
M; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Greyling, L W; Haasbroek, S F; Harding, A;
Jankielsohn, R; King, R J; Lee, T D; Masango, S J; Mfundisi, IS; Minnie, K
J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Ntuli, R S; Opperman,
S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Semple, J A; Smuts, M;
Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S
M; Wang, Y; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


ABSTAIN-7: Bici, J; Diko, M; Madikiza, G T; Mdaka, N M; Nkabinde, N C;
Sigcau, Sylvia N; Stephens, M.

Report accordingly adopted.


                         COMMENTS BY HON H C SCHMIDT


                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): Order! Hon members, during the
discussion of the report that we have just voted on and accordingly
adopted, a point of order was raised by hon Masutha with regard to the
comments made by the hon Schmidt.
I think we should be reminded that firstly, hon Kgoali is not a member of
this House; and secondly, that we have always been governed and directed by
a principle that says this House will not reflect on the conduct of members
in the other House. Therefore, any references by any member, and in this
specific case by the hon Schmidt, are comments that are inappropriate. I
therefore request the hon Schmidt to withdraw his remark.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, may I address you on this
point of order?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): Please proceed, hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: The House was busy considering a report
of the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests. The ethics
committee had been charged with investigating charges against members both
of this House and of the other House, including Ms Kgoali, who happens to
be the Chairperson of the NCOP. She was not being investigated in that
capacity though. The committee then had to decide whether her conduct
contravened the code of ethics or not. The majority of the members of the
committee concluded that she had not contravened the code. Those from this
side of the House believe that Ms Kgoali’s has conduct had contravened the
code and they think that because of her seniority, it is a very serious
matter. I submit to you that it is perfectly appropriate, if one believes
that, to say that she should not continue as chairperson of that House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): Order! Hon members, I have
accordingly given a ruling, but nevertheless for purposes of clarity on
this matter, I think, Mr Gibson, we shouldn’t confuse two things. The
structure referred to is a joint committee, and the House that is
considering this issue is the National Assembly, and not a joint session.
Therefore, the principle that says this House will not reflect upon the
conduct of other members serving in another House is therefore appropriate,
and that is the issue we are addressing. I just thought that maybe I would
want to clarify that very same issue, but a ruling has been given in that
regard: that it is not appropriate for this National Assembly to reflect
upon the conduct of hon members who serve in the National Council of
Provinces or the other House.

An additional point that I am being reminded of as well is that in any
event this very same report is for consideration and deliberation by the
very same House. Therefore, they will also accordingly look into it. Thank
you. Therefore, hon Schmidt, I ask you to withdraw your comment.
Adv H C SCHMIDT:  Mr Chairperson, I withdraw it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr N P NHLEKO): The report having been adopted we
will now afford an opportunity to the following affected hon members, the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party Mr Goniwe, Deputy Minister Hanekom, Deputy
Minister Xingwana and hon Mr Gumede to address the House.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr House Chairperson, I want to make
three points very quickly. Firstly, notwithstanding some reservations I may
have about the procedures, I want to say that I fully accept the judgement
by the committee and equally so express my full confidence in the
chairperson and the collective that is working in that committee and
express my sincerest regret for this oversight on my part. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, I would also
like to thank the committee for its work and for a job well done. I think
that it’s important for us just to reflect on one or two points, if I may
have the opportunity to do so.

Clearly, those members who were implicated in certain wrongdoings by the
Mail and Guardian article would feel pleased and relieved that those who
were exonerated by the committee feel pleased that their names were
cleared. But that isn’t really the issue: the issue is that the committee
did its work well and with integrity.

I think some of the lessons would be that, notwithstanding the comment that
people are innocent or rather that ignorance is no excuse in the eyes of
the law, we should recognise the fact that most of the people that were
brought in front of this committee were people who did not derive any
financial benefit and were in most cases genuinely not aware of what the
specific requirements were, although the onus is on us to find out what
exactly it is that we have to do. These are genuine cases of not
deliberately declining to reveal what is required of us.

I think the other lesson from this is that notwithstanding the fact that we
have rules, people will err. I think as members of this House the one thing
we should never do is to take a gleeful attitude when people err. Even if a
member of the DA or of the ID is guilty of wrongdoing, I should not say,
well gee, this is a good opportunity for me to knock that particular party
because the wrongdoing of one party reflects badly on everyone in this
House. So, I think we should all say that we don’t take any delight when
people are guilty of making errors or of wrongdoing. We say we want every
member of this House to be members that we associate with with pride.

I think some of the lessons we have leant are that rules are very important
as well as being clear guidelines. If we are going to minimise wrongdoing
and errors, systems need to be put in place that are as much as possible
easily understood, easily enforced and easily monitored. So, I think that
is one of the challenges to the House.

My last point is that the media need to reflect very carefully. I think the
Mail and Guardian in this case was guilty of making pronouncements and
allegations without doing its homework properly. I think it should reflect
on that. It is easy for us to be public representatives and to say we are
in the spotlight. Yes, of course, we are. But the media also have
responsibility and should exercise that responsibility much more carefully.
I think the Mail and Guardian should reflect very seriously on whether they
did justice to this country or not. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I also want to
declare that I accept the principle of transparency and accountability, but
firstly, I want to thank the committee for clearing me regarding the
allegations against Malibongwe.

I want to agree with the previous member that some of our journalists are
completely unprofessional and unethical. I personally responded to the Mail
and Guardian. I informed them that I had not been active in Malibongwe for
the last four years and that I had been a Deputy Minister for only four
months when they made this allegation. There was no way that I could have
allocated a mine to my so-called company, as I was not a Deputy Minister
last year.

I also want to declare that I am very proud to have been a member of
Malibongwe, a nonprofit organisation that serves women, particularly rural
and poor women. [Applause.] If I had the time I would have gone back and
worked for Malibongwe. I also want to say that I am very proud to have
worked with women veterans and leaders of the calibre of Makhosazana
Nnjobe, Mme Lydia and Adelaide Tambo, as well as Nadine Gordimer, as
directors of Malibongwe.

I want to stress that I responded to the Mail and Guardian, but because
some of our journalists are interested in only telling the world that all
MPs are corrupt and fraudulent I want to take this matter up with my
lawyers.

On the matter of City Cat or Lebone, I genuinely was not aware that I was a
director. Since its registration, I have never been invited to a single
meeting of this company. I don’t know where they are doing business, and if
they are doing business what kind of business. I’ve never received any
remuneration. I’ve never received any dividends; therefore I do accept what
the committee said.

I just want to raise a concern, namely that there are no proper procedures
for appeal regarding this committee’s decisions and I think Parliament must
take that into consideration. Thank you. [Applause.]

 PROTOCOL TO THE AFRICAN CHARTER ON HUMAN AND PEOPLE’S RIGHTS ON THE RIGHTS
                             OF WOMEN IN AFRICA

       (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Justice and
   Constitutional Development and Request for Approval in terms of Section
                         231(2) of the Constitution)

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson and hon members, the protocol before us is
unusual in many respects. Firstly, it is a human rights instrument that
applies at public international law level. This means that while it gives
rights to citizens, particularly women, it is only member states, by and
large, who are able to enforce it amongst each other.

Secondly, article 4(2)(j) of the protocol, while excluding the practice of
the death penalty against women who are pregnant and women who are nursing,
inadvertently allows the practice against other categories of women,
including minors. Clearly, our Constitutional Court has ruled against the
death penalty in our country, so this article finds no application in our
country. However, the Constitutional Court has expressed that the right to
life is sacrosanct and an inalienable right without which any other rights
cannot find expression.

It has also broadened the application of the State’s duty to safeguard the
rights of individuals beyond our borders. The existence of article 4(2)(j)
of the protocol, therefore, may be construed to be an inadvertent
sanctioning of the practice of the death penalty in other member states.
This may conflict with section 2 of our Constitution, which upholds its own
supremacy and invalidates all law and conduct inconsistent with it.

For Parliament to approve the protocol under the circumstances would have
been potentially illegal and we, therefore, proposed that the House
approves the protocol, subject to the reservations, as they are stated in
the ATC, in order to ensure that no adverse legal consequences can be
visited against Parliament and the executive pertaining to the ratification
of the protocol.

This, in itself, gave rise to a whole host of legal questions and debates
about whether Parliament has the inherent right to invoke such
reservations. The legal opinions ranged from no to yes and every hue
inbetween. I particularly appreciated the view of the hon Kader Asmal, who
argued that Parliament doesn’t have the inherent right, but where there is
executive concurrence the adoption by Parliament is entirely in order.

I label that particular kind of opinion as being certainly very wise and
very strategic, but also typically South African, in the sense that it’s a
ja-nee approach. However, I believe it is pragmatic, and I do believe that
sometimes we need to be pragmatic, particularly because the reservations we
proposed are essentially going to have the effect of being a communiqué to
the executive by Parliament to affect reservations, failing which, of
course, Parliament’s concurrence will not have been achieved.

Together with this reservation, the committee adopted the reservations
orally proposed by the South African negotiating teams during the
construction of the protocol. These relate essentially to the customary
marriages, where our country protects women whose marriages are not reduced
to written certificates. Secondly, our negotiating teams endorsed a
reservation against article 6(h) of the protocol, which makes the inherent
right to citizenship and nationality of children subject to national
security interests.

We have also proposed to the executives that two interpretive declarations
be made: firstly, against the definition of discrimination against women
which, in many respects, differs from our own interpretation of the
equality clause. Our courts have developed the concept of unfair
discrimination in order to promote full societal equality, so that even
previously disadvantaged individuals are preferred in certain
circumstances.

Secondly, because of our inherent system of limitations, another
interpretive declaration is made to the effect that the mere existence of
these limitations in our Constitution should not be interpreted to be a
less-favourable-rights regime. In fact, that is precisely the unusual
nature of this protocol. By affecting these reservations, Parliament does
not detract from the promotion of a rights jurisprudence on our continent,
but exactly the opposite is true; we actually enhance such a development on
our continent. We point out that there is a mutually complimentary
relationship that exists between our jurisprudence and that which is
beginning to develop on our continent.

This document is not a trailblazer in our country, but its worth is found
in the fact that it exists, and that it exists in Africa; that for the
first time in some cultures completely opposed to the very notion of the
equality of genders, women are seen to be deserving of special protection
and special status.

We should, instead of decrying its legal shortcomings, praise this
initiative of African countries and encourage the progressive realisation
of more and more rights as we enter the twenty-first century. I commend
this protocol to the House and I thank you for your time, hon members.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

The SPEAKER: Are there any objections to the adoption of the report of the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development on the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa?

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, we did not raise an objection, but we have
asked for an opportunity to declare our vote.


Declarations of vote:


Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The ACDP fully recognises the
crucial role women play in the preservation of our continent’s values based
on the principles of equality, peace, freedom, dignity, justice and
democracy. We are also aware that despite the ratification of the African
Charter and other international human rights instruments by the majority of
African nations, women and girls in Africa still continue to be victims of
discrimination and harmful practices.

Therefore, whilst the ACDP does not agree with all aspects of the portfolio
committee’s report, we do support the request for approval by Parliament of
the protocol in view of these many positive provisions contained therein.
In this regard, we wish to specifically record our reservation to article
14 thereof. Article 14, whilst containing laudable provisions relating to
health, authorises abortion, albeit in certain limited circumstance and not
on demand. [Interjections.] Our position on capital punishment is well
known and therefore we do not support the committee’s comments that are
contrary to our party’s position. Notwithstanding the above, the ACDP is
prepared to support the request for approval of the protocol. I thank you.

The SPEAKER: Are there any other declarations?

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I apologise for not having had the
opportunity to prepare, because I was unaware that I would have the
opportunity to speak. I want to support what the Chair has said, but also
to note that this protocol is a very controversial measure in many ways. We
support the fact that the reservations had been appealed for and should be
noted, because I think it would be highly improper for our Parliament to
support the protocol without reservations. Thank you.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chair, I would like to give a piece of advice, and the
advice is that it is important for members of Parliament to read. After
reading, it is key for them to ask questions and, after asking questions,
it is very important for them to listen when they are answered.

It is unethical for the ACDP to want to parachute the question of abortion
into this debate. Yesterday, when we spoke in this Chamber, we were talking
about the choice of termination. The ACDP as members of the committee - we
would have assumed as members of the ANC ...

Mr L M GREEN: On a point of order, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member.

Mr L M GREEN: A ruling was made yesterday by the presiding officer on
exactly this matter. It was dealt with, and I think the member is raising
the same issue in terms of which our member was allowed to use the words
preferred by our member, and that was the ruling of the Chair. This member
is now going against that ruling.

The SPEAKER: I am not familiar with the point of order you are talking
about and the words you are referring to, but my understanding is that this
hon member is really relating his words in respect of what you were saying.

Mr L M GREEM: Yes, but let me just bring to your attention that the word
“abortion” is in the protocol.

The SPEAKER: No, that’s fine. I don’t think the word was the issue. I
thought that what he was saying, the point he was raising, was about
bringing that particular debate into this discussion on this report, and
not so much the word “abortion” as such. I think, hon member, proceed with
your declaration of vote.

Mr P D N MALOYI: Chair, listening is a skill. It is now becoming an art, so
it is important for hon members to listen. What we are saying is that, as
the ANC, we support this protocol as outlined by the chairperson. As I was
saying earlier, let us not parachute other issues into this particular
protocol, because we spoke a lot yesterday about the choice of termination
of pregnancy, and let us not open that particular debate.

So, as the ANC we support the protocol and we request all members of
Parliament, irrespective of their political affiliations, to read, to ask
questions and to listen. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Report adopted.

Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa approved with reservations contained in the committee’s
report as adopted.

The SPEAKER: Now, hon members, that brings us to the last item on the Order
Paper, which is the Farewell Speeches, our favourite item on any Order
Paper in any year.




                              FAREWELL SPEECHES


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Speaker. It is my privilege to
say some words of thanks and farewell on behalf of the DA.

Firstly, I express my grateful thanks to the parliamentary staff at all
levels for the service that we have received this year. There are
deficiencies and shortcomings, but most of the people with whom I come into
contact with are kind, pleasant and efficient. I want, particularly, to
thank the service officers, the security people and the catering staff for
their good service this year.

This year, 2004, has been a tumultuous and tough year for people in and
around Parliament. Those of us who are old politicians had a torrid and
lengthy election campaign before we got back. Those of us who are here for
the first time have had to learn a great deal and adapt to many new ideas
and experiences in a short time. I thank, in particular, the members of the
DA team for their positive contribution at all times in this House to
nation-building and to strengthening democracy.

The miracle of this session is that the ANC has managed to get through a
whole session without having to change their Chief Whip. I am working on
the hon Mr Goniwe, because people are starting to blame me for the fact
that there is a rapid turnover and burnout among ANC Chief Whips.
[Laughter.] They have had six, and I am still here, so I am going to keep
him. I am going to keep him at least until next year. I believe they were
giving out trophies to the ex-Chief Whips. They should have given me six at
the same time as they gave them, with what I’ve had to put up with from
them. [Laughter.]

Having said all of those nice things, I now want to be a bit more serious,
and say that the most serious aspect of Parliament this year has been the
whole Travelgate scandal, which has hung over both Houses and all MPs.
According to the Speaker the beginnings of the travel voucher scandal came
to light almost two years ago. Chief Whips were told by the Speaker early
in August that the Scorpions were ready to arrest 23 MPs, but would hold
off until 18 August, pending interviews. Some ANC MPs refused to go and the
exact status of those interviews is no longer clear. What is clear is that
three months have gone by and not a single member of Parliament has been
arrested.

To many others and me it’s not acceptable that the matter has dragged on in
this way. There is a cloud hanging over every MP, those who are honest, as
well as those who are alleged to have committed criminal offences. I am not
a crook and I do not enjoy having members of the public assume that all MPs
are thieves, because they are not.

What concerns me even more than the 23 who have not been charged, is the 70
others who are allegedly implicated in the Bathong Travel affair. I do not
understand why Bathong Travel has not been liquidated. I want to state
clearly that I have received information to the effect that the liquidation
will not proceed, because certain people are determined that there will be
no liquidation enquiry and no interrogation of the guilty.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Yes, hon member, what is your point of
order?

Mr M S MANIE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The item is quite
clear in that we are having farewell speeches. The member is raising
substantive matters that are totally unrelated to this issue. I wish you to
bring him to order please. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, that is actually true. However, I will allow you
to finish your speech. I do want to respond to some aspects of what you are
saying.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Speaker. This means that if no
liquidation takes place, there will be no interrogation of the guilty and
it means that nobody is going to be able to testify under oath and, unless
we are very careful, nobody will pay for their misdeeds.

It is also strongly rumoured that Parliament is trying to arrange for a
payment of R400 000 in full settlement of the Bathong debt and that MPs
will then merely have to refund Parliament.

There are allegations that the police are not co-operating with the
Scorpions. There are rumours that Parliament itself is not being very co-
operative. There are certain allegations that people have been charged to
handle the matter to minimise the embarrassment.

However unpleasant it might be to raise words like this during a farewell
message, this is an important matter affecting Parliament for the whole of
South Africa, and I can’t just pretend that it’s not here, and we mustn’t
pretend that it is not here. Anybody who thinks that there is going to be a
cover-up and that the Travelgate scandal will go away, does so over my dead
body.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Yes, hon Green.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, on a point of order. I’m sure that all
political parties here would like to respond to the substantive issues
raised by the hon Gibson. We are not being given that opportunity because
we have prepared ourselves for farewell speeches. So, I think, Madam
Speaker, you have to rule on this issue in that we stick to the subject.

The SPEAKER: Yes, you are correct, hon Green. As I indicated earlier on, I
am simply allowing the hon Gibson to finish his speech out of courtesy from
the Chair. However, it is out of order. It really is, hon Gibson, out of
order for you to be consistently standing there, abusing the opportunity to
give a farewell speech in order to raise a whole range of controversial
rumours and supposed facts. You are even misquoting me in the process. It
is actually because of this that I thought I would let you finish. But,
really, I regret that you have decided to use this opportunity of farewell
speeches, which is usually a very cordial opportunity, to be so opposite to
the spirit of farewell speeches.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, I regret that it’s necessary for
me to use the opportunity. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, allow the hon member to finish his speech.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Parliament belongs not just to members of
Parliament but to all of the people, and we need to stand up for honesty
and integrity in public life. We need less lip service to the people and
much more determined honest action.
Although Parliament is adjourning, quite a number of committees will meet
next week and there is still a great deal of work to be done in the field
and in the constituencies. I extend my very best wishes to all friends and
colleagues in the House, and I wish the Christians, ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: ... a blessed Christmas; the Muslims; Eid
Mubarak; the Hindus, a blessed Diwali ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Allow the hon member to finish.
[Interjections.] Hon members, please allow the hon Gibson to finish.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s very easy to be popular, and it’s
not so easy to be unpopular. I wish all the Christians a blessed Christmas,
the Muslims Eid Mubarak, the Hindus a blessed Diwali and everyone else a
happy holiday. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order, Order! Hon Bloem, please take your seat. I simply want
to take this opportunity, firstly, to indicate that it is inaccurate to say
that the Speaker said, in addressing the Chief Whips of all parties, that
the Scorpions were ready to arrest 23 members. It is simply not true. I
reported to the Chief Whips that we had been handed 23 names of members
with whom the Scorpions wished to interact in pursuit of the work that they
were doing in the particular probe. To say that they were ready to arrest
those members is simply not telling the truth. That is the first thing.

Secondly, I want to appeal to every member who is going to stand at the
podium not to follow the unfortunate example set by hon Gibson. They should
proceed in the spirit of the usual farewell speeches so that we can go
home. We hope that hon Gibson, in the course of the festive season, is
going to change his attitude.

Mr A MLANGENI: May I address you on a point of order, Madam Speaker?

The SPEAKER: What is your point of order?

Mr A MLANGENI: Mr Gibson ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please don’t go back to hon Gibson. Let’s let hon
Gibson go home and ...

Mr A MLANGENI: No, no, no! I’m going to ask him to apologise to you, Madam
Speaker. We want him to apologise for misquoting you. He is an old
politician and an old member of Parliament. For him to come and make such a
statement in Parliament, and say that the Speaker said this and that, is
incorrect. He should please apologise.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please allow me to chair. Let’s leave hon Gibson
alone and let me call upon hon Van der Merwe to address the House.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I just want to deliver a farewell
speech today. At the end of this month I will have been a member of
Parliament for 27 consecutive years. I have, however, discovered, to my own
humiliation, that I have always spoken in either Afrikaans or English. I
never, in 20 years, tried to speak in any one of the other indigenous
languages. Today I want to put that right. I’m going to speak in Sesotho.
[Applause.]

Mme Speaker le ditho tsa Palamente. Kajeno ke batla ho leka ho bua Sesotho
sa Borwa. Wa bona, ke holetse mane Freistata, moo ke ithutileng Sesotho
hanyane teng. Batho ba bang ba mpitsa Mojapere, ha ba bang ba mpitsa
Mojatransporoto.[Ditsheho.] Letona la Tshireletso ke mojapere e moholo empa
o bua puo ya Afrikaans hantle haholo.

Afrika Borwa e na le dipuo tse leshome le motso o le mong tsa semmuso. Ke
nahana hore bohle re tshwanetse ho leka ho ithuta dipuo tse ngata. Ke tsela
eo re tla utlwisisanang hantle ka yona. Mme Speaker ke dumellana le bao ba
buileng pele ho nna, empa, o monna o batla monate feela.
[Ditlatse.][Ditsheho.]

Lebitsong la IFP, le nna ke rata ho leboha batho bohle ba thusitseng ho
tlisa katleho selemong sa 2004. Mothating ona re lokela ho hopola hore le
ha re dutse mekgatlong e fapaneng bohle re ntse re le batho feela. Bohle re
bopilwe ke Modimo, bohle re leka ho etsa dintho tse ntle feela. Kajeno ha
se letsatsi la ho ngangisana, ke nako ya ho bua ka dintho tse ntle. Kahoo,
lebitsong la Moporesidente wa IFP, le ditho tsohle tsa rona tsa IFP, ke le
lakaletsa leeto le bolokehileng ho ya hae.

Re le lakaletsa phomolo e monate. Re lakaletsa thabo ho ba malapa le
metswalle ya lona. Re le lakaletsa Keresemese e monate, mmoho le selemo se
setjha sa katleho. Jwale re rapele hore Modimo a ke a otlolle letsoho la
hae hodima rona ho fihlela re kopana hape. Ke lekile ka hohle. Tsamayang ka
kgotso. [Ditlatse.] ( Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker and members of Parliament. Today I shall make an attempt to
speak Southern Sotho. I grew up in the Free State where I learnt to speak a
little Sesotho. It is for that reason that some people call me Mojapere,
while others call me Mojatransporoto. [Laughter.] The Minister of Defence
is a great Mojapere, but he speaks fluent Afrikaans.

South Africa has eleven official languages. I am of the opinion that
we should all try to learn as  many languages as possible. That will
improve our communication with one another. Madam Speaker, I therefore
concur with the previous speaker, but you are a man and you are only
interested in a nice time. [Applause.] [Laughter.]

On behalf of the IFP I would like to thank all the people who participated
in bringing success to our country in 2004. At this juncture we should bear
in mind that even though we are representatives of different parties, we
are still ordinary human beings. We were all created by God, and we all try
to do only good things. Today is a day for debate and it is time to speak
about good things. Therefore, on behalf of the president of the IFP and all
members of the IFP, I wish you a safe journey home.

We wish you happy holidays. May your families and your friends be forever
happy. Merry Christmas and a successful new year. Let us pray God that He
may keep us until we meet again. Farewell. [Applause.]]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Speaker, we have reached the end of the first year of the
third democratic Parliament of South Africa. It seems that we had barely
been sworn in when in the blink of an eye we discovered that the end of the
year has arrived. It has been a very busy year for all members, starting
with an intensive election campaign, and having to deal with the
parliamentary budget process some months later than it would normally have
been.

Since then we have passed numerous pieces of legislation and conducted
various public hearings. As has become the norm, the Parliament of South
Africa has been very productive. A productive and vibrant Parliament is an
asset to democracy. Without becoming arrogant we can applaud our success.
In so doing we must also pay tribute to the parliamentary staff who assists
us in keeping the wheels of this great machine turning smoothly.

Allow me to thank all members of the House for their contribution and
participation in the proceedings of the institution. We may not always
agree ideologically, but we are all democrats seeking the best possible
solutions to the challenges facing the nation.

Somlomo, ndifun’ ukuthi abanye igazi liseshushu, ngoko kufuneka bahambe
bakhe baye kuqubha mhlawumbi baya kubuya bepholile. [Uwele-wele.] Ndinga
ndingathi kumaKrestu, akwaba anganeKrisimesi emnandi. Kwabenkolo yamaMuslim
ndithi, “Eid Mubarak”. KumaHindu ndithi akwaba bangabhiyoza kamnandi
bebhiyozela ukoyiswa kobumnyama kukukhanya. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Madam Speaker, I reckon that some members may need to cool down and
therefore this time would be welcome to them. [Interjections.] May the
Christians have a peaceful Christmas. To those that follow the Muslim
religion I say, “Eid Mubarak”, and best wishes to the Hindus who will be
celebrating the victory of light over darkness.] I wish all members of
Parliament, on behalf of the UDM, a happy holiday and I hope that when we
come back we’ll be ready to work.

Mhlawumbi, Douglas, sobuya sonke siphethe iiglavu. Ngoku besingaziphethanga
kuba besisithi size konwabisana apha. Enkosi. [Uwele-wele.] [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[Hon Douglas, maybe when we come back we will all put our gloves on. We did
not find it necessary to put them on because we thought that we had come to
entertain ourselves here. Thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]]

Mr A HARDING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The past year has indeed been very
exciting and challenging for the Independent Democrats. To have achieved
what the ID did in less than 24 months meant that we had to put in quite a
bit of hard work. We will certainly be taking a well-deserved rest.

I must just say that although we have found very many staff members and
many of the people around Parliament helpful, as a new MP I have found that
the institution is fairly unfriendly and unco-operative.
Furthermore, the institution is, in certain critical areas, weak and
dysfunctional. We as the ID look forward to a more organised and dynamic
Parliament in the very near future.

In conclusion, we wish all MPs, members of the Cabinet and all the other
religious groupings a good holiday. As usual, the choir at the back there
has been singing loudly, but mostly falsely, and I think that these
holidays are just what their tired voices need. Thank you.

Mr C H F GREYLING: Madam Speaker, at the end of the first session of the
third democratic Parliament it is my pleasure to say a few words of thanks
and to convey our season’s greetings. Therefore, I want to thank you, Madam
Speaker, as well as Madam Deputy Speaker, for your sometimes difficult
role, not only in maintaining the dignity of the House, but also in keeping
order.

Waar ons nou drie Voorsitters van die Huis het, wil ek ook graag aan hulle
dank betuig vir die onderskeie rolle wat hul speel om die Parlementêre
prosesse vlot te laat verloop. Dit is ook gepas om ons dank uit te spreek
teenoor die Hoofsweep en die Adjunkhoofsweep van die Meerderheidsparty vir
hul doeltreffende hantering van die Hoofswepeforum. Ook aan alle Swepe aan
opposisiekant, dankie vir die samewerking in die forums waar ons besluite
moet neem in die belang van alle lede van die Parlement.

Waardering ook aan die nuwe Sekretaris van die Parlement, en u word
voorspoed toegewens met die moeilike taak wat vir u voorlê. Aan die
Adjunksekretaris, Sekretaris van die Nasionale Vergadering, alle
Tafelpersoneel, diensbeamptes, spysenieringspersoneel, veiligheidsbeamptes
– alhoewel hulle nog steeds ons kattebakke hard toeslaan, en so ook ons
enjinkappe – en alle ander personeel wat die Parlement se wiele ge-olie
moet hou, ons opregte dank en waardering.

Ook ‘n woord van dank aan die media wat die publiek ingelig hou oor die
werksaamhede van die Parlement en sy vele komitees. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows)

[Now that we have three Chairpersons of the House, I would also like to
express my thanks to them for the various roles that they play in
streamlining the parliamentary processes. It is also fitting to express our
thanks to the Chief Whip and the Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party
for their efficient management of the Chief Whips Forum. Also to all the
Whips on the opposition side, thank you for your co-operation in the forums
where we have to take decisions in the interests of all members of
Parliament.

Appreciation also goes to the new Secretary to Parliament, and we wish you
success with the difficult task that lies ahead. To the Deputy Secretary,
the Secretary of the National Assembly, all Table Staff, the service
officers, the catering personnel, the security officers - although they
still persist in slamming our car boots, as well as our bonnets – and all
other personnel of Parliament responsible for its smooth running, we wish
to express our sincere thanks and appreciation.

Furthermore, a word of thanks goes to the media, which keeps the public
informed about the business of Parliament and its many committees.]

In conclusion, I want to wish everybody a very pleasant festive season. May
2005 be a prosperous year filled with happiness! I trust that all of you
will enjoy a well-deserved holiday and that you will return safely next
year. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mor. K R J MESHOE: Mme Sebui ke eme fa ke emetse mokgatlo wa ACDP. Gape ke
leboga Modimo ka thuso ya gagwe a re neileng yona mo selemong se se se
felang. Gape ke leboge maloko otlhe a Palamente ka  tirisano mmogo e entle
e re e boneng. Le ba thusi ba rona mo di kantorong tsa rona ba dirile ka
natla. Ke rata go tsaa tshono e go le leboga ka Pesalome (Psalms). Morago
ga moo ke leboge le go rapelela maloko otlhe a Palamente. (Translation of
Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Rev K R J  MESHOE: Madam Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of the ACDP. I
would again like to thank God for his help throughout this year that is
coming to an end. I would also like to thank all members of Parliament for
the co-operation we have had. Our office assistants also worked very hard.
I would like to take this opportunity to use Psalms to thank them.
Thereafter I would like to thank and pray for all members of Parliament.]

I am going to read from Psalm 113, titled Praise the Lord:

      Praise, oh servants of the Lord.
      Praise the name of the Lord!
      Blessed be the name of the Lord
      from this time forth and forever.
      From the rising of the sun to its going down,
      the Lord’s name is to be praised.
      The Lord is high above all nations,
      his glory above the heavens.


      Who is like the Lord our God,
      who dwells on high;
      who humbles himself to behold the things that are in the heavens and
      in the earth.
      He raises the poor out of the dust
      and lifts the needy out of the ash heap
      that he may sit him with princes,
      with princes of his people.
      He grants the barren women a home
      like a joyful mother of children.
      Praise the Lord!


I want to pray. I want to pray. I want to pray. Father, I want to thank You
for the time that we can come to You to say thank You. By Your grace we had
good working relationships in this place. You helped us. As we come to the
end of this session, after having said thank you to so many people, I want
to say to You: Thank You very much.

And, as we will be going to our respective places and homes, may Your grace
abide with us and ensure us safety, protect us throughout this festive
season, I pray, and help us to come back for the challenges of the coming
year refreshed and healthy. I ask all this in Jesus’ name. Amen!

The SPEAKER: Hon Reverend, next time you should time your prayer so that it
fits into your two minutes. [Laughter.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, a born Mfundisi has come
here now. The book of books puts it aptly that there is a time to come and
a time to go, a time to meet and a time to part ways, a time to bid welcome
and a time to bid goodbye. The time to bid one another goodbye has come.

In looking back to the beginning of the first session of this third
Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, one cannot but do so with a
feeling of fulfilment for the good work done in the short period. We in the
UCDP wish to thank the entire Parliamentary family, the cleaners and the
service officers who ensure that we operate in wholesome surroundings.

Though the delivery of documents in Marks Building still has to improve, we
have to thank staff because of their helpfulness; the Table staff for their
alertness in parliamentary procedure; and sound and television personnel
who have since come to accept that the UCDP members deserve to be covered
as well. We thank the Secretary to Parliament for keeping parties informed
and involved in the process of governance in this institute.

Colleagues in the ANC Whippery have to be applauded for the consultative
manner in which they run the affairs of Parliament. The Chief Whip, hon
Goniwe, takes the cake in this regard for insisting that the representation
in Parliamentary structures should not be the monopoly of some parties or
individuals to the exclusion or even complete marginalisation of other
parties and their members.

Siyabulela ngalomzekelo wobubhexeshi obubonisayo mhlekazi,
akunamathandabuzo okuthi nabo unabo bakufunda kuwe Nyawuza. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[We thank you for the example you have set. Undoubtedly, those who work
with you will learn from you, Nyawuza.]

I shall be remiss if I do not thank the presiding officers for the masterly
manner in which they execute their difficult task of directing the
proceedings of this House. To the three House Chairpersons: We wish you all
the strength. To the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker: We pray for you to
have strength, to have the wisdom of Solomon and the heart to cope with our
frailties. To all colleagues: Adieu! Adieu! Fare thee well! May the good
Lord shower his blessings upon you! Till we meet! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My farewell speech is dedicated
to imprisoned Azanian People’s Liberation Army, Apla, fighters. We must
always remember fellow freedom fighters who, after 10 years of democracy,
are still rotting in our jails, now called correctional services. They
fought fearlessly for us and with us to bring about the democracy we are
enjoying and celebrating.

Ka Sesotho ho thwe mofata sediba ha se nwe. [The Basotho say that he who
does the work, does not reap the fruits thereof.]

Whilst we champion democracy in Africa, let us remember that charity begins
at home. We are the lawmakers of our country. At the stroke of a pen - if
we have the political will - we can release those noble sons and daughters
of Africa to join the rest of us in developing our country and celebrate
this Christmas of 10 years of our democracy.

I wish to thank all Parliamentary support staff who on my election to this
Parliament, professionally kept consulting with me on relevant logistics
about my travel arrangements, and for their best and speedy assistance in
filling in the first documents of our members on Parliamentary premises. I
further wish to thank the Parliamentary VIP protection unit which protected
all of us, including our families, on our first stay in Cape Town in the
first term. I thank the Department of Public Works for housing us at Acacia
Park. [Laughter.]

I further wish to thank all hon members, old and new, who gave the PAC of
Azania full corporation in their noble cause of stabilising democracy in
our country. To all of you wonderful hon members and those whose names I
have not mentioned I say: Farewell! Farewell! And a big farewell to you
all! Whatever you do, remember Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
May I start by announcing that I request you to place on record that the
ANC will make a formal approach to your Office for consideration to be
given to an investigation into the substance of the issues that Mr Gibson
raised here.

We have come to the conclusion of the year 2004. Even though we have said
it so many times before, for its significance we must say it again in this
august House that the year 2004 concludes South Africa’s first decade of
freedom. This is a period that has come with a lot of change in South
Africa’s political and social reality and experience. The profundity of
this experience has impacted on African as well as global reality.

As we stand at the apex of 2004, necessarily and naturally we tend to cast
our eyes towards the next year and decade, wondering as we do so what the
future shall bring. Of course, as South Africans we have learnt that the
future will be what we make of it.

This democratic Parliament of the people of South Africa captures the great
and the timely aspirations representative of the views of our country. We
should note, though, that valued as this institution is, this has not
discouraged others from trying to dent its integrity. This institution and
members of Parliament have their integrity negatively impacted upon by the
manner in which investigations into the travel scam were conducted. The
manner in which those matters were reported by the media, in my view,
exacerbated the situation. We regret this and hope that it never recurs in
the future.

We don’t want any member of Parliament to be arrested. We don’t want any
member, no matter from what party, to be humiliated. We want the dignity of
all public representatives to be restored in this House and in the public;
that is the starting point.

We should, as we conclude this year, appeal to all South Africans who have
the honour of serving our people at this level to be exemplary in putting
the national interest above everything else. We are a people bound by a
common destiny that even our partisan affiliations cannot undo. This fact
must at all times be borne in mind and should inform the manner in which we
carry ourselves and conduct the business of this House.

So many times, including yesterday, the issue of resources has come up in
this House. As an institution Parliament needs to be better resourced. It
is difficult for members to perform work under the current conditions. The
situation is worse when it comes to the work that has to be done in
constituencies. We have spoken about this in the past, namely the vastness
of many of our constituencies, the rural character of others and the
challenges attendant thereto.

We have highlighted the problems brought about by the very underdevelopment
we are trying to address. And, therefore, as we look towards 2005 and the
next decade, we must say that these problem areas that have already been
identified should be addressed.

The service that members receive from staff generally is another sore area.
It seems there is a creeping institutional inertia which, if not promptly
dealt with, could have disastrous consequences.

There are those of our staff who give everything they have to enable this
institution to function, amongst whom are the Secretary to Parliament, his
Deputy; the capable Table staff, so ably led by our secretary to the NA, Mr
Hahndiek; and many others who sacrifice to make sure, behind the scenes -
working very long hours - that this House’s business goes on smoothly.
[Applause.]

During the course of the year members experienced numerous problems at
parliamentary villages. These ranged from accommodation, water cuts,
security, etc. We are glad to note that the Parks’ management is doing
something to resolve those problems. Many remain and need to be attended
to.

We must thank the presiding officers for the manner in which they have
conducted the overall affairs of Parliament: the Speaker, hon Mbete; the
Deputy Speaker, hon Gwen Mahlangu-Nkabinde; our three House Chairs,
Comrades Doidge and Nkosinathi Nhleko, and last, but not least, uMama
uSandra Botha.

We must also thank the Leader of Government Business and his Office for
their support and guidance, as well as members of the executive, from the
President to the Ministers and Deputy Ministers for their co-operation and
understanding. We also thank the Chief Whips of all the parties, all of
them without exception, for their co-operation and the comradely spirit in
which we tend to do things. Yes, there are other minor things that we still
need to attend to, but on the whole we have worked very well as a team.
Thank you for that, my colleagues. [Applause.]

We thank the Whippery of all the parties as a whole, particularly the
Whippery of the Majority Party, for its commitment, selflessness and
everything it has done to make this year what it has been.

Lastly, we must thank all the members of Parliament for their commitment to
the nonracial and nonsexist cause of our people. Contrary to popular belief
that members of Parliament are overpaid fat cats and passengers on the
gravy train, we know how hard members work. We are fully aware of the toll
of the work you do on your health, families, friends, etc. We must commend
you for your resilience and commitment and urge you to soldier on for the
sake of your people. [Applause.]

We wish all of you a joyous and safe festive season, and hope to see you in
the new year recharged, bright and fresh, ready to make yet another advance
in the campaign to fight poverty and create jobs. For that to happen I
think we need to consider these powerful messages that we have been sending
out throughout: abstain or be faithful, or condomise; don’t fool yourself,
speed kills; don’t drink and drive, unless you drink milk. Thank you very
much. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon members, for those farewell speeches.
I also wish to take this opportunity to add to those remarks by saying that
we have come to the end of a very hectic year.

We left Parliament earlier this year, went on campaigns preparing for the
elections and, without as much as a break, came back for a very hectic
session in which we had to process the Budget. And here we are, at the end
of the year, having covered quite a large portion of business.

We have, hon members, engaged with the Minister of Finance and we hope that
we will be able to be given the resources we need in order to improve on
the support that members need in order for them to be maximally productive
in favour of the electorate and to fulfil the promises made during the
elections. So we are all keeping our fingers crossed, hoping that we will
get those resources. But all the issues that members have been raising were
indeed raised and were accommodated in that Budget.

Hon members, I believe that despite all the challenges we faced in the
early days of this third Parliament and in this year - a very difficult
year – this is a very important year that will go down in the history books
as not only the 10th year of democracy, but it will also go down as the
year when South Africa was favoured with hosting the Pan-African Parliament
and also won the bid to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup. So really, it has
been a good year, albeit a very hectic and difficult one.

However, I believe that we should take the challenges that came with this
year as the issues that prepare us for the road ahead. And, hopefully, in
doing that, especially those of us who will remain here between now and
when you come back, we will have incorporated that into the preparations
for next year so that, indeed, we improve not only the operation of
Parliament, but also the understanding of the role of this institution in
our society: that is what it is that our people, when they voted us into
Parliament, expected us to come and achieve here.

So I believe that indeed, we’ve got to congratulate ourselves that we have
survived and that we have attended to all the business that we managed to
attend to.

Thank you very much, hon members. And on behalf of the Deputy Speaker and
the House Chairpersons, I really wish you a restful festive season, but
also hope that you will come back more energised. We will really hit the
road in 2005.

That concludes the business of the day and the sittings for this year.
[Applause.]

The House adjourned at 12:15.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          FRIDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 12 November 2004:


         (i)     Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist
              and Related Activities Bill. [B 12F - 2003)](National Assembly
              - sec 75)


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Housing:

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Housing Fund for
     the period ended 31 March 2004, including the Reports of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004, 2000-2003, 1998-2000
     and 1994-1998 [RP 154-2004].


