---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 May 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-05-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 MAY 2004
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                APPOINTMENT OF LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: I have the following announcement to make. The hon President
has informed me that he has appointed the Deputy President as Leader of
Government Business in the National Assembly in terms of section 91(4) of
the Constitution. [Applause.]

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: The following seats in the National Assembly were or became
vacant: Mr T M Mbeki; Mr M L Mokoena; Mr B Nair; Mr M J Mahlangu; Ms J
Kgoali and Mr E Ebrahim.

These vacancies have been filled with effect from 14 May 2004 by the
nomination of the following members, respectively: Mr N J Gogotya; Mr J J
Maake; Mr O M Mogale; Mr B L Mashile; Mrs N J Ngele and Mr D V Mabuyakhulu.

These members have made and subscribed the oath or solemn affirmation in my
office, and so I have already welcomed them to the House. [Applause.]

 DEBATE ON THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
                               OF SOUTH AFRICA

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of
order.

The SPEAKER: Yes, hon member, what is your point of order?
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: This relates to the speaking order and
the speaking turn of the hon Leader of the Opposition in this debate. The
ANC Whips, without consulting the other Whips, have placed the hon Mr
Dipico as the first speaker, preceding the Leader of the Opposition.
[Interjections.] I might say that the speakers' lists were sent to our
offices after one o'clock today. I draw your attention both to the
agreement reached at the time Mr F W De Klerk became the Leader of the
Opposition and also to the recent ruling of your hon predecessor.

In the most recent state of the nation debate, Speaker Ginwala ruled that
my point of order on exactly this point was correct, and that the Leader of
the Opposition has the right to speak first after the introducer. The ANC
Whips were present when that ruling was given and can only have acted out
of malice and with what I regard as an abuse of power. They are no doubt
hoping that you will state that this is a matter for the Whips to resolve.

I submit that when the ANC Chief Whip abuses his power, the dispute is not
capable of being resolved by the Whips, and it is right and proper for the
Speaker to intercede and see that justice is done. It is part of the
Speaker's function to protect hon members, and to protect the opposition
against oppressive action by the majority.

I ask you to rule that the Leader of the Opposition be accorded the
courtesy and recognition to which he is entitled, and that you call on him
to address the House. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Chief Whip of the Majority Party, will you allow me to
deal with the point of order as raised?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes.

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson correctly reminds those of us who were part of the
past Parliament that there was a ruling by the then Speaker, Speaker
Ginwala, on 9 February 2004 when a similar point of order had been raised.
Regrettably, there wasn't enough time after that ruling because, as you
will know, within that month the House dissolved. Therefore, given that the
point of order is raised at this point when we have a speakers' list before
us, I would like to rule that this matter should go to a forum where it can
be properly processed - such an opportunity arises at the Rules Committee
meeting tomorrow - so that the issue of whether or not the Leader of the
Opposition ought to exercise the right of first response after the
President's address is a matter that is agreed upon.

I rule that, at the moment, we proceed with the speakers' list as it
stands. [Interjections.] We will process how the matter should be dealt
with in future.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Surely the convention in this Parliament
for the last 10 years has been that until a Speaker gives a different
ruling, the House should be bound by the existing ruling?

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, I have ruled that this issue will receive the
necessary attention it deserves, and that an opportunity will arise at the
Joint Rules Committee meeting tomorrow. [Interjections.] After that, we
will proceed according to how we decide at that ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: So we ignore the previous ruling?

The SPEAKER: For now we will proceed according to what I am saying.
Mr E M DIPICO: Madam Speaker, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon leaders and
members of Parliament, comrades and friends, after this ruling it feels
good to be South African and indeed to be an African. [Applause.] Indeed I
feel good because South Africa is a winning nation. I feel good because the
election campaign throughout the length and breadth of this country was
peaceful, free and fair. I also feel very good because the ANC received a
resounding victory, an overwhelming victory, from our people. [Applause.]

I feel good as a South African and also as an African because of the
leadership displayed by our hon President. By humbling himself and the ANC
after such a victory, he was very courageous and showed leadership in
calling all other people to join his Government and lead the people of
South Africa. That is good, and that is what we want to see - South African
people being a winning nation. The example you have set, hon President, is
humbling indeed. It is an example for the wonderful people of South Africa.
These are blessed people. They are blessed because they have not, as people
have said, joined the sinking Titanic on the 14th. In reality it was a
victory we all deserved. [Applause.]
We are proud as we meet today. Today marks a very important day in the
history of our country and the continent. Today, it is 24 May 2004. It is
Africa Day. Forty-one years ago, African leaders gathered in Addis Ababa to
put in place a structure that would seek to advise the interests of the
African people. We have come a long way since that historic day and have
since transformed the OAU into the African Union. South Africa has played
an important part in the realisation of the dreams and aspirations of the
African leaders who set out on the path to ensure that this continent and
its people occupied their rightful roles in the world's political and
socioeconomic arenas. We wish all Africans on the continent and of the
diaspora everything of the best. May this continent thrive for the better.

Almost 50 years ago, the people of South Africa declared for all our
country and the world to know that South Africa belongs to all who live in
it, black and white, and that no government could justly claim authority
unless it was based on the will of all the people. We pledged ourselves to
striving together, sparing neither strength nor courage, until democracy
had been won.

The Freedom Charter was drafted only after an army of volunteers had
scoured the most remote corners of our country. They spoke and listened to
all our people: in town and countryside; brothers and sisters without land;
children without schooling; the miners of coal, gold and diamonds; the
workers on the farms and in the forests; the teachers, students and
preachers; and the mothers and daughters. Led by our former President,
Nelson Mandela, these cadres for a better life listened to the people's
grievances. They dutifully recorded the solutions that the people
themselves proposed to the problems of everyday life. The Congress of the
People, which convened in Kliptown in 1955, was a preview of a free South
Africa with a clear vision of a better life for all her people built on the
values of freedom and dignity.

Once again, over the past twelve months, South Africa has witnessed a
nationwide mobilisation of the people. Thousands of volunteers led by our
hon President Mbeki scoured the length and breadth of our vast nation,
armed with nothing more than a commitment to the vision of a better society
as proclaimed in the Freedom Charter.

The election campaign served to explain to our people how they should
realistically act together with the Government, in a practical manner, to
overcome the many issues they confront in their daily lives. It sought to
mobilise millions of our people into direct engagement with the country's
political leadership. Going from house to house, from shanty to shanty,
from village to town, from north to south, in every community, we patiently
interacted with the people. At taxi ranks, shopping centres, sports events
and religious gatherings, we spoke and we listened to the many voices of
South Africa's beautiful human complexity.

Our people did not only offer complaints and misgivings, although it cannot
be denied that these were apparent in no small measure. Reminding us of the
endless creativity of the people in motion, they also offered insightful
analyses and practical solutions to the complex problems of everyday life.
The solutions they offered, grounded in the realities of their own
existence, must form the bedrock of our advance towards the ideals
envisioned in the Freedom Charter.

Our hon President has outlined the responsibilities that the executive must
fulfil, but the newly elected premiers and Ministers have a dual
responsibility. Not only must they ensure that the tasks outlined by our
hon President are implemented within the timeframes given, they must also
conduct themselves in a manner that builds upon these lessons in democratic
practice. The context of mobilisation during the election campaign has set
a new standard for the manner in which our Government interacts with the
people. Building on traditions established by the Congress of the People,
and advancing beyond the rich experience of imbizos over the past five
years, we have indeed set ourselves a daunting benchmark.

All Ministers and Premiers and MECs and all of us here as members of
Parliament and the legislatures must earn our leadership through the daily
interaction with our people and ensuring that there is a concerted
interaction with our people on their daily work as we proceed to do our
work.

As legislatures, too, the extent of the tasks is awesome. Not only must we
hold the executive to account, ensuring the punctual implementation of the
detailed programmes that our hon President has outlined for the Government,
not only must we act on the decisive mandate received from the people
continuing to develop the legal framework on which to build a democratic
nonracial, nonsexist and a prosperous South Africa, but we must also
maintain and advance the momentum of democratic mobilisation that has
charactersized our campaign for election. Consciously rejecting the
tendency towards lazy self-satisfaction, we must conduct ourselves, each
and everyday, as if we were in the midst of an election campaign.

It is not enough for us to rest on our laurels, waking up to seek a mandate
again in five years' time. Instead, the consent of the nation must be
renewed each day at the coalface of labour amongst the people - going to
where they live, helping them to solve problems, navigating on their behalf
the difficult terrain of public service that is still striving to realise
the principles of Batho Pele, and most importantly, drawing on their
creative genius by listening to the solutions they themselves pose to the
problems they confront in their daily lives.

Our Government's programme can only succeed if the people act as their own
liberators. We as MPs and members of the NCOP and of the provincial
legislatures are not simply representatives of those people but we must
become the full-time organisers of the revolutionary transformation of our
society. Our mandate from the people is truly humbling.

On 14 April 2004, the poor, the unemployed, the workers and the landless
voted in overwhelming numbers, demonstrating their confidence that
democracy can and will deliver a better life for all. The consequence of
this awe-inspiring mandate from the masses of our people is that we must
now act decisively to implement the people's contract to create work and to
fight poverty and ensure that participatory democracy is part of the fabric
of our society. This is the contract that we should all enter into as South
Africans, each of us with one another, Government and each citizen, each
community, each organisation, each sector of society.

The South African people have shown their readiness and enthusiasm to
participate in such a partnership to tackle the challenges of poverty and
unemployment. It is now up to us, their elected representatives, to deliver
on our part of the contract. Among our immediate tasks will be to engage
communities across the country to discuss the people's contract in the
context of local Integrated Development Plans. We are also aware that such
work remains to be done in building local government as the hands and feet
of our developmental efforts.

As MPs and MPLs, we must ensure that every locality has a clear set of
priorities and an agreed-upon programme of action to achieve these
priorities. We must ensure that all stakeholders in the community know and
understand their respective responsibilities. Our effort to build a
people's contract must also build on the foundation laid at the Growth and
Development Summit. Civil society, NGOs, cultural groups, sports groups,
churches, trade unions and businesspeople must be drawn into our daily
programmes through practical work and honest engagement.

As public representatives, when we leave this august House, we must ensure
that we go out to inform our people about the state of the nation address,
about the tasks which have to be carried out by all of us, and ensure that
we communicate in all the languages of our people and that we can assist
them to build this country to unblock areas for speedy delivery of
services. It is important that we ensure that our people are united and
organised in a national effort to create work and push back the frontiers
of poverty.
In confronting these tasks, let us be inspired by the noble commitments of
our forebears. As they adopted the Freedom Charter they pledged themselves
to strive together, sparing neither strength nor courage until democracy
was won. The hon President has outlined the responsibilities of all of us,
including the executive. As we enter the second decade of freedom, let us
once again pledge ourselves to striving together, sparing neither strength
nor courage until poverty is eliminated and a better life created. Let us
all, those who love their people, the South African people and those who
love their country now say: Side-by-side, we dedicate our lives to
advancing the cause of our people.

Together we can and will do more. Together we can and will continue to
strive towards a nonracial South Africa, a nonsexist South Africa, a South
Africa united in diversity, a prosperous South Africa and a democratic
South Africa. Let us all be united in achieving that goal. That is what our
people want. We dare not fail them. The President has given us the
directive. Hon President, we will carry out that work. We are going out of
this august House to work with our people, together to bring about the
changes you had in mind, of a true South Africa which is a winning nation.
Together we can create the work you said we should create. Together we can
fight poverty and bring change to our people. As we leave, we go out here
inspired by your words, inspired by the timelines you have given us, and we
go out to our people to ensure that the work begins. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, hon colleagues,
South Africa has begun its second decade of democracy in a spirit of
celebration and optimism. Not only have we succeeded in holding our third
democratic general elections, as Mr Dipico reminded us, but we have also
won the privilege of hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

These achievements, among many others, show that there is literally no
limits to what our nation can accomplish. When we focus on our goals and
work together there is no obstacle that we cannot overcome.

The truth is that South Africa earned the right, if one ever earns the
right, to host the world cup and we should not be afraid to say so. Of all
the countries that competed for the bid, South Africa was the only true
democracy among them.

Today is Africa Day, as the previous speaker reminded us. There is no
greater symbol of Africa's liberation and hope than South Africa. We are
the best choice, therefore, to represent the continent. But the purpose of
this Parliament, of course, as the President reminded us, is to set goals
for the years ahead. How will we prepare for 2010? What kind of democracy
will we be celebrating 10 years from now in 2014? What foundations are we
laying today for a better South Africa tomorrow?

President Mbeki has provided us with a bold version of the future. I said
on Friday afterwards and outside this House that I believed his state of
the nation address was brave because he set forth dozens of goals, targets
and commitments that the Government would work to achieve.

There were a few important goals that were however missing from his list.
The President said nothing in his speech about the economic growth target
of 6% per annum which the Government committed itself to in its Gear
policy, and which our economy has yet to reach. The President also pledged
that 53 000 people with Aids will be receiving antiretroviral treatment by
March next year. Yet that target was already supposed to have been reached
by March this year. Further, the hon President failed to set a target for
reducing the HIV infection rate which has continued to increase.

President Mbeki also neglected to set a target date for the restoration of
democracy and stability in Zimbabwe. [Interjections.] Last year, at the
World Economic Forum in Durban, he promised the resolution of the Zimbabwe
crisis by June 2004. Yesterday, however, the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the hon Aziz Pahad, admitted that this deadline would be missed.
We, in the DA, believe that the Government must now change its policy along
with the changed deadline.

We were very pleased, however, to note that the President committed himself
and the Government to a charter of victims' rights in respect of the
criminal justice system. We were happy to hear about the expansion of the
police force to over 150 000 officers by an earlier deadline than expected.
We were also delighted to hear that the Government plans to re-establish
the agricultural credit scheme. These were all measures that the DA had put
forward in campaigns and debates over the past several years.
[Interjections.] We are delighted that the Government has decided to accede
to them; and, it actually proves that persistency and principle pay off
over time.

Broadly, then, we can say that there is an agreement between Government and
Opposition about the major goals our society needs to reach. Yet, while we
agree on ends, we disagree on means. We need to explore this disagreement,
I submit, more carefully in order to understand it and to understand each
other.

It seems, on a careful analysis of the hon President's speech and related
documents, that the ANC believes that the state, the Government, should
guide South Africa's economic development and virtually everything else.
The conclusion and affirmation have come right now. The conclusion of the
Government's 10-year review which has yet to be debated in this Chamber
was, that the state should ``assert its leadership role beyond the realm of
areas under its direct control''.

In contrast, the DA believes that the people and the private sector, the
faith-based initiatives and the nongovernmental organisations make better
choices and deliver better results than government alone. That is the
lesson of decades of experience, not just in South Africa but around the
world. We believe that the state should and must intervene to protect the
lives of its citizens. That is why we favour far more aggressive Government
policies on, for example, crime and HIV/Aids.

We also believe that the state must and can intervene in circumstances in
which people are unable to enjoy their rights and freedoms because of
poverty and need. That is why we support free basic services for the poor -
and, indeed, through the municipalities under our control have provided
them - and the basic income grant.

Beyond performing those duties, we believe that the state must yield. It
must allow the people themselves to determine their own futures. That leads
us to another area of disagreement. The ANC is pursuing a policy of
transformation in every sphere of life in South Africa. The DA agrees on
the need for radical and fundamental change. But, the policy of
transformation, with respect, as the ANC defines it, aims at something
more. The goal of this transformation, about which there has never been a
full and proper engaged debate in this Parliament - maybe we will have one
- is to achieve representivity: a state of affairs in which every
institution, public and private, reflects the demographics of South Africa
as a whole.

The ANC's version of transformation therefore views demography as destiny.
The role of the individual citizen is determined in advance by his or her
race. The value of a company or the worth of an organisation is no more
than the sum of its demographic parts. In contrast, we believe in a change
that is guided by the principles of nonracialism which were defined in the
words, many years ago and in a different era but still valid today albeit
from a different continent, of Martin Luther King Junior who said that a
person should be judged not by the colour of their skin but by the content
of their character.

We believe there is difference between encouraging diversity on the one
hand, which is a good goal at the end, and enforcing a blunt version of
representivity on the other. We believe that the Government should create
equality of opportunity but that it can never hope to create equality of
outcome. The most common and most damaging accusation in South African
politics today is that if you criticise transformation, as the ANC defines
it, then you are opposed to change and you are clinging to racial
privilege. [Interjections.]

Indeed, much of the 10 years of this Parliament, for those who have
survived the past 10 in this Parliament, was largely based around that
empty and hollow debate. The truth is that transformation, in many
respects, institutionalises privilege. It benefits the elite rather than
the many. Instead of changing South Africa, it props up the old social
structure albeit reinforcing it and changing its racial composition in
which there are few winners and a great many losers.

Furthermore, there is simply no way that the Government can meet all the
delivery objectives outlined by the hon President and many on which we
agree while at the same time pursuing hard-line racial transformation all
at the same time. The Public Service cannot deliver if it loses experienced
civil servants. The economy cannot grow if the Government has to raise from
within it R700 billion to cover the costs of black economic empowerment.

When demography becomes destiny we start to ask the wrong questions about
Government policies. We worry more about the skin colour of a teacher and
less about what he or she delivers to the children in the classroom, and
that, surely, is wrong.

To reiterate, both the Government and the Opposition agree that we want
South Africa to be a winning nation, in the words of the previous speaker.
But we disagree on the means to achieve that end. We disagree on the role
of the state: how much state and how much private initiative? While we
agree on the importance of change, we disagree about the ANC's policy of
transformation which defies the principle of nonracialism.

We were told a minute ago that it is important that Parliament becomes an
arena of participatory democracy, and I agree with that completely. But it
is critical that we debate these very issues. That is what a democracy is
all about. We are constantly called to reach a consensus but we cannot, in
truth, have true unity until we have a full and proper debate.

Parliament can't simply be a rubber stamp for Luthuli House, nor should it
be used for state functions and celebrations. [Interjections.] We must use
this forum to examine our country's policies, to propose new ideas and to
reject the bad ones. If you go outside Parliament there is a huge banner
there which says that Parliament has passed 300 laws in the past 10 years,
and that is great. But, surely, we should be more concerned with quality
than quantity. We should not be afraid to fix or throw away laws that are
not working. And, at all times in this process we must respect differences
of opinion among the majority and the minority.

There was a very interesting argument raised in the Sunday Times two or
three weeks ago by the Minister for the Public Service and Administration,
the hon Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi. She said and I quote: ``We must join the
caravan of a single vision for South Africa.'' [Interjections.]

I'll put it to you, Madam Speaker, that implicit in that concept is a
fundamentally antidemocratic concept that goes against all that we and the
nation have struggled for. [Interjections.] Democracy, surely, depends on
tolerance for diversity - diversity of cultures, diversity of beliefs,
diversity of viewpoints. As Karl Popper argued, open societies such as ours
are threatened by ideologies that claim to possess the ultimate truth.
We are on dangerous ground when we suggest that dissent is equivalent to
treason. A maturing democracy is not marked by greater uniformity of
thought but actually by greater diversity of ideas, greater tolerance for
criticism and greater inclusion of dissent. There are many, many points of
view represented in this Chamber, especially within the ranks of the ANC
itself. [Interjections.] Diversity is the essence of what it means to be a
rainbow nation.

Today, tolerance is more important than ever before. Today, South Africa is
living with a curious paradox: as the economic gap between black and white
is shrinking, the political gap between black and white is growing.
[Interjections.]

In the past election, both the DA and the ANC set out to win support in new
areas. President Mbeki took the courageous step of campaigning door-to-door
in white neighbourhoods such as Silverton and Die Moot, and the DA launched
its election manifesto in Soweto. [Interjections.] And yet when the ballots
were counted they revealed that South Africans are still deeply divided
along racial lines. The DA had won approximately 75% of the vote in
predominantly white voting districts, while the ANC won approximately 82%
of the vote in predominantly black areas.

Of course, the DA does not only represent racial minorities, just as the
ANC does not represent only the racial majority. [Interjections.]
Obviously, the ANC disagrees with that suggestion. Maybe they know
something we don't. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Racial quotas.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Don't worry, Minister of Labour, there are no
quotas here. People got there on their rights not because they were
representing a racial quota. [Applause.] And your Employment Equity Act
doesn't apply here. In any case, there is no shame in representing
minorities. I believe that the President was mistaken during the election
campaign, if in fact he was correctly quoted, when he said that
representing minorities ``should not be a question of pride, but rather one
of shame’’.

But it is clear that both parties must do more to reach out beyond what has
become traditional constituencies. A democracy that votes with its skin
cannot be a healthy democracy over time. The ANC must win more white votes,
and the DA must win more black votes. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] To
achieve that, in my view, ironically, we have to move our national dialogue
beyond race. We must recognise, criticise, punish and honour black men and
women in exactly the same way as we recognise, criticise, punish and honour
white men and women, and any people of any colour.

We must listen to what other people have to say and evaluate it on its
merits before we question their motives. We must give equal respect to
people whose views we disagree with and whose life experiences may have
been different from our own. We must work together to develop a common
dialogue about the issues facing all South Africans. And then will we truly
begin to break through the enduring racial barriers.

South Africa's future, in our view, depends on economic growth; and so
economic growth must become the passion and the core of our national
debate. That is not to say that economic growth is the only important
issue; there are certainly many others. But, unless we achieve rapid growth
of at least 6% per annum or higher, as announced in the Government's
economic plan six or seven years ago, we will not be able to achieve many
of the goals or any of the significant ones that the President set on
Friday.

The Government today announced that its growth rate has been adjusted to
3,1%, something we didn't achieve in the past year. But even 3% growth is
nominal, and in real terms amounts to a negative growth rate, if you factor
in inflation.

It is good, for example, that the Government has set about creating
temporary jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme. But these are
no substitute for the millions of sustainable jobs that can only come about
through rapid economic growth.

The rise in economic growth announced today by the Government was driven
almost entirely by the growth in manufacturing indices. That shows we must
rely on the private sector to create jobs, and, with respect, not the
state. The Minister of Trade and Industry announced yesterday that
parastatals must ``be at the heart of the job creation drive''. With
respect, if we rely on the parastatals to create jobs, we will, in essence,
be creating very few of them.

In his address on Friday, the President spoke of a First Economy and a
Second Economy. Here we can safely assume that he was referring to the
formal, developed economy on the one hand, and on the other, the informal,
underdeveloped economy that exist side-by-side in our nation. We should
not, with respect, treat these two economies as if they are doomed to
perpetual separation. We should be doing all that we can to break down the
walls that separate the second from the first. And if we are honest in the
debate we are going to have, and to which we have been summoned, we should
actually examine those walls and knock them down; the walls created by
rigid labour laws that destroy jobs; the walls created by heavy regulations
that keep new firms from entering the market; the walls created by
collective bargaining agreements that leave no room for small businesses to
survive and thrive; the roadblocks obstructing communications and the
information superhighway. [Interjections.]

We must also build bridges - the President calls them staircases - to
connect the one economy to the other. And surely, the most important and
fundamental bridge is to give every child a sound education, to expand land
ownership among the poor and to create business support centres in
disadvantaged communities. We cannot continue to have two separate
economies in one nation. Economic growth must be a goal for everyone, not
just for the few.

The President also spoke on Friday about measures to promote broad-based,
black economic empowerment. With respect, none of these proposals dealt
directly with the question of how to increase ownership and
entrepreneurship among millions of black people in this country.

The Economist of 7 April 2004 said that this Government's empowerment
policy is hostile to investment. It went on to say ``it retards the
economic growth that might make the poor less so''. And that actually needs
to be put on the table in this Parliament, because if it is not debated
here that debate won't happen anywhere.

As for the empowerment charters that have been produced, they have so far
proved to be little more than a costly way to shift economic power from the
old elite to the well-connected members of the political elite . Let's take
one example: A very well-known former politician in that party made
national headlines when he made a deal to buy 10% of Absa Bank, worth about
R4 billion. But everyone forgot about the tens of thousands of Absa
employees, 65% of whom are black, who were only given 1% of the bank as
part of an employee share ownership scheme.

The proper way, surely, to encourage empowerment is through measures that
will accelerate economic growth, because without that economic growth and
job creation, broad-based empowerment will remain little more than a dream.

When we have this enduring debate about privatisation, surely,
privatisation and its impetus must come because that is the way to sell or
indeed give away shares to the poor at reduced prices, just as Telkom did
with the Khulisa offer. We must encourage businesses to provide shares to
their employees. And above all, the focus of empowerment must shift from
rich tycoons to ordinary people who are still waiting, in the words of the
President, to enjoy the fruits of freedom.

The irony about the ANC's approach to issues such as empowerment and
transformation is that in many ways we are recreating an old elite
structure that owed its origins to the previous order - not just in terms
of the fixation on race, but also in terms of the cosy relationships among
elites in every centre of power.

The governing party is consolidating its power through a practice it calls
deployment. It assigns its cadres to leading roles in every institution,
public and private. It expects that these cadres will perform their duties
faithfully, but that they will retain their loyalty to the party first and
foremost.

Deployment, with respect to all the other fine achievements of democracy,
is undermining the integrity of institutions that are meant to be
independent. From the SABC, to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts of
this Parliament, to the boards of major corporations, ANC cadres have risen
to positions of dominance. [Interjections.] She says, ``so what?'' Well let
me tell you ``so what''. The dangers of such a concentration of power in
the hands of a ruling party - any ruling party - are clear. A society that
is controlled by a small group of people, regardless of its mandate, loses
its robustness. It cannot respond to challenge or change. [Interjections.]
I believe that this Parliament should pass legislation to make it more
difficult for high-ranking governmental officials to leave Parliament and
immediately assume roles in the private sector that mirror the roles they
held in the public sector. [Interjections.] I believe that this Parliament,
if it is to show its robustness and strength, must insist that it does not
turn over the precedent established over the past 10 years and that,
indeed, it insists that a member of the Opposition serves as Chairperson of
Scopa, in line with the practice in the rest of the Commonwealth to which
we belong. [Interjections.]

The handshake that President Mbeki and I shared on the occasion of his re-
election one month ago could, I hope, be a starting point for a new era in
South African politics. As Government and Opposition, the ANC and the DA
obviously have different roles to play. But, as I have said before: we are
rivals, not enemies. What we must all strive for is a society in which the
rights of each and every individual are upheld. We must remember that the
struggles for freedom and equality were never waged on behalf of the
masses, they were waged on behalf of human beings.

We must also remember that the concept of the individual is also reflected
in the notion of ubuntu. We must recognise that our individual identities
are shaped through the primary relationships of family and community. We
must also acknowledge the obligations each of us has towards people,
especially the less fortunate.

We must do all this to create a new ethic of citizenship. The one
unmentioned feature of the last election campaign, whatever the gains were
for that side and indeed for the DA, was, in fact, that the voters have
become remarkably apathetic. The ANC itself has lost two million votes in
the past 10 years. [Interjections.] We must make the Government obviously
more sensitive to the needs of the people, and encourage the people to
become more involved in the process of government and delivery.

The Government says that there is a people's contract. Indeed there is, and
it is called the Constitution. It makes clear that our mission as a nation
is to produce the social, economic and political conditions in which each
and every citizen can fully and equally enjoy their rights and freedoms.

We should, however, in all this, obey several dictums. One of them was from
Edmund Burke, who advised us not to destroy those free institutions which
are the most essential to the survival of liberty in our haste to reform
them. He said:


  You possessed in some parts the walls, and, in all, the foundations of a
  noble and venerable castle. You might have repaired those walls, you
  might have built on those old foundations but you began ill, because you
  began by despising everything that once belonged to you.

We should also learn from the simple but powerful declaration of President
Mandela made 10 years ago in this Chamber: ``Never and never again, shall
it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one
by another.''

Those are the ideals. And we shall fulfil this optimistic spirit that leaps
in the heart of each South African, when we fulfil them. And then the dream
of a rainbow nation in 2010 and beyond would be a reality. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon
Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon members of Parliament and the public
at large, I would like to speak to you about local government. I will be
responding to the President's address to the first joint sitting of the
third democratic Parliament which took place on 21 May 2004. I will speak
on issues that emanate from the Freedom Charter launched in 1955 at
Kliptown.

The people of South Africa, black and white, have always longed for a
programme of governance that is free of injustice and inequality. When they
converged on Kliptown in 1955 they said: ``There shall be houses, security
and comfort.'' By this they wished for improved surroundings at local
government level and a good quality of life the indicators of which are
free basic services, like electricity, clean water, clean surroundings,
recreational facilities, etc.

In 1955 they longed for low rental payments. Today a billing system for
rates and services that is reasonable and compassionate in terms of the
poor and vulnerable is necessary and must be implemented by local
government, for instance the indigent policy. In 1955 the people wished
that the slums would be demolished and that new suburbs would be build
where they lived, with adequate transport, lighting, playing fields,
clinics and crèches, etc. Today these services must be provided as part of
local development strategy and as a component of the Expanded Public Works
Programme at local level.

After celebrating 10 years of democracy we need to intensify our delivery.
The President's imbizos and the ANC's door-to-door campaign revealed that
there are many problems at local government level. Therefore the local
governments are expected to play a proactive role in the social, economic
and material development of local communities. At local government level
the disparities in South African society are distinctly noticeable between
the rural and urban areas and between the townships and suburbs. Attention
to these disparities often takes race but not gender into account.

The Local Government: Municipal Structures Act explicitly defines gender
equity as a developmental outcome. This makes the empowerment of women a
local government responsibility. In rural areas, which are where most of
the poor women and children are, there is little easy access to such basic
services as running water in homes, sanitation and fuel. On average, the
time of people residing in these areas is spent on water and fuel
collection. Poverty-stricken people who are part of the second economy, as
espoused by the President, are found in rural areas or in townships and are
mostly women. Therefore there is a need for a detailed programme to respond
to the challenges of this second economy.

The Expanded Public Works Programme intended for urban renewal and the
Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programmes at local government
level should take the initiative by doing the following: training our
people in horticulture and landscaping and employing them to improve the
environment in the townships so that the people who reside in these areas
are afforded an opportunity to own shopping centres. And they can provide
the shopping centres with goods and services. For instance, women who do
baking can provide cakes and those who are able to manufacture clothing can
be the ones that market their projects. These beautiful malls should be
built within the townships and rentals should be made affordable in order
for our people to be able to have access to the market.

With regard to building social and economic infrastructure, for example,
construction and building, those involved in any construction project that
takes place in our communities should take a conscious decision of
capacitating our people by training them, for instance, to build bridges
and to become qualified road constructors. This should be done in
conjunction with the Department of Labour.

The rearrangement of social patterns should be in line with our nonracial
objectives. Clinics and schools should be built within the townships. This
would make it convenient for patients to access treatment on time without
having to travel long distances and, in the end, be denied treatment
because they came from somewhere in Soweto.

In pursuing the development of local economies, public-private partnerships
should be formed between municipalities, metros, civil societies, for
example women's groups, and the private sector, for example banks, to
further development at local level.

It is a known phenomenon that traditional governance is male dominated. The
involvement of women in traditional leadership at the decision-making level
is critical so that issues affecting women and children can receive
attention at all times.

There should be mobilisation of all sectors of the public at local level,
including participation in ward communities. Giving them direction is of
utmost importance. Job creation means that local government should be
charged with the responsibility of creating a databank of skills within the
communities and of tapping into the undiscovered potential within the
communities in their respective wards. Capacitating all the people will
enable them to establish their own businesses.

In the ANC, when we speak about the creation of jobs, we do not mean the
stereotype notion of boss and slave. We mean creating areas of work and
training people for them to be able to establish their own businesses.

It is a great pleasure to be part of South Africa, a nation that persevered
so long in its bid to hold the Soccer World Cup that its time has arrived
to host the cup in 2010. This means there is a great challenge for all of
us to commit to unity in changing the bad attitudes of other fellow South
Africans. One expects this country to host the Soccer World Cup
successfully, because we have a history of hosting successful events in
South Africa such as the WSSD, Aids conferences, the racism conference, you
name them.

Let me complete this speech by assuring our people who gave us the mandate
to govern that we are definitely on the correct track. We hope to fulfil
the 1955 mandate given to our leaders that the people shall govern. This is
what the ANC means when it calls for the people's contract. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr M G BUTHELEZI: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President, hon members,
we are conducting this debate against the backdrop of an election which has
redefined roles and responsibilities. All political parties campaigned
primarily on the five substantive issues of unemployment, crime, HIV/Aids,
poverty and corruption. The ANC received an overwhelming mandate to deal
with and redress these issues. We are not contesting or challenging this
mandate because, as a democrat, I fully respect the will of the South
African people. It is now my responsibility and that of my party to provide
our contribution to ensure that the mandate of the South African people
will be respected and fulfilled.

The South African people do not deserve another season of empty promises.
In his address the President shifted the emphasis from planning to
implementation. We must turn over a new leaf to ensure that integrity,
accountability and honesty now enter the realm of politics and change the
way our country is governed. For this reason both I and my party have
committed ourselves to providing our people with a democracy which holds
the benefits of a much-needed moral opposition.

Our moral opposition will be constructive. We shall applaud when praise is
due and we shall voice the moral indignation and anger of the South African
people when their mandates are being ignored. Our moral opposition will
reflect the way I have always acted in the past 50 years of service in
politics. We will focus on shortcomings in policies, programmes and
legislation, and we will deal with issues, not with people, without
personalising matters.

We feel that it is the role of a moral opposition to bridge the divisions,
which have been generated within this House because of a lack of respect.
The ruling party must learn to listen to the merits of what is being said
without rejecting good proposals merely because they may not like the
messengers.

We are emerging from an election that has strengthened the ruling party and
weakened our democracy. We have spent six years negotiating a
constitutional framework for our country that is now almost meaningless
from a political point of view as the Constitution is liable to change as
the ANC pleases. [Interjections.]

Unfortunately, the crossing-of-the-floor legislation has shown the
willingness of the ANC to tamper with the Constitution, not only at will
but even at whim. We are emerging from an election that has concentrated
100% of the political power in the hands of a few people, who may end up
acting as a small and self-serving elite. Under these conditions, the
responsibility of a moral opposition is that of providing the last sets of
checks and balances, without which our democracy is in great peril.

We need to keep at bay the ever-present forces and pitfalls lurking in the
shadow of a one-party state. In our nation's interests the ruling party is
to be held accountable to ensure that our people's expectations are met. In
his address His Excellency the President mentioned important programmes,
such as those relating to black empowerment. These programmes will extend
the power of the ruling elite to wider segments of our economy, and social
and cultural life. It will be our role to voice the expectations of the
South African people that these programmes are indeed about the empowerment
of the many, rather than the enrichment of the few.

Now, more than ever, our democracy needs checks and balances. I feel that
both I and my party are now truly free, free at last to provide the full
measure of our constructive moral opposition to ensure that our democracy
may survive in a context in which 100% of the power is so highly
concentrated in the hands of a few people. We need to ensure that our
democracy begins to recognise the need of separating the party from the
state.

The state cannot belong to the ANC, only to the South African people, and
the ruling party ought not to use the state as if it were an extension of
its political machinery for its own political purposes. We must strengthen
the role of Parliament and its centrality to ensure that it is not regarded
by the executive as a tool on demand, which carries out the wills and
dictates of the centre. Democracy is vested in this Parliament, not in the
corridors of Tuynhuys and the Union Buildings.

We in this Parliament have the responsibility of making laws and developing
public policy. The executive should limit its role to implementing what has
been thought, formulated and decided here. Unfortunately, we all know that
in the past 10 years the overwhelming majority of what has been legislated
was, in fact, thought and formulated outside of this Parliament, whether it
was from within the departments of state, or from within the policy
backrooms of the ruling party.

The next five years must give rise to the supremacy of Parliament and our
collegial responsibility of fulfilling the mandate we received from the
people. This Parliament must express the conscience of South Africa. We, as
the moral opposition, shall voice the bad conscience of the ANC in respect
of matters in which it is not living up to the promises it made. Together
we must react whenever the executive falls prey to paralysing denial,
whether it is denial about corruption, HIV/Aids or Zimbabwe. In these
chambers there cannot be space for any more of this syndrome of denial.
With all of you, I wish to champion the centrality and supremacy of this
Parliament. Too much has not been attended to in spite of many promises,
and our reaction cannot be that of denial, but ought to be that of caring
self-criticism.

We must recognise the dramatic nature of the problems confronting us and
against them assess the adequacy of the measures proposed by the President.
In his address the President made proposals that are good, but the issue is
whether they are indeed good enough. Unemployment is now at 42% of our
population and it is rising. The expansion of the Public Works Programmes
is not a sufficiently vast and sustainable response to such a dramatic
problem.

We still do not have a comprehensive strategy to accelerate our rate of
economic growth, provide South Africa with an industrial basis, and enable
our country to have a long-term successful and profitable presence with its
products and services on the global markets. As we contested the elections,
my party, as well as other parties, formulated viable proposals to
accelerate economic growth and unleash the hidden potentials in our economy
by liberalising market forces.

It is essential that the ruling party has the humility of recognising that
might is not necessarily right and that those in the moral opposition may
indeed have a contribution to make to the general good, by means of better
ideas and strategies to generate employment through economic growth, rather
than placebo measures such as the expansion of the Public Works Programme.

Similarly, I am deeply saddened that the President's address seems to
ignore the dramatic nature of the HIV/Aids pandemic, which would have
required more than a passing mention in the strategy of Government.
HIV/Aids cannot be a priority amongst many. It must be one of the first
priorities, because our nation is dying while its rulers ignore this with
complacent denial. Across the board, I feel that we are far from creating
the parameters of a truly caring society. The lack of sufficient
recognition and care for those who are infected and affected by HIV/Aids is
the tip of the iceberg.

Poverty remains our country's major unattended problem. A country like ours
has the resources to ensure that all our children go to bed every night
with food in their stomachs, and yet the malnutrition of our children and
their daily hunger have become an occurrence to which, with complacent
denial, most of our leaders have grown accustomed.

As the moral opposition, we are committed to voicing the anguish of those
who are ignored, because our society shall never become one in which those
who have become rich and powerful, or merely achieved a level of comfort,
become oblivious and insensitive to the plight of our compatriots. A moral
opposition must be a patriotic opposition, which recognises that this
country of ours must provide for all South Africans.

We cannot allow the politics of race to be replaced by the politics of
class, in a context in which those at the top remain, in the future, as
insensitive to the plight of those at the bottom as they were in the past.
We must care and we must be able to transform our caring into action. To
this end, it is necessary to strengthen the delivery capacity of the state.
Policy and statements which do not translate into tangible delivery are a
further insult to the plight of the poor.

I'm concerned about the President's address underpinning a centralistic
logic of delivery, which is at odds with the decentralised structure of our
state. One cannot make commitments from the centre to delivering houses
when the matter is handled by provinces. This constant centralising and
centralised perspective will remain a major impairment in actual delivery.
If we are to bridge the gap between policy and implementation, we must
recognise that in our country in our system of Government, and in our
reality, implementation and delivery are the responsibility of provincial
and local government. We'll provide our contribution to making the ruling
party realise that the role of central Government should be that of
enabling provincial and local government, providing them with autonomy and
capacity.

We are still dealing with a highly inefficient state apparatus, which is
made worse by the unwillingness of the ruling party to reform it on the
basis of the devolution of powers, decentralisation and autonomy so as to
redress the state's weak delivery capacity. We remain committed to the
practice and philosophy of local empowerment, because we can no longer
afford for the state to remain part of the problem rather than part of the
solution in respect of delivery.

We must become more sensitive to bread and butter issues. We cannot rest
while people are still without electricity, access to running water or
tarred roads. A lot was done by the past Government in which I
participated, and more must be done by this Government, as the President
announced in his address. We must break the cycle of poverty and ignorance
by fighting adult illiteracy. Our role would be that of reminding
Government that if we were to drive progress, the chain with which we would
do so would only be as strong as its weakest link, which lies in the
neglected masses of South Africa.

We'll continue to support the Government to increase the delivery of
services, and in this respect have no intention of being destructive, even
when voicing our criticism. We compliment the President for having begun
attaching timeframes to certain aspects of service delivery, shifting
emphasis to implementation and away from promises which hang in the air.
I've noted the remarks made by the President, in passing, relating to
traditional leadership. In many other respects the address of the President
reflects statements which he made one year ago, the previous year and the
year before that. Many of the promises have been repeated and some have
been increased. However, in respect of traditional leadership we have now
reached what seems to be a policy of wooing without even promises being
made, as this year less has been promised for traditional leadership than
in any of the past years when much was promised and little or nothing was
delivered. I feel that our country has yet to develop a real policy on
traditional leadership and offer traditional leaders fair and just
accommodation in the new, democratic dispensation.

I'll continue to voice the aspirations of traditional leadership, not
because we wish to protect the interests of a few leaders, but because, on
the strength of more than half a century of experience, I know that
traditional leadership has a fundamental role to play in the renewal of our
society and the development of our communities. I think it would be idle
talk to talk about an African Renaissance without the contribution of
traditional leaders, as they are the custodians of traditional values.
Our country has great opportunities. The next five years will be remembered
as the time in which these opportunities were seized or forever missed. We
pledge our role and commitment to ensuring that the Government of South
Africa becomes an instrument in these opportunities being seized before
they are lost.

Both my party and I remain long-term runners. We feel that our role in the
service of our democracy is now more important than ever. Like our society,
democracy too is also a chain as strong as its weakest link. It is the role
of a moral opposition, and the role I will play in this Parliament, to
ensure strength in the weakest links of our democracy. I hope that as I
respect the role of the ruling party and the mandate that it has received
from the South African people, the ruling party will learn to respect my
role and the role of the opposition. [Interjections.]

We need to learn to look upon an opponent not as an enemy and to become
more respectful of one another. I often find the proceedings in this
Parliament to be appalling, to say the least, both because of the jeering
and heckling which takes place here and because of the unwillingness to
listen and learn from what is being said here. [Interjections.]
If we are serious about providing the full measure of our contribution as
members of Parliament, and if this Parliament is to become more than a
clapping crowd, obsequiously applauding the work and policy of the
executive, we must rise to the challenge of becoming more professional in
our debates and more respectful of whatever is said here, irrespective of
who says it. I hope that, also in this respect, the next five years will be
better than the past five years.

We must ensure that the momentum we gained in this first decade of our
democracy is not lost. We have not arrived. The struggle for our liberation
and the struggle for democracy are far from complete. We have dedicated our
lives to those struggles and we shall see them through. Let us, my brothers
and sisters, ensure that the second decade of our democracy may, indeed,
surpass the first one in achievements, in glory and in hope for all the
people of South Africa. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr B W KANNEMEYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to start by agreeing with
the hon Buthelezi that indeed it is important for us to listen and learn.
But because I am still in the learning process, one of the things I want to
learn, hon Buthelezi is, if indeed, according to public opinion and
political analysts, one of the weakest links in our democracy is the lack
of strength of opposition parties how that can be laid at the door of the
governing party that managed to get more than 70% of the support?
[Applause.]

Secondly, to the Minister of Education, if possible, could you assist
Parliament in our training programme by arranging a basic session on
arithmetic? Because I can't see with all my bits of education how 70% can
constitute a small group of people, as has been indicated by both
opposition leaders, both hon Leon as well as hon Buthelezi.
[Interjections.]

I believe it is not our political eloquence, or the robustness of debate,
or the quality of the legislation that we pass that informs our local
communities of the quality of government that they are having; it is rather
the much simpler things such as clean drinking water, adequate shelter and
living in a safe and secure environment. This, of course, is one of the
understandings that separates the governing party from parties on our left.

Local government, within the broader governance context, is where people
experience basic service delivery, where people experience the different
manifestations of Government, whether it is good or bad. This sphere of
government is central to all major areas of governance and service delivery
- from access to clean water, to social grants, schooling, safety and
security, health services, etc. All these services are delivered in this
physical and geographical domain of public representatives elected at the
local sphere of government. It is therefore this very simple reality that
then places such a tremendous and challenging responsibility on local
government, at leadership, political, organisational, management and
administration levels.

The 2002 ANC National Conference's resolution on transforming the state and
governance, adopted in Stellenbosch, asserts the following:


  We seek to build a developmental state capable of implementing the
  creation of a better life for all. And acting as the driving force for
  socioeconomic transformation, the state, as the key instrument for the
  delivery of basic services, should develop appropriate systems and
  structures in order to facilitate a more quality and sustainable delivery
  machinery.

Again, this places an immense and awesome responsibility on us to ensure
that the capacity exists, especially at local government level. Central to
addressing these challenges that are faced by Government at all spheres, of
course, as the President indicated, is the need for reliable information so
that programmes can be designed appropriately and resource allocations be
done accordingly. Linking the need to our system of monitoring and
evaluation, the President then indicated the necessity for an improvement
of our statistical and information base.

I am of the opinion that with the appropriate skills deployed at local
levels we should be able to build a very reliable data basis in all the
different communities where we work, live and play. Comrade President, I
would venture to suggest that close interaction between the different arms
of Statistics SA and local authorities might indeed make a significant
contribution in this regard.

Again, in adopting the conference resolution on local economic development,
we correctly asserted that local economic development is critical for
balanced, employment-creating, equitable and dynamic growth. Apart from the
measures already undertaken, the President announced some very specific
measures that will contribute to this.

The President indicated the following clear tasks in his address to the
nation last Friday. The sectors he identified within our macroeconomic
reform strategy are, among other things, explaining the incentives
available; review of the regulatory framework that impacts on the small and
medium business sector; the creation of a unified enterprise development
agency; broad-based black economic empowerment remaining a pivotal element
of Government policy; the Expanded Public Works Programme; the process of
skills development and the compilation of a register of all graduates, in
order to link them with Umsobomvu learnerships and other schemes and
institutions that would help them to start their own businesses or get
jobs.

A much more proactive, vibrant, interactive and dynamic approach is
therefore required from our cadres deployed in this important sphere of
government at local level. Let me venture to make the following suggestions
in this regard. It would certainly be in the interests of every local
authority to be fully versed in the key growth sectors, as well as the
different incentive schemes of the relevant departments, so as to determine
what benefit could accrue to the local authorities and local communities if
they creatively combine their own investment incentives with local
Government, both those of national and provincial levels. This argument is
as relevant for the review of the regulatory framework for the small and
medium business sectors.

On black economic empowerment one would assume as obvious the role and
responsibility of local authorities as they relate to preferential
procurement policies, but also providing support and opportunities for
black economic empowerment in setting procurement targets for black
economic empowerment companies. As the Expanded Public Works Programme
finds implementation at local level, it is the clear task of local
authorities to ensure that all red tape, as it relates to local planning
and development, is smoothed out to give effect to the President's
directive that we launch the 21 nodal points in September this year.

Even though the skills development focuses more on a sectoral basis, there
is nothing that prevents provinces, and more specifically metro and
district municipalities, to disaggregate the national sectoral targets and
interact with the relevant Setas and local business and industry about the
placement of learnerships. Therefore in the same way local authorities need
to develop their own locally based database of both graduates and
matriculants in different areas, so as to improve that interaction.

Hon Morutoa already touched on some of the areas of the traditional local
government services such as water, sanitation, electricity and other forms
of service provision. Let me touch on the linkage between a safe and secure
environment and local authorities. The President said on Friday that we
also have a duty to improve the safety and security of all our citizens. In
this regard, engaging meaningfully with the police, Justice, Correctional
Services and Social Development, local government can indeed play a pivotal
role, together with volunteer community workers, in the setting up of
physical infrastructure to complement the victim support programmes,
especially as these relate to the victims of violent crimes and domestic
abuse - who in most cases are women, children and the elderly.

But more than this, I believe it would be in the interests of all local
authorities to ensure a safe and secure environment, not only for the very
important local communities, but also for the potential investors in their
local areas. The continued interaction between and support to councils,
community police forums and neighbourhood watches must therefore be
encouraged and strengthened.

On the aspect of social cohesion within our communities, which I also think
finds the greatest expression in our different local authorities and local
communities, the President states that in the coming months a thorough
review be done on the impact of socioeconomic transformation on social
cohesion within our communities, and across society as a whole including
qualitative issues such as nonracialism, nonsexism and the role and place
of family value systems, identity and moral regeneration. We hope that this
exercise, which will involve structures of civil society, will help us
better understand who we are and better appreciate quality of life beyond
the material.

The Stellenbosch resolution, again on transforming the state and
governance, correctly asserts that the challenge of nation-building remains
the primary task of the ANC. The ANC places a particular responsibility
also on local government leadership interacting with all strata and
sections of the community to contribute to the review as suggested. Despite
resistance from certain quarters, I think we will have to ask and answer
the tough question whether indeed our communities are today experiencing a
society that is more equal, nonracist and nonsexist.

The divide between peoples of all races in our countries, cities, villages
and on farms has not been the result of any accident or natural occurrence.
Hence, the reconstruction of a nonracial and nonsexist society cannot be
left to chance, but requires very concrete and conscious content in each
and every programme of socioeconomic transformation.

The President went on to speak on the need for greater integration between
different spheres of government, which would impact on the ability of local
authorities to improve their own role where they find themselves.

In the last remaining minutes I want to move on to another aspect that the
President touched on. When he started his address he congratulated members
of Parliament for having been elected, and he continued by saying that the
April elections reinforced the legitimacy of both national and provincial
legislatures and our national and provincial executives. This strengthens
the mandate of these institutions to discharge their responsibilities as
defined by the Constitution. I am raising this particularly, because for me
it links up with the very important question of work in our communities at
ward level, as well as at parliamentary constituency level. The President
continues to say that we will also assist local government to ensure that
the system of ward committees functions as visualised in the national
legislation.

It is common knowledge that where people are not involved in the decisions
that affect their lives, social policies and social interventions are less
likely to succeed. Ward committees are one of the considerable advantages
the ANC has made in transforming our system of governance into one in which
the people are able to actively participate. This has been done through
various structures and mechanisms such as school governing bodies,
community police forums, ward committees, imbizos, constituency offices,
etc.

However, in order to render assistance, assessment of all these structures
and mechanisms is probably necessary, based on how it is currently
operating and functioning. In 2002 we already asserted that the ANC takes
active steps to promote participatory democracy by creating opportunities
for the effective involvement and participation of men and women, of the
illiterate as well as the literate, the rural, the poor, the working
people, and people with disabilities and other targeted groups to gather
and express themselves on matters relevant to basic conditions.

I have not seen the Minister of Finance, and I think the Speaker is
probably on her way, but what is important is the next part: The conference
resolution on this aspect continues to say that resources should be made
available for the expansion and consolidation of participatory democracy
and the functioning of ward committees and parliamentary constituency
offices in order to ensure that residents and sectors of society are
mobilised to actively participate in programmes of governance and
socioeconomic development.

I am very definitely arguing, Comrade Deputy Speaker, that there should be
more time for constituency work, and greater availability of adequate
resources to enable members of Parliament to respond more effectively to
the challenge related to that field of work.

Let me conclude by saying: Comrade President, in a variation of your famous
``I am an African" speech, which states that it is good to be an African,
let me say that as good and as sweet as the election results were at
national level, you will forgive me and share my elation that after 10
years it is indeed good for the Western Cape to join the rest of the
country and to also be liberated and free. [Applause.] I now have a much
better understanding of Martin Luther King Junior's words: ``Free at last!
Free at last! Thank God Almighty, we are free at last.''

Mr President, it feels good to be an African. It is amazing to be a South
African, and today I can say: ``Dis mngca om 'n Wes-Kapenaar te wees.''
[It's wonderful to be an inhabitant of the Western Cape.] [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President and hon members, the
UDM welcomes President Mbeki's state of the nation address made on Friday
last week. We welcome the commitments made, as well as the targets and
deadlines that have been set. We doubt neither the wisdom nor the necessity
of the President's economic and employment goals. We have been urging for
the adoption of many of them for some time now. The time has arrived for
the highly skilled public servants in various departments to implement the
President's plans, while Cabinet members play a leadership and monitoring
role.

The managers must now be allowed to manage without political interference.
It is therefore appropriate for me at this time to thank the President for
the confidence shown in the UDM by inviting us to supply a Deputy Minister
for the critical portfolio of Public Works. The UDM and other major parties
in this House already administer taxpayers' money at provincial or local
government level. In these instances all the major parties have to deal
with the ANC national and provincial governments on a daily basis.

It is one of the virtues of our Constitution that many parties can
contribute to governance, despite our political or ideological differences.
We view this appointment in the same fashion. It is yet another opportunity
for the UDM to participate in nation-building, and the creation of a more
prosperous nation. At the same time the UDM will continue to play an active
role as opposition party, and carry out the mandate of our voters, namely
to campaign for our policies, which they supported. It means that we will
support policies that we concur with whilst we will voice our opposition to
those actions or policies that we disagree with.

We will criticise and campaign for solutions that we believe are better
suited to the challenges facing the nation. Yes, indeed, both the ANC and
the IFP will agree that in the past the UDM was ready to contribute to
government and nation-building when called upon to do so. Yes, we supported
the IFP two years ago during the floor-crossing in KwaZulu-Natal. At that
time the will of the majority, as expressed in the previous election, was
on the side of the IFP. Similarly, after the voters had spoken in the last
election, the UDM, amongst others, was called upon to assist in resolving
the KwaZulu-Natal governance issue. This is a principled position that
allows us to behave consistently without sacrificing our policies or role
as opposition party. [Applause.]

I believe that Deputy Minister Kganyago will make a meaningful contribution
to the Department of Public Works. His appointment means that the UDM has a
heightened responsibility to ensure that the department succeeds in its
objective. I would like to use this opportunity to call upon the ANC
leadership that we should compare notes on a periodic basis with regards to
solutions and strategies for the Department of Public Works. I hope
together we can ensure that Public Works becomes the engine for growth and
employment which we agree it should be.

For instance, there are already fears being expressed about the permanency
of jobs created through the Public Works Programme. The UDM would like to
see the establishment of infrastructure maintenance units to absorb
semiskilled labour. These jobs will have the potential of becoming more
permanent, and lasting beyond the construction phase of a project.

The UDM is pleased that gradually a shift in economic thinking has occurred
in Government. Greater economic intervention by Government through Public
Works and other strategies is in our opinion a relevant and necessary
approach. South Africa has many backlogs and imbalances inherited from the
past. The so-called Washington Consensus is designed for developed
countries. By the President's own admission, South Africa has two
economies. The solution to the problems of those in the second economy
cannot be found exclusively in strategies designed for developed economies.
We applaud Government for recognising this reality that we have been
pointing out for a long time.

Madam Deputy Speaker, we believe Government must move one step further and
recognise that the initiatives announced by the President must be
underpinned by an expanding economy, otherwise they will have no lasting
effect. In this regard Government needs to acknowledge that it is one of
the main sources of inflation. Continuous tax cuts are recouped with higher
administered prices and at the same time interest rates are kept high to
deal with this inevitable inflation. The results are that Government
directly causes the high cost of capital in the country, therefore economic
growth cannot get into a higher gear.

In 2010 South Africa will host the Soccer World Cup. Indeed, South Africa
is in a carnival mood, and if Government can meet the target set by the
President, that mood can be sustained. The UDM congratulates every member
of the bid team, and all those who assisted them.

Madam Deputy Speaker, 2010 is a mere six years away. We appeal to
Government to recognise that in such a short period of time, medium-term
budgeting and roll-overs will not suit our purposes. We require a different
style of year-on-year budgeting - one that clearly spells out annual
targets, and which Parliament can monitor on a continuous basis. We believe
that the 2010 World Cup should galvanise us to pursue our development
agenda with even greater vigour. I submit that this provides us with the
necessary incentives and opportunities to bring forward the deadlines for
some of the development programmes.

This includes the targets that were set at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and the Growth and Development Summit. Previously stakeholders
have spoken of deadlines in 2014 and 2015. I believe that these timeframes
should be reduced to fall within the 2010 timeframe. The 2010 World Cup
should be a rallying point to accelerate development and delivery, one that
will leave a lasting legacy. Here we are speaking about much more than a
few big stadiums. The legacy that we must create will be in areas such as
improved transport, infrastructure, housing, security, education, sports
development, as well as tourism and the environment.

There are many potential strategies to exploit the overlap between
infrastructure and human development. For instance, there is a great deal
of latent sporting talent in the townships and rural areas. This talent
lies dormant for lack of recreational facilities. The social benefits of
giving all South African children access to constructive sport and
recreation are countless. In the long run it will contribute to an
environment where criminals, gangsters and drug peddlers will not be able
to easily tempt children into their nefarious activities.

We propose, for instance, that every construction project that exceeds a
certain cost, say R1 million, should also construct a basic sporting ground
in the area. Here we are talking merely of using the construction equipment
already there to level the ground and fence off the area and perhaps plant
turf. In this fashion the construction of a road, for instance, becomes
something more. It becomes both economic and social investment in the
community. This is how we can build a lasting legacy through the 2010 World
Cup.

Of course, this is but one example. What we foresee is that Government
would draft a social investment code that forms part of every construction
tender. This would include a menu of options, such as the sporting ground
mentioned above. But it would also include other options such as clinics,
school laboratories and community libraries. Contractors will then consult
with the community where a project is awarded, to pick a social investment
to complete along with the major project itself. Naturally, Government
should set specifications for these social investment projects to ensure
that every sporting ground, library or laboratory meets certain minimum
standards.

An immediate priority concerning the World Cup is to inculcate a culture of
ownership among all South Africans. This culture of ownership and of
responsibility is sadly inadequate in our country. One example of this is
the fact that our cities and neighbourhoods are blighted by littering.
South Africans are not dirty people. Once you enter their homes, they are
neat and tidy. But what will our guests in 2010 think when they see our
cities and neighbourhoods? How do we explain to them this filth and grime?
How do you explain to people that Johannesburg, Cape Town, Durban and
Pretoria are filthy and drowning in litter whilst Nairobi and Cairo are
not?

I believe that it is time for Government at the highest level to take up
these efforts and establish perhaps an environmental trust. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I apologise that my name is not on
the list. Hon President and hon Speaker, as we celebrate Africa Day today
it seems that the dust around this election is finally settling now. It was
an election in which many lofty promises were made by many political
parties. As the ANC said at the time though, your party, Mr President,
would be the one with the responsibility of actually implementing those
promises.

The ANC won this election under the promise of a people's contract to
create work and fight poverty. We in the ID are determined to ensure that
you do not default on the letter and the spirit of this contract. The
concept of a people's contract speaks to the very heart of our new
democracy. It is a sad fact that the lack of democracy in the apartheid
years led to the severe underdevelopment of the majority of our people in
this country.

The challenge we are all faced with now is to turn the power of our
democracy into a force of development. The ID is completely committed to
the principle and practice of true democracy in South Africa. People need
to be able to direct and guide Government on the most appropriate form of
development needed for their circumstances. Too often these voices are not
heard, and projects and plans are sometimes implemented with disastrous
effects.

What we need is more consultation and not consultants. According to
Government's own 10-year review, almost a quarter of Government's
procurement budget is spent on consultants. We should be using that money
to build capacity within Government departments so that they can interact
with communities themselves and find the right long-term solutions.
Government must also put mechanisms in place to find out where the lack of
capacity is being used as an excuse for inefficiency.

Mr President, if you want your bold plans to succeed, you will need to
crack the whip and ensure that Ministers and public servants implement your
programme according to the timelines spelt out by you. You will be very
busy indeed implementing this plan. So, I do not want you to worry about
the noise from the small boy on this side, I will deal with him.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

One of the greatest dangers our new democracy faces is that of poverty. If
we are unable to turn the tide of the ever-increasing levels of poverty in
South Africa, many of the hard-won victories for freedom and democracy
would have been for nothing. Poverty is a threat to the very existence of
an individual and society at large. It attacks a person's dignity and self-
worth, and eats away at a person's self-esteem. It creates moral dilemmas
between choosing a life of crime and basic survival.

The Government has embarked upon some initiatives to stem the rising levels
of poverty, such as social grants and the Public Works Programme. The only
real long-term solution, though, is tackling the unacceptably high
unemployment level in South Africa. The rallying cry against poverty must
be jobs, jobs and jobs.

Now, once again, Mr President, you have promised the country one million
jobs. I ask you though, what has suddenly changed? We have heard these
promises before, but the jobs did not materialise. The ID believes that the
only sustainable way of creating jobs in larger numbers is by giving
priority, and directing our resources, to SMMEs. Government and large
business cannot do this alone and, in fact, they are the ones that are
currently shedding jobs.

One practical way of doing this is to award a R100 million worth of
infrastructure contracts to SMMEs. They should be the contractors who are
responsible for overcoming the huge backlog that exists and maintaining our
much-needed infrastructure. By awarding it to these contractors, Government
will be helping them to overcome the hurdle of capital they need to turn
their businesses into viable enterprises.

South Africa also needs to make a link between our education system and the
kinds of skills that are required for our economy to prosper. The ID also
believes that as a nation we need a critical debate on controversial
issues. We cannot shy away from these debates, as our new democracy was
built through negotiating and debating and finding each other on divisive
issues.

On the economic level we should be critically debating amongst all key
sectors the precise role Government's intervention in the economy should
play. This will prevent a situation where different sectors simply
determine the role for Government. Like you, Mr President, the ID does not
want to see our children being taught in conditions where they are exposed
to the elements. We will go further and claim that every child in South
Africa deserves the quality education guaranteed in our Constitution. Like
our access-to-education initiative, the ID will be presenting a number of
practical solutions over this coming year to show that this can be
achieved.

The ID also supports Government's national antiretroviral roll-out
programme. But we are concerned that the current rate of implementation
will not achieve Government's target of 1,4 million people by 2008. To
achieve this, we must provide roughly 300 000 ARVs per annum and not the
current 53 000. This virus, Mr President, is outmanoeuvring us as a nation
and we need to play this virus as a team - like we did so successfully for
the 2010 soccer bid.
Mr President, do you really think that there is a need to create a special
joint task team to apprehend the 200 worst criminals in South Africa? In
what way will this task team differ from the Scorpions, and does this then
mean that the Scorpions have been unable to fulfil this task? We in the ID
also share your vision which you spelt out to the country in your state of
the nation address. It is a bold plan in which all of us will have to play
a part to ensure that it gets implemented according to the timetable laid
out by you.

The ID will be there every step of the way to ensure that Government is
held to account in regard to this plan. It will also encourage a lively
spirit of critical debate within Parliament to ensure that the country is
being exposed to all the different policies available to us.

In conclusion, I must make a comment, because so many parties referred to
the role of the opposition, and I think it is about time that we debated
this role. Opposition parties are created by voters exercising a choice for
different views, and therefore opposition parties must send out a nonracial
message to our country, underpinned by the values of the Constitution and
not race.
I am sick and tired of hearing all this talk about race coming from this
side. [Interjections.] We have a role to play in making certain that we
send out a nonracial message. Opposition must also speak the truth to power
so that South Africans can begin to trust them, because they do not trust
opposition parties at the moment. Opposition parties must ensure that the
principle of separation of powers is adhered to. [Interjections.]

Parliament must remain independent, and therefore it is critical that as
opposition parties we do not just shout and scream, but also look at
ourselves and the role we must play. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr K O BAPELA: Deputy Speaker, President, Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
hon leaders and hon members, many in the House have been asking why flags
of the 53 African countries are displayed outside the Marks Building. I
hope the answers were sufficient: that today, 25 May, is the 41st
anniversary of Africa Day.

I want to join other speakers, and I also want to embrace and join millions
of people on the continent, in celebrating this historic day. It was a day
when, in 1963, African leaders and people resolved to launch the
Organisation of African Unity which was to unite Africans and consolidate
the freedoms of those who got freedom from colonialism, and to support
those who were still in the bondage and shackles of colonialism.

We have now achieved transforming the OAU into the African Union - which
has new goals and objectives that have been determined by new challenges,
as espoused in Nepad. The African Union is to carry the founding vision of
its predecessor. In some of the African countries, this day is declared a
holiday. President, I'm not calling for any additional holiday. However, as
a country we need to debate such a possibility in future, particularly if
in July we win the hosting of the African Union.

Our people must also learn the national anthem of the continent, understand
their own continent and be proud Africans. I have heard that some schools
are having events in recognition of this day. The Department of Foreign
Affairs has organised a luncheon with the media. This event alone is not
enough for such a significant day as Africa Day.

We are also responding to the President's state of the nation address to
Parliament. In Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, delegates from African countries have
gathered, including our own - who are led by the Deputy President and
accompanied, among others, by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma - to witness and be part of the historic event, that is the
launch of the African Union's Peace and Security Council. We wish the new
organ of the AU success in its endeavours. Its tasks are to ensure
collective security, early warning arrangements, and to facilitate a timely
and efficient response to conflict and crisis in situations in Africa.

One of its functions will be to act as the standing decision-making organ
for the prevention, management and resolution of conflict. However, its
success depends on support from all governments and people on the
continent, including the South African Government and its people. For
information purposes, I would like to state that the 15 members of the
Peace and Security Council were elected on 16 March 2004 by the executive
council of the AU.

As we celebrate Africa Day, we can pride ourselves, President, on some of
the achievements pronounced when we declared this century an African
Century. At the turn of the millennium, we can pride ourselves on the
achievements on this continent, some of which are the reconstitution of the
OAU into the AU, the adoption of Nepad as a socioeconomic development plan
of the AU, the decrease in conflict and political instability on the
continent, an increase in the democratisation of governments, the growing
international goodwill towards the continent; and now, for the first time
ever, a Soccer World Cup tournament is coming to our continent.

As you rightly said, Mr President, it is Africa as a continent that will be
hosting the event. However, we remain confident and hope that some of the
outstanding conflicts are in the process of being resolved. Some of those
pertain to the peace process in the DRC in which South Africa plays a
significant role, including the hosting of the talks that led to the
government of national unity that is supported by all groups and forces. We
note the recent visit by our President in which he was accompanied by a
delegation of business people and Government agencies to identify the
issues and agree with the people of Congo regarding the reconstruction and
development of their country.
Regarding the Burundi peace process, the continuing engagement with all
groups in seeking solutions remains a programme of Government in which the
Deputy President is leading. Others that still seek resolution are the
Somali conflict - South Africa is, indeed, working with regional bodies to
see to the end of this conflict; the Sudanese conflict and peace process -
there is a need to support the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
Igad, which is one of the regional bodies there; Western Sahara - we will
continue to keep the unresolved question of Western Sahara on the agenda of
the AU and other multilateral forums; the near resolution in Liberia in
which South Africa is also playing a role; encouragement of dialogue in
Côte d'Voire; and the newly-found peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea in
which South Africa is playing a role through its peacekeeping personnel.
These are but some of many more milestones or achievements that we cannot
overlook as we are also conscious of the fact that there is still a lot
that needs to be achieved in the renewal of our continent.

My colleague will speak about other broad international issues and will
expand on south-to-south relations and challenges in Third World countries.
Those challenges also find resonance in Africa because it is part of the
developing countries or Third World countries. The African continent has a
visionary programme, the New Partnership for Africa's Development, and is
busy reorganising and strengthening the African Union and its organs. We
now have the Pan-African Parliament in place, the African Peer Review
Mechanism and, as alluded to earlier, we are also launching the African
Peace and Security Council.

South Africa is not an island; its existence depends on the existence of
other nations and countries. We need our goods to enter other markets,
hence our involvement in the WTO, discussions and agreements on trade, and
binational and bicommission agreements with other countries. We have
resolved, as a nation and after years of isolation, to be an active member
of the international community of nations, and that includes membership of
the UN, Nonaligned Movement, AU and others.

We have also declared this century the African Century in order to end war
and conflicts on our continent; ensure peace, security and stability; and
to pursue the programme of Nepad - which will ultimately pursue programmes
such as economic growth, infrastructure development, poverty alleviation
and create a better life, thus giving the people of the continent hope.

We need to pursue our programme of restructuring or transforming and
strengthening multilateral institutions which include the UN, WTO, World
Bank, IMF, etc. We need to continue our active participation in other
bodies such as the Commonwealth; interact with regional bodies such as the
EU and Carecom, including special focus and attention on the south-south
relations; and to strengthen and transform SADC and Sacu.

South Africa as a country is in demand on the continent and in the world.
As a responsible nation and as part of this globe, we should honour with
pride obligations and requests where possible, while balancing our domestic
needs.

Lastly, whether we like it or not, we have an obligation to contribute to
the creation of a better Africa and world. A number of South Africans walk
with pride and can raise the country's flag anywhere in the world. A number
of South Africans enjoy the benefits of our freedom and democracy. They are
also involved in various fields such as research, sports, arts and culture,
and business. We are the envy of the world, hence we have in the past years
hosted major conferences and sporting events. In 2010 we will be hosting,
on behalf of Africa, the Fifa Soccer World Cup on our shores. I bet that
for us to get the nod as a country, besides the work done by the bid
committee, central to all is the confidence the world has in South Africa
and its collective leadership.

If we had not played a significant role in international activities,
including profiling the country and its vision, we would not be known and
therefore should thank the efforts of the South African leadership,
particularly our President, Thabo Mbeki. We should also dismiss as hogwash
those assertions which are uninformed and ill-conceived which state that
the President spends more time outside the country.

The President is guiding, providing leadership and directing his Government
to the challenges of ending poverty and creating a better life for our
people, and that includes the people of the continent. In doing so, as the
President, he continues to honour his international obligations as expected
of the head of Government. South Africa is not an island, but a member of
the community of nations.

We also note the challenges regarding ensuring a programme of
democratisation and good governance in the countries where citizens do not
enjoy the fruits of freedom and democracy, as alluded to by the President
in his state of the nation address.

We also welcome the change of heart and strategy by the DA in raising
issues that we may not agree on or may differ on. This change of heart or
strategy did not exist before the elections or during the previous term of
government. The ANC will engage in anything that contributes to nation-
building or the creation of a better life for our people, including the
alleviation of poverty.

Here are some of the issues that need our utmost attention even though
differences remain as to how to handle them: Regarding the issue of
Zimbabwe, unfortunately, some people in this House and elsewhere have plans
that we do not think will work in resolving the crisis in Zimbabwe. History
has also proven that any imposed settlements do not work and in many cases
are rejected. Political settlements are those that are products of the
citizens or people of a country, and the same goes for Zimbabwe. The so-
called road map to democracy in Zimbabwe by the DA is not the product of
the people of Zimbabwe and may not work there. The South African
Government's approach of being a facilitator who interacts with the main
stakeholders ie the ruling Zanu-PF, the opposition - MDC and other civil
society organisations, has to be encouraged. Facilitation by South Africa
and Zimbabwe's neighbours and multilateral bodies is aimed at giving the
Zimbabwean people the opportunity to engage in talks and find a mechanism
towards a political resolution. Until such time that all sides are in
talks, we are confident that it will be a Zimbabwean solution that will
bring lasting stability in that country.

As far as the Haiti issue is concerned, I would like to thank the majority
of South Africans, black and white, who support and have welcomed the
decision by Government to give political asylum to the former President of
Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. There is, however, those who are opposed to
this and cite a terrible record of human rights violations - correctly so.
They say that Aristide is a dictator and argue that as a result of South
Africa being a champion of democracy and good governance, it should not
spend a cent of public money on Aristide. This is a narrow way of looking
at this issue and dangerous political adventurism. I fully agree with Prof
Molefi Asante in his monthly column, which appeared in the City Press, 23
May 2004, where he said: ``The kidnapping and overthrow of Aristide remains
a stain on the idea of democracy.'' He continued and said: ``Whites have
not forgiven the African people of Haiti for defeating the greatest
European military power of its day.'' Comrade Mavivi Myakayaka-Manzini, the
ANC head of international relations, in ANC Today said: ``We cannot support
the violent removal of democratically elected leaders.''

I'm bringing up these issues for our people to know about the history of
Haiti, our connection to it and the call for unity of Africans, including
those in the diaspora. Granting Aristide political asylum is not the first
of its kind and is not part of the diplomatic strategy to resolve whatever
problems that country or nation might be facing. It is also not the first
time that that has occurred. Through our multilateral institutions, when
Liberia was in turmoil, our leaders agreed that the solution was for the
former President, Charles Taylor, to leave his country. He is being hosted
by Nigeria during his political asylum. So we will have to continue to play
that particular role as a country.

We welcome the Government's response, support and diplomatic role within
our own laws and the Geneva Convention regarding the visit and statement
made by the attorney-general of the government of Equatorial Guinea, Mr
Jose Bono, who recently visited South Africa for consultations with
Government agencies, families and legal representatives of those arrested
there. He assured South Africa that those people will be given a fair trial
which will be observed by the international observers.

In conclusion, I was also requested to raise a challenge regarding the
declaration signed by leaders of SADC - which we hope will find its way
into the AU. That declaration says that by 2005 governments or heads of
states should ensure that a gender balance of 30% representation of women
is achieved in their parliaments, executive and organs of state. A note of
concern, they say, should be raised with you to pursue the matter with
other leaders in the region so that they follow the example of South
Africa.

Lastly, I would like to inform you that as we celebrate Africa Day today,
we hope that after July we'll celebrate - as part of our overall
celebrations - the hosting of the Pan-African Parliament. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon President and hon members, I take
advantage of this opportunity in my capacity as the Speaker of the National
Assembly to say something during this important debate. I will, of course,
soon have an opportunity to again address the House on the occasion of the
debate on the Budget Vote of Parliament in June.

The importance of this debate, apart from it being based on the state of
the nation address by the President, is that it comes six weeks after our
third election, which has produced this House. Hon members, we are a
collective of South Africans who have been given a mandate by the
electorate to use the institution of Parliament to respond to their needs,
to make this country work better and to build our nation and the values
which can better take us to a better future. Coming so soon after our
successful election, it is an appropriate occasion for us as the elected
representatives to thank the electorate for their confidence in us
collectively.

Today I wish to reflect generally on some of the challenges that face this
Parliament and some of the thoughts that need further processing as we move
forward. The first relates to strengthening the working relations and
linkages within governance. Between the various arms of governance in the
country, we need to examine where there is room for improvement in our
system and working relationships. Parliament must play its role alongside
and together with the executive and the judiciary to strengthen our
democracy. As a society and as a system, we must grow and we must
strengthen ourselves by building on constitutional imperatives such as
public participation, accountability and co-operative governance.

Elected public representatives, regardless of party-political affiliation,
are representatives of, and accountable to, the public that elect them.
They carry the authority of the masses of South Africans who came out in
their thousands on the 14th of April. The act of election itself is an
expression of democracy whereby the electorate freely expresses confidence
in the organised groups of people called political parties. Though
organised in political party formations, we, of course, always need to
remember that the needs of all South African citizens must inform the work
of Parliament and individual parliamentarians.

We must remember some of the challenges which have emerged in the past 10
years. The question of ensuring that ordinary people make their input in,
for example, our public hearings, is one such challenge. Public hearings
have tended to be largely opportunities for the elite in our society to
express themselves. The question is, how do we strengthen our system to
ensure that we enhance the capacity of ordinary people to make their voices
heard in Parliament? We must seek to be informed by the views of the people
on the ground in the work we do. More detailed proposals on this particular
matter will be tabled as soon as we are ready with them.

As a new parliament, we must look at our parliamentary system in which one
of the Houses, the NCOP, facilitates input directly informed by
consultation with the provincial legislatures and communities. We need to
consider if there are any improvements that are needed. We must consider
whether we have fully appreciated and taken maximum advantage of their
different roles.

In looking at how to strengthen the working relations between the two
Houses of Parliament, the question of provincial visits by the respective
committees of the two Houses is an area of particular interest. Are there
any unnecessary overlaps? Do these committees and the Houses play different
roles in the areas in which they work? How do we co-ordinate and enhance
the effectiveness of the work by MPs and these committees on the ground
towards deepening our democracy? These are all important questions which
might sound technical, but have an important bearing on improving
governance broadly and heightening our capacity to deliver on the hopes and
aspirations of ordinary South Africans.

Over the past 10 years there have been many visits to other parliaments
internationally. It is clear that parliaments of the so-called developed
world are far better resourced than we are in many ways. I will focus more
on this area in Parliament's Budget Vote in June. For now I just wish to
say that numerous discussions on this that have taken place over the past
10 years, and we definitely need to improve on the resources we allocate
to, for example, our committee work, constituency work and other facilities
which come as support to members of Parliament.

Today is Africa Day. It reminds us that we are not an island as a country.
Even in the legislative sector we are part of collectives of parliaments
and parliamentarians. On an ongoing basis we need to strengthen our work
and linkages with parliaments in the region and Africa as a whole.

This coming Sunday our delegation will be leaving for Namibia to
participate in the SADC Parliamentary Forum meeting. One of the key issues
on the agenda of the SADC PF at present continues to be the challenge of
regional integration, specifically in the context of the debate on the
creation of a SADC parliament. This matter and the relevant documents have
been referred to the Ad Hoc Committee on International Affairs. The
National Assembly will soon have to debate the report that will emanate
from that committee on this matter. Our views will then be conveyed to the
executive, in particular the Department of Foreign Affairs that has already
been in touch with us on this matter.
I must also remind the House that we will soon have to decide on
Parliament's delegation to the Pan-African Parliament. These bodies at
regional and continental levels are a proud realisation of the progress our
continent is making as we take our destiny into our own hands as Africans.
The work done by these institutions must always be informed by caring for
our people, enhancing good governance, accountability and building a human
rights culture in Africa. Hon members, hon President and Madam Deputy
Speaker, thank you for your attention. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Deputy Speaker,
there are some societies that are ripped apart by division. Yet others,
like South Africa, seem to have an undefined ability to heal themselves.

For more than 400 years the people of Northern Ireland have waged war
against one another, and the hon member Mr Asmal knows that history well.
At times Irish Catholics were forbidden from receiving an education,
holding any public office, living within five miles of any major town or
owning land of any kind. Families have been destroyed, whole generations
lost and, despite the best efforts of political leaders and the
international community, that conflict continues.

Another of the world's most enduring conflicts is that of the Middle East.
From partition to mediation, to settlement and also to outright war, no
lasting solution has ever been found and none seems likely, whilst atrocity
is met with atrocity and violence spirals into new cycles of hatred.

How did we achieve, in the space of 10 years, what so many other nations
have struggled for centuries to attain - a just and lasting peace? Our own
history has more than enough examples of conflict, oppression, bitterness
and deep-seated aggression. Take, for example, the Anglo Boer War; even 10
years after its end, hatred and bitterness between Briton and Boer was so
deep that it resulted in the 1914 rebellion. Most significantly, take the
struggle against apartheid, its casualties and the deep injustice that was
the reality of South Africa for decades.

So, what then has been that South African difference? Part of the answer, I
believe, lies in the insight of our people. In other conflicts there
remains a deeply-held belief - on all sides - that ultimate victory is
possible and that one side will eventually rise above the ashes. South
Africans came to realise, however, that in some victories lies defeat, that
winning a war will often lose the peace. This is the cornerstone of our new
South Africa: The acknowledgement that every community has worth and that
each person is needed to build our joint future.

Another powerful South African difference is that we did not delegate the
responsibility for peace to political leaders alone. In our country it has
been the strength of civil society that has helped to drive the agenda for
unity and for reconciliation. Combined with the TRC and the too-often
undervalued Chapter 9 watchdog bodies created by our Constitution, these
have provided valuable safety valves to vent the frustrations and the
concerns of all South Africans and to voice their ambitions.

What is clear, is that the South African difference has been the grass-
roots approach to peace, cemented by visionary leadership. There are few
areas in which this has been more apparent since 1994 than in the private
sector, in which honest and voluntary partnerships between white and black
enterprises have increasingly gained momentum.

Wie sou 10 jaar terug kon dink dat sakeleiers soos Nally Bosman, Tokyo
Sexwale en Nthobi Angel sou saamstaan aan die stuur van die opvolger van
die ou Volkskasbank? Of dat Sanlam, eens 'n voertuig vir Afrikaner-
bemagtiging, vandag 'n dryfveer is vir swart ekonomiese bemagtiging onder
die aanvoering van leiers soos Ton Vosloo en Patrice Motsepe? Of, soos
bevind in 'n onlangse Markinor-studie, dat 75% van wit boere in die land
die belangrikheid van grondhervorming sou erken, met meer as 70% wat
gewillig is om hul dienste as mentors aan te bied vir opkomende jong boere?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Who would have thought, 10 years ago, that business like Nally Bosman,
Tokyo Sexwale and Nthobi Angel would be at the helm of the successor to the
old Volkskas Bank together? Or that Sanlam, once a vehicle for Afrikaner
empowerment, would today be an incentive for black economic empowerment
under the command of leaders like Ton Vosloo and Patrice Motsepe? Or, as
was found in a recent Markinor survey, that 75% of white farmers in the
country would recognise the importance of land reform, with more than 70%
prepared to offer their services as mentors for emerging young farmers?]

So, let no one doubt that we are entitled to celebrate what we have
achieved and to say that we have done well together in our first 10 years,
and give all the credit to the people of South Africa. If there was one
overarching message of the President's speech on Friday, however, it was
that the job is incomplete, that the project remains unfinished and that it
is time to deliver the fruits of our peace.

With the phenomenal news that our people will play host to the 2010 Soccer
World Cup, it is certain that more visitors from more countries will
experience South Africa than ever before. Although we will continue to put
in the hard work required to sustain our normal tourism growth, the nature
of World Cup tourism will be very different. Where before we received only
limited numbers of Spanish, Portuguese and Japanese visitors, for example,
those countries are now major markets waiting to be unlocked. It will
require from us - all the role-players - a comprehensive tourism
development plan on a new scale. One issue that will require our urgent
attention in unlocking these markets, with the assistance of the hon
Minister of Home Affairs, is to review the visa systems for those
countries.

We will also need greatly increased numbers of direct flights to South
Africa and more airport facilities of international calibre. The hon
Minister of Transport announced yesterday that we will invest many more
millions of rands in the public transport system. We will require the
highest levels of quality control to ensure that our hospitality and hotel
grading systems guarantee a positive and value-for-money experience.
Because ultimately the measure of our success will not be how many visitors
arrive for the World Cup, but how many of those visitors leave impressed
and how many of them will return repeatedly.

This is a fantastic opportunity to launch South Africa as a global
destination of choice, and not just for our main cities, but especially for
our rural regions. The Soccer World Cup belongs not only to Cape Town,
Johannesburg and Durban, but also to Orkney, Polekwane, Rustenburg,
Pretoria and Port Elizabeth. But is goes even further. It also belongs to
the crafter in Beaufort West, the bed-and-breakfast in Alexandra and the
tour guide in St Lucia. As with all tourism in South Africa, we must ensure
that every community shares in the benefits of this growth.

In conclusion, it is time to get down to work. We know the road that we
must travel together. We know the route that we must take to reach our
goals in the second decade of freedom. There is no doubt that our just and
lasting peace will endure. The only question is the quality of life that we
can bring to every community as the rewards of the South African
difference. As South Africans we stand ready to make that journey together.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr President, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members,
I rise on behalf of the ANC to respond to the state of the nation address
of the President, the hon Mr Thabo Mbeki.

The speech has received national and, indeed, international acclaim for its
clarity of vision, incisiveness, clear targets and focus on delivering an
economy and package of social services that will restore the dignity of our
people and fight poverty. The ability of the ANC-led Government since 1994
to deliver on its election mandates was clearly felt by the majority of
South Africans who voted the ANC into power for a third term with a huge
majority.

Not only have we delivered social services, but also the Soccer World Cup
in 2010. We will continue to make South Africa, Africa and the world proud
of this Government. Mr President, indeed it is good to be an African, and
proudly South African too.

Let me provide a small sample of what we have achieved in health over the
past decade. Madam Deputy Speaker, our mass immunisation campaigns and the
dedication of our health workers and mothers to ensuring that our children
get immunised have resulted in our immunisation coverage increasing from
63% in 1998 to 74% in 2003. As a result, no child has died from measles
since 1999. This is a major achievement of this Government. [Applause.]

In addition, our surveillance efforts will ensure that South Africa and
indeed SADC is declared poliofree in 2005. Malaria has caused much
suffering and death in three of our provinces, namely, KwaZulu-Natal,
Limpopo and Mpumalanga. I am pleased to announce that as a consequence of
our strengthened malaria control programme, which includes the efforts of
the governments of Mozambique and Swaziland as part of the Lubombo Spatial
Development Initiative, we have been decreasing cases of malaria and
significantly lowering the number of deaths. We have now entered into a
partnership with Zimbabwe in the fight against malaria at the borders of
our countries.

The World Health Organisation's target is a case fatality of 1%. We are
currently just below this target and we will endeavour to reach 0,5% case
fatality in the next five years. In addition, as was announced by the
President, we will deliver on the 10% reduction in malaria cases per year.

We have contributed to a range of regional strategies on health in line
with our commitments to Nepad. I am proud to report that for the first time
at the WHO assembly African ministers of health spoke with one voice on all
health policy issues. We are currently implementing the SADC Health
Protocol and the SADC HIV and Aids programme. Our work in malaria control,
with our neighbours, is one concrete example of our joint successes.

In February 2003 the President announced that people with disabilities
would get health care free of charge at public health institutions. We have
successfully implemented this programme in all provinces. We are currently
working with the Department of Social Development to ensure that there is a
seamless process in accessing disability grants and free health services,
regardless of which department is first approached by people in need of
these services. In addition, by the end of this financial year, the backlog
with regard to wheelchairs and hearing aids that we inherited will be
eliminated. The comprehensive HIV and Aids care management and treatment
plan for South Africa is being implemented. Facilities have been identified
in all provinces, and the selection of patients who qualify for the
programme has taken place. In some case treatment has commenced. We will
have at least one service point per health district by the end of the first
year of the plan.

Allow me, Deputy Speaker, to reiterate, however, that this plan is more
than just antiretrovirals. The ANC and this Government's response to HIV
and Aids has emphasised and will continue to emphasise the need for a
comprehensive response on three levels, namely that prevention and care is
as important as treatment; that Government action alone will not stop the
spread of HIV infection; and that all sectors of society - every community,
every family and every person - must take individual and collective
responsibility to ensure that the incidence of HIV and Aids decreases in
the second decade of our democracy. Our response must be intersectoral. All
Government departments must have strong HIV and Aids programmes.

We have increased access to primary health care for all our people. Since
1994 we have built more than 1 300 new clinics in the underserved areas of
our country. This means that primary health care facilities are more
accessible to millions of South Africans. More recently, since 1 July 2003,
we have implemented a scarce skills and rural allowance to ensure that we
are able to attract and retain health workers in the rural areas of the
country. This policy complemented the phased introduction of community
services for health professionals that has resulted in especially
pharmacists, speech and occupational therapists and physiotherapists being
available in rural and other historically underserved areas of our country.
Our people have seen these improvements in health service delivery. We are,
therefore, not surprised that they voted for the ANC in such large numbers.

There have been suggestions that we neglected hospitals in the past ten
years in favour of primary health care. Of course we have prioritised
primary health care. Any sensible government would do this, because the
majority of the population requires this level of care in the first
instance. Let me state categorically, however, that we have not neglected
our public hospitals. [Interjections.] We have made billions of rands
available to revitalise our hospitals and to build new ones. Since 1999 we
have commissioned 16 new hospitals. Amongst these are the Inkosi Albert
Luthuli Hospital in KwaZulu-Natal, the Nelson Mandela Academic Hospital in
Umtata in the Eastern Cape, and the Pretoria Academic Hospital in Gauteng.
These are flagship hospitals comparable with the best in the world.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] However, we have also focused on upgrading the
existing hospitals. We have 27 hospitals in a revitalisation programme
since 1999, which will ensure that their infrastructure, management and
quality of care are significantly improved.

The public health sector will contribute to the Expanded Public Works
Programme initiative by the President. We will expand our community health
worker programme in every province to ensure that communities are provided
with health information to prevent them from getting sick and to support
individuals and families when they are ill.

We have developed, in consultation with community health workers, NGOs and
academics, a new framework for the selection, training and stipends of
community health workers that is in the process of being implemented. These
community health workers will play a major role in ensuring that
communities are able to access health and other public services as early as
possible. I must add that while some of the community health workers are
paid stipends, there are many who volunteer their services free of charge.
In addition, we have encouraged especially retired nurses also to volunteer
their services, and many have done so.

Besides volunteering their services to become community health workers,
community members participate in structures established to ensure that
their influence on how the health services are managed is felt. Communities
participate through clinic committees and hospital boards where they
present community concerns about health issues. I also encourage
communities, especially the youth, to adopt healthier lifestyles. Proper
nutrition, exercise and avoiding risky behaviour such as alcohol and drug
abuse are issues that, in partnership with communities and other
stakeholders, we shall endeavour to strengthen in the next five years.
I have dealt extensively with the public health sector. However, the
private sector in South Africa is equally large and in some ways more
complex. This Government will work with the private sector to ensure that
we develop synergies between the two sectors. We must, in line with the
WHO's recommendations, provide stewardship of the entire health system of
this country. We cannot allow an unregulated private health sector which is
both inequitable and, I believe, unsustainable. I held a meeting with
senior representatives of the private health sector in April, at which we
agreed that there was common ground between us as Government and the
private sector, and agreed to develop a health charter. I will ensure that
this process is completed by the end of this year and that the charter
clearly sets out the role of the private sector in our country.

One of the key strategies for making health care more affordable is to
reduce the cost of medicines. We are doing this by introducing a single
exit price and ensuring that those who dispense the drugs only charge a
professional fee. This brings me to the issue of dispensing licences. We
must ensure that health professionals who wish to dispense drugs are
trained adequately to do so. Thus we expect them to do a course and to
apply for a licence. It is a very simple process and we encourage all
health professionals who wish to dispense to apply for the licence.

Lastly, permit me to provide a few examples of the leadership role South
Africa plays in the WHO. This role is exemplified by the fact that last
week I was elected one of the vice-presidents of the WHO assembly to serve
in this capacity for a year. [Applause.] In fact, I returned from Geneva
only yesterday, where I must say I was very proud of the influence that we
bring to bear on public health policies that affect the whole world. We
adopted a range of resolutions that will in the years to come ensure better
health for the world's people.

For example, South Africa played a key role in the adoption of a range of
resolutions, including a resolution on nutrition and physical activity to
ensure a reduction in obesity. I am proud to report that South Africa
chaired the task team drafting group which drafted this resolution, which
is key to combating the effects of noncommunicable diseases such as
hypertension, diabetes and asthma, as outlined by the President in his
state of the nation address.
We passed a resolution on the international migration of health workers to
ensure that member states adopt a code of practice in this regard and that
we also look at issues of compensation to the country of origin when such
migration occurs. As you know, developing countries lose large numbers of
highly trained health professionals to the developed world each year.

We greatly influenced the WHO assembly's resolution on HIV and Aids to
ensure that it focused on nutrition, traditional medicine and protection
from counterfeit medicines. All these resolutions were passed by consensus.

I was elected also by African ministers of health to lead the African group
at the WHO assembly. This enabled us to speak with one voice, as I have
mentioned already. I chaired the Eastern and Southern African Global Fund
constituency meetings.

In conclusion, Madam Deputy Speaker, permit me to salute all South Africans
for their contributions to making the first decade of democracy such a
special one for our country in particular, but also for Africa in general.
Under the leadership of our President and the ANC, the next ten years will
be even better for all South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, I was elected by South Africans to speak
here on their behalf and that is what I am going to do. One of the risks of
being a leader is that your advisers and security people may isolate you
from the realities of South Africa. During the election campaign, the
President made a point of visiting people from all walks of life. We
congratulate him on this. I know he experienced the realities of poverty
and he saw the frustrations of ordinary people on the receiving end of
local governments that do not deliver.

It is quite clear from the state of the nation address on Friday that the
President is serious about solving the problems of poverty and the lack of
job opportunities. We welcome this. The President used the words ``we
shall'' and ``Government will'' nearly 40 times in his speech. The speech
therefore provides the voters out there with a checklist against which the
Government's performance over the next five years could be measured.

The proposal to build capacity at local government level by budgeting R8
billion is important, but money alone will not solve this problem. As long
as municipal managers and officials receive salaries higher than those of
Cabinet Ministers, this money will not build capacity. As long as local
governments do not succeed in recovering taxes and service rates from
residents, R8 billion will only be a short-term solution. As long as local
councillors boast about how they forced experienced personnel to take early
retirement and how they replaced them with friends and people with very
little experience, these problems will not disappear.

The FF Plus predicts that many of these well-meant projects announced in
the President's speech will founder, not because there is something wrong
with these plans, but because the necessary expertise simply does not exist
on the delivery level. The FF Plus therefore urges Government to seriously
consider, as a project, finding a way to bring back some of the former
expertise and experience lost in order to ensure the realisation of these
plans. I spoke to some of these ex-local government people who are willing
to contribute if only they were asked. It is such a waste to have this
expertise around, willing to make a contribution, but not being used at
all.

In my remaining few minutes I want to address the DA, something that I
don't normally do.

Dis in die belang van die demokrasie in Suid-Afrika dat die ANC se 70%
gebalanseer word met groter opposisiesamewerking. In die aanloop tot die
verkiesing het die DA die belangrikheid van groter opposisiesamewerking
teen die ANC gepropageer. Die VF Plus het dit verwelkom, maar ons het gou
agtergekom dat die DA nie regtig samewerking wil hê nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]
As die DA samewerking praat, beteken dit die insluk van ander
opposisiepartye, soos mnr Louis Luyt se party. [Tussenwerpsels.] As die DA
samewerking praat, beteken dit die vernietiging van partye wat hulle nie
kan insluk nie, soos hulle met die VF Plus probeer doen het.

Dit is oneerlike en opportunistiese politiek. Dit is verouderde Westminster-
denke wat in `n homogene land soos Brittanje met `n kiesafdelingstelsel kan
werk. Ons het die Europese proporsionele stelsel. In so `n stelsel sal daar
altyd `n groot verskeidenheid partye wees wat dan op `n verantwoordelike
wyse moet saamwerk om goeie opposisie te verseker. Die DA verstaan dit nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Daarom het die DA-verkiesingstrategie misluk om te eindig
met net twee partye in hierdie Parlement. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die agb mnr Gibson het voorspel dat die DA ná die verkiesing 100 setels in
die Parlement sal hê. Die DA het net die helfte daarvan gekry. Die agb mnr
Ryan Coetzee het voorspel dat die DA 5% van die swart stemme sal kry, maar
dit het `n droom gebly. Die agb leier van die DA het hulle doelwitte vir
die verkiesing in Februarie met die afskop van hulle verkiesingsveldtog in
die Goeie Hoop-sentrum uitgespel. Hy't gesê hulle eerste doelwit is om in
die Wes-Kaap te regeer. Dit het misluk. Die tweede doelwit was om in
KwaZulu-Natal te regeer. Dit het misluk. `n Verdere doelwit was om in elke
provinsie in Suid-Afrika die naasgrootste party te wees. Dit het misluk. In
Noordwes is die UCDP die opposisie, in die Oos-Kaap die UDM en in KwaZulu-
Natal die IVP. [Tussenwerpsels.] Om saam met die IVP in hierdie verkiesing
30% van die stemme te kry, was die ander doelwit wat gestel is.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Hulle is nie eens by 20% nie, wat nog te sê 30%, en dan
het mnr Gibson voorspel hulle gaan oorneem in 2009. [Tussenwerpsels.] Die
DA het nie een van die doelwitte bereik wat hy vir homself gestel het nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

In die plaaslike verkiesing van 2000 het die DA 22% steun gehad; nou het
hulle 12%. Dis 10% agteruit! Nou sê hulle ja, maar ons kan nie 2000 met
2004 vergelyk nie, want dis appels en pere wat jy met mekaar vergelyk.
[Tussenwerpsels.] In die jongste DA-advertensies - u moet na die
advertensies gaan kyk - het hulle die grafiek getrek om te sê só het die DA
gegroei en het húlle die 9% van 1999 na die 22% van 2000 getrek en die
voorspelling van 30% gemaak, so húlle vergelyk dit so met mekaar!
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Wat is die punt wat ek probeer maak? Ek wil sê dis tyd dat die DA hulle
strategie gaan herbedink en dan besluit of hulle op `n eerlike wyse met
ander politieke partye kan saamwerk in belang van Suid-Afrika. Dis
belangrik om saam te werk, dis belangrik om hierdie 70% te balanseer, maar
nie op oneerlike, opportunistiese wyses nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

It is in the interest of democracy in South Africa that the ANC's 70%
should be balanced with greater opposition co-operation. In the run-up to
the election the DA advocated the importance of greater opposition co-
operation against the ANC. The FF Plus welcomed this, but we soon realised
that the DA did not really want co-operation. [Interjections.] When the DA
talks about co-operation, it means swallowing up other parties, such as Mr
Louis Luyt's party.[Interjections.] When the DA talks about co-operation,
it means destroying parties that they cannot swallow up, as they tried
doing with the FF Plus.

This is dishonest and opportunistic politics. It is archaic Westminister-
type thinking that can work in an homogenous country like Britain with a
constituency system. We have the European proportional system. In such a
system there will always be a great variety of parties that have to work
together in a responsible manner to ensure sound opposition. The DA does
not understand this.[Interjections.] That is why the DA election strategy
failed to end up with only two parties in this Parliament. [Interjections.]

The hon Mr Gibson predicted that after the elections the DA would have 100
seats in Parliament. The DA only got half of that. The hon Mr Ryan Coetzee
predicted that the DA would get 5% of the black votes, but this remained a
dream. The hon leader of the DA spelt out the DA's aims for the elections
in February when they kicked off their election campaign in the Good Hope
Centre. He said their first aim was to govern the Western Cape. That
failed. The second aim was to rule in KwaZulu-Natal. That failed. A further
aim was to be the second biggest party in every province in South Africa.
That failed. In the North West the UCDP is the opposition, in the Eastern
Cape the UDM, and the IFP in KwaZulu-Natal. [Interjections.] To win 30% of
the votes together with the IFP in the elections, was the other aim that
they had set. [Interjections.] They are not even at 20%, let alone 30%, yet
Mr Gibson predicted that they were going to take over in 2009.
[Interjections.] The DA did not reach one of these aims it set itself.
[Interjections.]

In the local elections of 2000 the DA had 22% support. Now they have 12%.
That is 10% less! Now they are saying yes, but we cannot compare 2000 with
2004, because it is like comparing apples and pears.[Interjections.] In the
latest DA advertisements - you must take a look at the advertisements -
they drew the graph in such a way to show how the DA had grown and they
drew the 9% of 1999 to the 22% of 2000 and made the 30% prediction, so they
are in fact comparing them with one another in this way! [Interjections.]

What is the point I am trying to make? I would like to say that it is time
for the DA to rethink its strategy and then decide whether they can co-
operate in an honest manner with other political parties in the interest of
South Africa. It is important to co-operate, it is important to balance
this 70%, but not in dishonest, opportunistic ways. [Interjections] I thank
you.[Applause.]]

Mrs M M SOTYU: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon President.

Eers wil ek sê, mnr Mulder, vir 'n verandering sal ek met jou saamstem. Die
DA ken nie die betekenis van die woord ``samewerking'' nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.] [First of all I want to say, Mr Mulder, that I will agree
with you for a change. The DA does not know the meaning of the word ``co-
operation''. [Interjections.]

The ANC's strategy and tactics document states that the battle against
crime cannot be separated from the war on want. This document goes on to
say that crime is a scourge that does not respect borders, with syndicates
continuously and consistently making the entire globe the theatre of their
criminal operations. We are pleased to say that the ANC-led Government has
embarked on the National Crime Prevention Strategy that allows the South
African Police Service to focus on preventing crime before it occurs or
reoccurs. This strategy does not only remedy criminal situations, but also
addresses the root causes of crime.

There are two approaches that are outlined by the crime combating strategy.
The first one is the geographic approach and the second is the organised
crime approach. These approaches require the SAPS to identify the sources
that will be compatible with each crime spot. It is imperative that
resources are distributed where they are needed the most.

Through these two approaches, the SAPS has managed to identify the
following areas as the department's priorities: serious and violent crime,
organised crime, crime against women and children, and improved basic
service delivery at police stations and upgrading the support system.
Approximately 124 police stations were identified as requiring more
intensive policing. Together with these police stations, the community
forums have also been earmarked for increased resources and capacity in
order to combat and prevent crime effectively. As a new focus, sector
policing has become an effective tool, becoming a practical manifestation
of community policing. Sector policing, as a tool, will not only improve
communication between the police and the community, but will also determine
the needs and problems, and identify criminal hotspots on a continuous and
consistent basis.

Uluntu ngokubanzi maluncedisane nala madelakufa, oobamba isikhali
ngobubanzi baso, ngokuzijula ijacu bekhonzela isizwe. Iinjubaqa
mazingaphazamisani nocwangco. [People at large should work hand in hand
with these heroes, who were prepared to pay the ultimate price in service
of their nation. Criminals should refrain from disturbing the the order.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon President in his state of the nation address
said that 152 000 police officers would be appointed by 2006. It must be
highlighted here that this process is already in progress. A policy on the
recruitment and use of reservists has already been developed. With regard
to serious crime against women and children there are programmes in place,
including victim empowerment programmes. The Victim Charter of Services and
the development of a policy on victim empowerment are being finalised.
Shelter for abused women are among the SAPS's areas of priority. Victim-
friendly facilities have been provided at presidential and priority police
stations. At most police stations, communities and NGOs run these services
on a voluntary basis, thus enhancing community involvement in the process.

Madam Deputy Speaker, rape should get priority in the criminal justice
system, especially from the investigation and prosecution authorities.
Child protection and sexual offences units need to get additional resources
in the 2006 budget to enhance their functions. This increment will yield
clear programme plans and implementation on how increased resources will be
utilised.

A conference on human trafficking held in Pretoria at the beginning of May
2004 heard that South Africa is a major destination and source for
international child trafficking. Susan Christian of the council of the
National Center for Justice and the Rule of Law in the USA told the
conference that between 28 000 and 38 000 children were currently being
prostituted in South Africa. Having said that, we are pleased to learn that
an accelerated programme to transform immigration services and improve
border control and security is under way.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend and salute the men and
women in blue who sacrifice their lives in dangerous situations. We would
like to commend the police for a job well done during our national
elections. This follows a host of other successful national and
international events that South Africa hosted over the past years. We are
ready for the 2010 soccer tournament.

Tshwarang jwalo banna le basadi. Ha re sebeletseng tokoloho ena ya rona eo
re e fumaneng ka thata. Tshwarang ka thata batho beso. Presidente, Dlamini,
Zizi, Jama ka Sjadu, o re buletse tsela, hare se ke ra e lahlang re ye
pele. Setjhaba sa heso ka ntle ka moo, lekang ka ditsela tsohle hore le
tshehetse sepolesa sa rona, re leke hore re thibele hore dikweta tsena tse
kanakana ka hara naha re se ke ra difa sebaka. Hobane re batla hore
matjhaba a kene ka hara naha ho lokisetsa tonamente ya rona ya 2010. Ke a
leboha [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[Men and women, be strong. Let us work hard for this freedom that we fought
for for so long. Be stonrg, brothers and sisters. Our President, Dlamini,
Zizi, Jama of Sjadu, has shown us the way, let us not lose it, let's go
forward. Our nation out there, try by all means to support our police, so
that we may not give the criminals an opportunity to do what they want. We
want all nations to come to our country for the preparations for the games
in 2010. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon members, the
President has spoken, and we noted with interest, much admiration and
encouragement as ordinary South Africans his bold pronunciations about how
he intends to make South Africa a prosperous, caring and better country for
all to live in.

We believe this is the same mission which his predecessor, former President
Nelson Mandela, wanted to achieve. There is no doubt that as the opposition
we have an active role to play to make sure that the President's blueprint
for socioeconomic development is realised. We are aware and mindful of the
challenges that lie ahead and the President and his Executive will not
shoulder this responsibility alone.

We are there not to criticise when things fall apart, but to build so that
we share a common understanding of the problems confronting the country
when dealing with unemployment, poverty, homelessness, diseases, crime and
other pressing issues that make it difficult for the poorest of the poor to
enjoy democracy. However, we have to caution that the President's programme
of action and its implementation should be felt at grass-roots level, by
both rural and urban communities.

It is at this stage of implementation that many governments' programmes
fail, not because their objectives are wrong or suspect, but simply because
silent voices of civil society are not given space to help implement those
programmes, especially with regard to labour-intensive public works
projects. We need to create employment opportunities that are sustainable.
We also need to create a climate that will enable enterprises to thrive, as
these institutions are the engines that drive the economy.
We also welcome the announcement that black economic empowerment will be
accelerated. The success of BEE will be measured by how many people we are
able to introduce to the mainstream economy. Many people are sceptical as
to who the real beneficiaries will be. Mr President, for this programme to
succeed, it should not be linked to party affiliations, as this is the
concern that many have expressed, judged by the reality on the ground that
many BEE deals have gone to people who are connected to the ruling party.
But we hope that this time around we will see real entrepreneurs being
given a chance through these empowerment deals. If the President is ready
to work, so we are. He can count on us, because if South Africa wins, we
all win, and vice versa.

Motlotlegi Tautona, puso e tshwana le kgetsi ya tsie, e kgonwa ka go
tswaraganelwa. Dirisa magosi segolobogolo mo diporofenseng , ba thusanye le
dipusosemorafe tse di leng teng. Magosi a tlhomilwe ke Modimo ka lorato le
tsholofelo ya go direla batho ba one go ba tlhokomela. Tsholetsa seme.
[Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Hon President, the Government's work can also become easier when many
people give their assistance. Make use of traditional leadership,
particularly in the provinces. They should co-operate with the local
government that exists. Traditional leaders have been inaugurated by God
with love and with the hope of serving their people, as well as looking
after them. Be firm. [Time expired.]]

Mr H P MALULEKA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon members, comrades
and friends, South Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and a
settlement of international disputes by negotiation, not war. ``Peace and
friendship among all people shall be secured by upholding equal rights,
opportunities and status for all.'' This is a quotation from the Freedom
Charter that was adopted in 1955. This has been the cornerstone of our
foreign policy since the democratic elections in 1994.

Our Government and the population at large have committed themselves to the
multilateral system of world governance. We recognise the United Nations
organisation as a primary multilateral body that is entrusted to ensure
collective peace and security for our world and to facilitate economic and
social development. Although we are a young democracy, we are confident
that we can play a key role in the efforts to restructure and transform the
United Nations and its agencies. This, we believe, will enhance
multilateralism.

We recognise and understand the fact that on our own there is very little
we can do to realise our objectives, whether on the continent or elsewhere
in the world. Whatever we do, we act as a collective to address issues, be
it on our continent or elsewhere in the world. I know that some sections of
this House would not understand this notion, hence they supported the
invasion of Iraq. But the majority of our population believes in our
strategy, therefore we will go on with it. [Interjections.]

En ek sal dit eintlik in Afrikaans sê. Ek dink wat vandag in Irak gebeur,
moet eintlik 'n les wees vir die opposisie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Agb Speaker,
die gebeurtenisse in Irak vandag moet 'n les wees vir die opposisie, en dit
moet hulle wys dat eensydige besluite nie werk nie. [And I will, in fact,
say this in Afrikaans. I think what is happening in Iraq today should
actually be a lesson to the opposition. [Interjections.] Hon Speaker, the
events in Iraq today should be a lesson to the opposition, and it must show
them that unilateral decisions do not work.]

We will always seek to build strategic partnerships with strategic
countries on the continent in an effort to consolidate the African agenda.
Our relationships with countries such as Algeria, Nigeria, Mali, Egypt,
Tanzania, Botswana and Mozambique are but a few examples. We will also
continue to build and forge strategic relationships with strategic
countries of the South in an effort to consolidate the agenda of the
countries of the South. Our interaction and relations with Brazil in South
America and India on the subcontinent, and our commitment to strengthening
relations with China, is a demonstration of our efforts, and already these
relations have yielded some positive outcome for both our country and the
continent.

Our relations with the countries of the North, or the developed countries,
are extremely good. Today, whatever we say as a country and collectively as
the countries of the South, the developed countries are taking note of
that. Our agenda with the countries of the North is based on the following
issues: global good governance, consolidation and implementation of Nepad
objectives, global poverty and underdevelopment. As these are primary
problems facing the world, a multilateral approach to international
disputes, which provides legitimacy to actions and ensures a solution to
the question of international peace and security, is more sustainable.

We are advocating a broad-based world trade system that will benefit
everyone in the world. As I have indicated before, our Government and our
people respect the will of the international community. The Caribbean
countries, through their regional organisations, Caricom, and the African
Union, requested our Government and our people to host President Aristide
from Haiti. This request was made in the interests of peace in that
country. But who is President Aristide? Let me give members just a few
facts about him: he was a Catholic priest who was part of those who we
associated with liberation theology and was very prominent from the 70s to
the 90s. Most of the people seated on my left will not understand this
liberation theology, because they were protected from knowing about it.
[Laughter.]

Haiti became the first independent black republic in 1804. It has been
ruled by dictators and criminals that are still being sheltered by some
prominent Western countries.

An HON MEMBER: Is that why he is coming here?
Mr H P MALULEKA: In December of 1990, Haiti's first-ever free and fair
democratic elections were held. President Jean Bertrand Aristide was
elected as president of that small, troubled country. Within a year of his
election, he was overthrown by General Raoul Cedras and was forced into
exile in the United States of America. In 1995 he returned to Haiti on
condition that he did not contest the election that year, but he contested
the 2000 general elections and won by a clear landslide. On February 29 of
this year, the French Foreign Minister and the US Secretary of State
suggested to President Aristide that he step down despite the fact that he
had been democratically elected. President Aristide's case again
highlighted the importance of the multilateral institutions. If we had a
properly functioning multilateral system, problems such as this one could
have been avoided. It is in line with our own international commitments
that we host President Aristide.

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, the world will know no peace until the
Middle East question is resolved. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has all
the ingredients to destabilise peace in the whole world. The United Nations
needs to play a more prominent role in efforts to solve this crisis.
Activists from the region who assist with the matter need to be given our
full support in their endeavours. We need to emphasise the point that a
solution to the problems lies with both the Israeli and Palestinian
communities. They need to find each other. The efforts of ordinary citizens
on both sides to find common ground need to be encouraged.

Lastly - because some parties have spoken about the election campaign and
the President visiting certain communities - I think it is also important
to share with this House that the President did not only see poverty and
the other things that were raised, but received a warm reception,
especially from Afrikaner communities. Some people, on seeing the President
in their houses or in front of their houses, came out. Outside of a few
incidents, one elderly Afrikaner tannie [woman] came out and held the
President by both his arms and said: ``Mnr die President, ons bid vir jou,
want wat jy doen vir ons, veral die pensioenarisse is baie goed.'' [Mr
President, we are praying for you, because what you are doing for us,
especially the pensioners, is very good.]

And the one elderly gentleman said: ``Thabo, luister nou hier! Jy is nog
baie jonk, maar ek wil vir jou sê, jy is die regte ou vir die regte job.''
[Thabo, listen here, you are still very young, but I want to tell you, you
are the right person for the right job.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Long live Africa Liberation Day! Long live mighty Africa!
Madam Speaker and Mr President, the PAC welcomes the Government's programme
for the eradication of poverty and underdevelopment which the President
unveiled in his state of the nation address.

The PAC holds that this century is Africa's finest hour. Great things are
in store for us if we would but take courage and act in the interests of
the poor majority of this country, who were dehumanised by colonialism and
apartheid and have still not recovered economically from that
dehumanisation.

From the PAC's perspective, Pan-Africanists and all progressive forces are
once again being summoned by history to renew their vows to the Pan-African
vision of a rejuvenated Africa and a country where no one will sleep in a
cemetery, as has been the case in Maitland Cemetery here in Cape Town for
years now, or live in shacks which often burn down, resulting in the tragic
loss of life; where no one shall be unemployed and where all the poor
children shall receive free education. Yes, genuine liberation shall
prevail, where the minority shall not oppress the majority economically and
dominate them technologically, and where the people of this country shall
not buy their water from the rich because of the privatisation of strategic
state assets sold to the rich.

The people of this nation and continent have been waiting in anxious
expectation for a concrete programme which will assist them to realise
their hopes and aspirations. They have known suffering for a long time. The
national agenda for the economic and social emancipation of the poor dare
not fail. The PAC will play its role to see that it succeeds. It was the
primary objective and ultimate goal of our national liberation struggle. We
went to prison for it. Our freedom fighters died for it. Let their
sacrifices not be in vain.

The PAC, however, concurs with the recent United Nations Development
Programme report which confirms that South Africa needs a fundamental
policy shift if radical changes which benefit the poor and the landless are
to occur in this country. Is the President prepared to consider a policy
shift?

Twenty million of our people live below the poverty line. There must be a
change in their lives. In the view of the PAC, there shall be eradication
of poverty only when four things happen. Firstly, our children must receive
free education tailored to the needs of our country's development, in order
to raise our country technologically to heights where we shall have the
technological capacity to process our raw materials here at home and export
them as finished products and enrich ourselves.

Secondly, we ask questions about the apartheid debt which consumes so much
of our national budget. This debt was incurred for our genocide. It is
therefore an odious debt. Yet this year alone we are servicing it at R50,4
billion, at R53,7 billion next year and at R57, 9 billion in 2006. As long
as this debt consumes so much of our national budget, the millions of the
poor in our country can kiss their emancipation from poverty goodbye.

Thirdly, those who control land control economic power. Research shows
that, with the present Government's land policy, it will take 80 years to
distribute a mere 30% of agricultural land to African farmers. Fourthly,
our Constitution must be amended to enable land distribution to start from
long before 1913. There must also be a law prohibiting the sale of land to
foreigners until our own people have land for decent houses, farming,
mining, fishing, etc. Renewable leases of 99 years must be offered against
the sale of land to foreigners.

There is nothing strange about this position of the PAC. Russia did not
sell its land to foreigners until 2002. Britain sold its land to foreigners
for the first time in 1810. It does not make sense to sell land to
foreigners while our own people are still dispossessed of their land.
Moreover, with the collapsed value of our rand, our land is being auctioned
for peanuts for our permanent land dispossession. However, we would like to
emphasise that we wish this programme great success.

Izwe lethu! [Our land!]

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Madam Speaker, the hon President,
colleagues in the National Assembly, if we are clear in our direction then
it is always easier to take each step on the road. In our economic policy
we are clear in our direction, and it is for this reason, Mr President,
that it was possible for you to spell out the detail of the steps that we
will take in the next few months. These steps will, in turn, define the
path that we walk in the third democratic administration.

The virtue of this clarity is that we do not have to chop and change our
policy or respond to the capricious whims of the pundits, including those
in the opposition benches, or to ill-conceived and ill-advised reports
produced by international agencies. However, we do have to change emphasis
and focus as our policy makes its impact and we do have to ensure that we
respond to what is happening in the economy and the society. The programme
that you set out is such a response to the changes we see.

It was essential to undertake a 10-year review and to define for ourselves
the possible scenarios that could unfold if we did not act. This work and
the benefit of two comprehensive census results have allowed us to change
emphasis and focus to meet new challenges.

Let me summarise the key findings of this 10-year review and the outcome of
the census. The structural changes in our economy in response to better
macroeconomic management and reduced protection have been positive. The
economy has diversified its range of investment and exports. The value
addition in the economy is increasing and in particular it is increasing in
our exports. We are now a competitive manufacturing economy that is
benefiting from major free-trade agreements such as that with the European
Union. Our reform process on the fiscal and trade policy terrains means we
are well positioned both in the WTO negotiations and in the world trading
system. These are positive developments that we have to further enhance.

Despite major structural change in our economy since 1994, two million new
jobs in the formal and informal sectors have been added between 1996 and
2003. This is a considerable achievement. However, we have much more work
to do. The number of new jobs is not enough in the light of two important
demographic developments. These are the effects of higher population growth
rates in earlier periods that now bring new entrants to the labour market
and a significantly higher participation rate, by women in particular, in
the labour market. This means that we are not as yet reducing the overall
level of unemployment. This is a serious problem as it impacts on poverty
and income inequality.

The structural change in the economy has another important effect and this
is the need for more and new skills sets in the economy. For older workers
with low skills levels this is serious as it starts to expel them from the
labour market. The same applies to young persons with poor training and
inappropriate skills.

Taken together these factors begin to open a fault line in our political
economy. There are those who are located in an economy with rising
productivity and an active and successful engagement with the global
markets, and those located in activities and locations that are moving to
the margins of our economy and society. Such a fault line must not be
allowed to deepen. To highlight this process from a policy and
implementation point of view we began to work with the notions first
articulated by the President of a first and second economy.

Contrary to the Leader of the Opposition's point of view, this is not the
usual formal-informal divide, as there are formal activities that are
moving to the margins and, as we will examine, there are activities that
are not recorded that are productive in potential and actuality that reside
in the second economy. The challenge we set ourselves is to begin to
reintegrate the two economies and prevent a permanent fault line from
developing with its profound socioeconomic, humane and political
consequences.

To understand the policy adjustments we are now making we need to look more
closely at what we mean by the second economy and how we see it changing in
the short to medium term. There is, of course, more work to be done on the
precise geography and sociology of the second economy. Let me say that this
is not an urban-rural divide; these are processes that exist in urban areas
and rural areas. Certainly, we are not yet fully on top of the precise
relationships that work in this economy, and we need to understand that.

However, for the present we are working on the basis that there are three
domains within this second economy that we have to address. There are many
activities in the second economy that could become more effective income-
earning and income-generating economic entities. However, they are
restricted by the bias towards the first economy when it comes to finance,
access to information and infrastructure and by regulation and weak support
by the state. This requires us to act in the areas of access to finance,
infrastructure and business support services. There will also be a
regulatory review. However, such a regulatory review will not be designed
to reduce worker rights, as some would have us do. Its purpose is to reduce
compliance costs and remove redundant provisions.

These programmes that have been set out in some detail in other
presentations in Parliament and the press briefings are designed to
vitalise enterprise development where it is now marginalised. What we are
looking to do is to ensure that in township areas that were previously
isolated and in rural areas that were previously isolated we provide the
necessary support to allow enterprises to begin to flourish and grow. The
role of services in this regard is particularly important. There are many
activities undertaken in communities - service-type activities - that could
be viable and effective enterprises, and the services strategy that we are
working on is an attempt to address this and vitalise this sector of the
economy. If we do that by creating new enterprises and new wealth we will
have a traditional multiplier effect that will contribute to economic
growth.

The second domain within the second economy is less amenable to generating
economic enterprises, but here it is possible to increase the prospects of
obtaining sustainable livelihood. Again, this can be in the form of
building infrastructure; it can be in the form of providing social
services; it can be in the form of self-sustaining production of food and
other products. A large part of the Expanded Public Works Programme and
aspects of the service strategy I have just made reference to are designed
to facilitate this possibility of a sustainable livelihood being created
that makes people's lives better.

Finally, there are vulnerable population segments that have to be assisted
by an effective welfare net. Clearly, our objective is to expand the first
two domains - creating enterprises and creating sustainable livelihoods -
and thereby limiting the need to provide the welfare component within the
parameters of what would be long-term sustainability.

Within the first economy we have to speed up the microeconomic reform
strategy and focus on growth areas. As we do this we need to ensure that
the processes of this first economy begin to attract, interact and
facilitate with parts of the second. At present too much happens in the
first economy which repels the enterprises that could exist in the second,
and it will be the task in the programmes we have set through credit law,
access to finance and many other programmes that have been announced to try
to create a linkage between potential enterprises in the second economy and
what happens in the first. New approaches and new methods have to be
developed to deal with this; new activities will have to be created. These
are tremendous challenges.

The key transversal aspects of the microeconomic reform strategy are
energy, logistics or transport systems, telecommunications, research and
development, and access to finance. Now here the state-owned enterprises
play an absolutely crucial role. If you think back to what I've just said,
in each of these areas we have major state corporations. Hence, the
emphasis in the restructuring of state assets will now be on ensuring the
required investment to ensure leading-edge systems in these areas.
As has been the case up to now, we will use the various options of
strategic equity partners, joint ventures, concessions, licensing
arrangements and in certain areas outright sale of assets. But the
efficiency and financial sustainability of the state-owned enterprises is
now our prime focus in order to open up higher levels of investment in the
economy as a whole, leading to higher growth and more development in our
basic infrastructure. We have not done it in the past, nor do we now
contemplate the sale of strategic assets in the energy system, transport
system and defence industry.

The notion that the solution is to sell everything and then the market will
work is naive in the extreme. It hasn't worked anywhere and it's not
working now. It is the combination in balance between effective state-owned
enterprises located in strategic sectors of the economy and effective
mechanisms to involve and work with the private sector. It is our intention
to continue to increase the involvement of the private sector in these
sectors that I have mentioned in order to achieve our objectives.

It is also important to realise that the more stable and effective our
state-owned enterprises are, the greater the role they can play in Nepad in
the provision of infrastructure beyond our borders. The importance of this
to our economy, and to all economies in Africa, just cannot be stressed
enough.

In the restructuring of the public sector a more focused and structured
approach will be taken to black economic empowerment, in partnership with
key state financing agencies such as the National Empowerment Fund, the
IDC, the Public Investment Commissioners and Khula. Very significant
empowerment opportunities exist, and we will move to realise them. To try
to depict current black economic empowerment activities as merely
empowering an elite is a convenient camouflage for resisting the process.
In truth, enterprises of all sizes are emerging. And is it surprising that
where no ANC-aligned persons could sit on any board of any state-owned
enterprise for many decades, that we have to ensure that many of them sit
on those boards now? We are the majority. Is it being suggested, possibly,
that the ANC should govern, but that the DA should sit on the boards? God
forbid that we allow such incompetence. [Applause.] [Interjections.] That's
why we can't allow anyone from the DA - we can't find competence.
[Interjections.]
The other components of our work in the first economy have been extensively
set out in the President's address and in the briefings that departments
and Ministers are in the process of giving at present. In essence we are
working off the base of our past achievements now to reach higher and go
further in the objective of providing a better life for all. As we do this,
we need to ensure a more caring economic environment that brings women,
youth and the disabled firmly into the economy at every level of endeavour.
This can also only be done if we stress the requirements of broad-based,
black economic empowerment as well.

Hon President, I believe we are entering a very exciting period with higher
levels of investment and many opportunities for the private sector to be
part not only of the growth process, but, in addition, the developmental
process. There is an abundance of BEE opportunities and possibilities in
this growth process, and we can more consciously focus on the locus of
poverty in the second economy. You've set out very detailed milestones and
they are there to be met. We need to build the partnership for the economy,
get these milestones behind us and meet our targets in full.
Hard work and diligence have earned us a major event - the World Cup - and
this will not only provide us with many opportunities, but will keep us
focused. As a people and an economy we are coming of age, and we
demonstrate the benefits of leadership by those with a clear ability to
represent the aspirations of our people, but who, at the same time,
understand the intricacies of the world we live in. I think this is very
important. We've been able to show over the past 10 years our ability not
only to manage an economy, build it and grow it, stabilise it and correct
major structural flaws, but we've been able to understand the intricacies
and the realities of what's happening in the world economy.

Many of the propositions put to us as economic policy are single-issue,
naive propositions without any clear understanding of what the impact would
be - not only on our economy, but how it would affect our interactions with
the global economies. And it's for this reason that the President very
wisely - because he is a very good economist and because this Government
understands economics - decided that we cannot start easily setting targets
in the current environment. We learnt, when we did it in Gear, setting an
indicative figure, that many, many things happen. So our objective is to
make sure that we create the basic conditions for higher levels of growth.
One of the great achievements of these past 10 years is that for the first
time in South Africa's economic history we actually broke the balance-of-
payments bottleneck. South Africa can grow faster without a balance-of-
payments constraint.

What we are now working on is to ensure that the basic infrastructure - the
logistical systems, the energy systems, the research and development
systems and the telecommunication systems - make our economy more
effective, reduce the cost of doing business and allow that first economy
to expand more rapidly. At the same time we have introduced programmes and
packages of policy designed to ensure that the faultline that we identified
- and we identified it, no other party identified it - that has been
developing in South Africa between what we have referred to as the first
and the second economy, does not deepen, and that we create a South African
economy that will provide a better life for all. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker and the President of South Africa, the
recent Government review entitled ``Towards Ten Years of Democracy'' makes
two important pronouncements. Firstly, the proportion of households living
in poverty has risen from 20% in 1995 to nearly 33% in 1999. Secondly, jobs
grew at about 1,2% per year, failing to keep up with the 4% per year
increase in the economically active population.

When looking at these two statements, Azapo observed that over the last
decade jobs grew by 12%, but the economically active population grew by 35%
over the same period. Unemployment is now standing at between 35% and 38%,
depending, of course, on whose statistical data one wants to believe. Some
statisticians have revealed a more telling figure of more than 80% for
families that have no significant economic activity, despite having one or
more employed adults.

The review concluded that the advances made in the first decade by far
exceeded the weaknesses. It is within this context that Azapo supports the
kinds of timeframes that have been set as part of a decisive strategy to
eradicate poverty and joblessness. Of interest to Azapo are the following
issues. Firstly, we need a commitment to building a sense of national
unity, united activities and patriotism. To this end we suggest that we
should, for a start, celebrate all national days as a nation and not as
separate political parties.

Secondly, we need a review of the regulatory framework that impacts on
small and medium enterprises. When this review is conducted, Azapo wishes
to point out some areas that need attention. We suggest that the harassment
of hawkers, spaza shops, shebeens, taxis and taverns should be made a thing
of the past. Law enforcement agencies known as liquor squads, hawker squads
and all squads specifically aimed at the economic activities of the poor
should be disbanded. Documentation relating to small businesses should be
simplified and translated into all official languages, to make it easy for
members of poor communities to carry out their economic activities with
ease. Businesses in black areas should be promoted so that the poor are
able to spend their money within their own communities.

Thirdly, the Expanded Public Works Programme is yet another area of Azapo's
interests. This programme, whilst it is meant to accelerate the creation of
jobs, is nevertheless open to unscrupulous and corrupt individuals, as well
as companies, who might use this important programme as a means to enrich
themselves. This programme should be managed in such a way that these
corrupt individuals and companies should never find a way to gain at the
expense of the poor. Furthermore, care should be taken that jobs created
under this programme are sustained. Our country's ability to eradicate
poverty can only be sustained if at the same time we can sustain jobs.

Azapo supports the commitment to expanding the child support grant and
raising the upper age limit to 14. However, Azapo is concerned about street
children, who, because of the circumstances under which they live, are not
easily accessible, and therefore do not benefit from the present child
support grant. We suggest that an appropriate strategy should be devised to
make it possible for these eligible children to be brought into the net.

The Government's intention to eradicate mud schools and other dangerous
conditions that expose learners and teachers to unhealthy schooling by the
end of the financial year is indeed an important statement that indicates a
brighter future for our children. This statement, read with the one
regarding aligning courses at technical colleges to our national
requirements, goes a long way towards improving our education environment.
In conclusion, we wish to support the re-establishment of the agricultural
credit scheme. The R1 billion earmarked for this will go a long way in
assisting the poor to carry out their agricultural pursuits with
determination. We will be there with you and will monitor all these
timeframes to ensure that they are adhered to. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Speaker, hon President,
today without reservation and without any platitudes, I stand boldly as a
proud South African, an African who has had an Afrikaner background and
upbringing. In short, I was socialised into and by a society which, in
almost all ways, was beyond correction, or so I thought.

When the ANC arrived in 1990, in its full glory, this thought had to be
dispelled. I am grateful to my Maker, my God, that I had the good sense of
joining the ANC when the political shack, the DA was created. This afforded
me an opportunity to walk the road with dignity and hope that at least
there is a chance for correction and redress.

The President's state of the nation address is a clarion call to all South
Africans, regardless of race, to help create the conditions in our country
where separateness, hate, suspicion and racial arrogance permanently
disappear from our beloved country, thus creating a peaceful South Africa.
We cannot just say that South Africa belongs to all who live in it when we
refuse to take responsibility for making it liveable for all who do live in
it.

Mr President, I am humbled by your decision to entrust me with the
responsibilities of a Deputy Minister for a department which is so vital in
and for nation-building. I thank you, Mr President.

The national chairperson of the ANC, Comrade Mendi Msimang, Mewa Ramgobin
and Dr Manie Schoeman, my fellow comrade, to name but a few, eased my soul
by convincing me that it was time for parents to teach young people, early
in their lives, that in diversity there was beauty and strength.
[Applause.] Under the ANC leadership we have learned that diversity makes
for a rich tapestry, and that all of us have to understand that all the
threads of the tapestry are equal in value, regardless of the different
colours.

In this regard the contributions of the active interventions of our
sportspersons are critical for the national nonviolent transformation of
our country into a nonracial and united South Africa. Sports can and must
play a special role in this regard. It is befitting to salute the South
Africans who pioneered the cause of nonracialism in sports. Special
reference must be made to Sacos and the National Federation of Soccer. With
2010, the souls of these pioneers will not only be resting in peace, but
they will be content in the knowledge that the efforts of the ANC do
justice to the human spirit, and that the ANC leads and that the ANC will
not fail to lead.

Our demand for a social contract, a covenant, is for all of us to get
together to destroy those remaining vestiges of social barriers which stand
in the way of unfolding our freedom. May I say, Madam Speaker, that
resistance and an unwillingness to do so will be injurious to our common
humanity. With 2010 coming, to quote Dr Frederik van Zyl Slabbert, ``a
person may die of many causes, but here in South Africa to die of boredom
is a criminal act against yourself by yourself''. [Applause.]

Madam Speaker, only the new democratic dispensation could deliver 2010. We
make dreams come true. We have delivered a contract for the people with
opportunities for all. It is now our duty to consolidate, as Africans, and
to show the world who we are, what we are, and what we have to offer.

As we humbly accept the honour to host 2010 on behalf of our nation and our
continent, we also acknowledge that it is the international leadership role
of our President Mbeki which is now bearing fruit. Madam Speaker, 2010 is a
living monument to precisely that international leadership. [Applause.]

Mev die Speaker, my ervaring is dat 2010 ons as 'n nasie net so verenig
soos 1995 toe die Amabhokobhoko oorwinnaars in die Wêreldbeker-rugby was.
Dog ervaar ek, en moet ek sê jammerlik so, dat sokker deur sommige mense as
'n swart sport beskou word in hierdie land. Vir diesulke denkers moet ek sê
hier is nou weer 'n geleentheid om vooroordele af te breek, want hier is
nou nog een geleentheid om saam deel te wees van ons wenland.

Van die Afrikaners, en andere, is dalk nog in die afgelope verkiesing op 'n
dwaalspoor geplaas deur van die opposisie-leiers. Daar is mense wat nog die
slagoffers is van die dogma wat vra hoe ver of hoe na moet die Afrikaners
van die regering, die ANC en die swartes in die algemeen staan, en hoe
toegeeflik of hoe onversetlik moet hulle wees oor sake wat hulle na aan die
hart lê.

Ek vra van die Afrikaner: Moet nie vir u laat marginaliseer of laat lam lê
nie. Ons het talle geleenthede wat hulle voordoen. Ek vra van die Afrikaner
om in die gees van ubuntu en inklusiwiteit aktief mee te werk om die skanse
van wanbegrip van die verlede af te breek en om te bou aan wedersydse
vertroue en gemeenskaplike belange - dít tot voordeel van ons almal in
hierdie land. Ons moet 'n bydrae maak tot die toekoms van ons land in sy
geheel, want ons is mos almal Afrikaner, nie waar nie? (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, my experience is that 2010 unites us as a nation in the
same way as when, in 1995, the Amabhokobhoko were triumphant in the World
Cup rugby. Yet I find, and I must say unfortunately, that soccer is
regarded as a black sport by some people in this country. To those people
who think like that I want to say that here we have another opportunity to
break down prejudices, because here we have another opportunity together to
be part of our winning country.

Some Afrikaners, and others, could possibly have been misled by the
opposition leaders in the recent election. There are people who are still
the victims of the dogma which asks how far from or how close to the
Government, the ANC and the blacks in general the Afrikaners should
distance themselves, and how lenient or how unyielding they should be about
matters that are close to their hearts.

I ask the Afrikaners: Do not allow yourselves to be marginalised or
paralysed. Many opportunities are presenting themselves. I ask the
Afrikaners to work together in the spirit of ubuntu or inclusiveness to
break down the barriers of misunderstanding of the past and to build on
mutual confidence and communal interests - to the advantage of us all in
this country. We must make a contribution to the future of our country in
general, because we are all South Africans, not so?]

Madam Speaker, as part of Government's ongoing commitment to putting the
interests of all the people of South Africa at the top of its agenda, the
Expanded Public Works Programme presents a further manifestation of our
views. The possibilities opened up by our successful bid to host the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup finals and the Expanded Public Works Programme are
endless. It not only serves to demonstrate the real capacity of sports to
contribute to the realisation of national objectives and priorities, but
also motivates us to look positively at other opportunities that present
themselves. The possible hosting of the Commonwealth and Olympic Games,
amongst other major international sports events, in the future, is such an
opportunity. May I say that in fact, the 2010 event places South Africa on
the fast track to hosting the 2011 Rugby World Cup.

The ANC Government will not hesitate to make the resources in the hands of
the state available to create opportunities to uplift all South Africans.
This is aimed at creating a better life for all, hence the decision of the
Government to support and provide the guarantees for and to invest in the
bid to host the 2010 World Cup finals. This is a further manifestation of
our commitment to creating a caring society by ensuring that those without
jobs benefit from this very initiative.

The 2010 bid will not only provide opportunities for employment, but also
for skills development that will hopefully ensure the sustainability of
jobs well beyond 2010. It will contribute to our objective of ensuring that
the country's wealth, skills training and other opportunities are more
equitably shared by all our people, irrespective of race, gender,
disability or age. It will contribute to our commitment to reducing the
levels of unemployment in our country. We will combine the resources of the
public and private sectors to build an economy that benefits all.

The commitment of the private sector to investing R120 million in the 2010
Soccer World Cup, and the contribution of our state to cover the shortfall
demonstrates the power of working together. Together we win. Our commitment
to serve as Africa's stage extends the potential impact of the event to
well beyond our borders. It demonstrates our commitment to the development
of our region and our continent. It is part of our efforts, in conjunction
with our brothers and sisters on the continent, to ensure the success of
Nepad. Africa remains the least developed and most marginalised continent.

The hosting of the 2010 finals should contribute to ensuring that South
Africa, the region and the continent take up their rightful place as a full
and active member of the global family of nations. The fact that we were
awarded the 2010 World Cup finals is a fitting gift, as we celebrate 10
years of freedom and democracy. May I say thank you, Fifa.

The success of the 2010 bid will help to consolidate the people's contract.
It has been estimated that 2010 will create between 150 000 and 200 000 new
jobs. It has the potential to increase investment, promote black economic
empowerment and skills development, and promote our country
internationally.

Employment creation is guaranteed now in an Expanded Public Works Programme
through Government`s commitment to ensuring suitable World Cup venues.
Thirteen stadiums will either have to be built or upgraded. We will urge
the organising committee to employ labour-intensive methods to ensure
maximal employment. Because this form of delivery takes longer, it is
important that we begin with the task immediately. Government is committed
to making resources available for this project. Sport is estimated to
contribute 2% to GDP currently, and that is a bit more than in the United
Kingdom. We hope and trust that 2010 will increase our contribution to the
GDP in this country.
The hosting of the World Cup finals creates endless opportunities for
expanding diplomatic relations and for signing trade and investment
agreements. The eyes of the world will again be focused on South Africa, to
the same extent it was prior to, during and after our first democratic
elections. We must grasp the opportunities that this presents with both
hands and never risk being accused of letting it slip away. It requires the
co-operation of business, organised labour and all South Africans to take
advantage of these opportunities to promote the country's image and provide
good service to investors and tourists.

All of this constitutes a definitive part of sport's contribution to
concluding the contract for a better South Africa that we should enter into
as citizens of this country. It should commit to democratic consultation,
mass participation and volunteerism within the spirit of Vukuzenzele, moral
regeneration, as well as people-centred and people-driven development. It
has the potential, and should drive the quest for a society that is truly
united, nonracial, nonsexist and democratic. We must utilise the exciting
opportunities presented for involving the youth through learnerships.

I trust that Theta, the sector education and training authority responsible
for sport, takes cognisance of the opportunities that the 2010 finals
present for it. It will contribute to meeting our objective of creating one
million additional jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme, and it
will contribute to the implementation of those agreements concluded at the
growth and development summit aimed at creating work and fighting poverty.

Our victory in the bid for hosting the 2010 finals must surely enhance our
confidence in the future and provide a rallying point that all South
Africans can relate to. It must provide the impetus to approach our
envisaged bids for the 2014 Commonwealth Games, and the 2024 Olympic Games
with renewed enthusiasm. It will give us greater confidence in our efforts
to face up to national challenges, especially the challenge of poverty. We
embrace it as part of our people's contract to create work and to fight
poverty in our effort to create a better life for all.

We trust that all South Africans will join us in this endeavour. Together,
Mr President, we will win. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 17:41.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                            TUESDAY, 11 MAY 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
         Committees mentioned, viz:


         Agriculture and Land Affairs:


              African National Congress


                  Abram, Mr S
                  Blose, Ms H M
                  Combrinck, Mr J J
                  Holomisa, Adv S P
                  Kotwal, Mr Z
                  Masithela, Mr N H
                  Ngaleka, Ms E
                  Ntuli, Mrs B M
                  Radebe, Mr B A
                  Schoeman, Dr E A


                  Kati, Mr Z J (Alt)
                  Kondlo, Ms N C (Alt)
                  Makgate, Ms M W (Alt)
                  Mathebe, Mr P M (Alt)
                  Ngwenya, Mrs M L (Alt)
                  Nzimande, Mr L P M (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Nel, Mr A H
                  Van Niekerk, Dr A I


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Ngema, Mr M V
              United Democratic Movement


                  Bici, Mr J


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Durr, Mr K D S (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Ditshetelo, Mr P H K


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Pheko, Dr S E M


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J


         Arts and Culture:


              African National Congress


                  Gololo, Mr C L
                  Khumalo, Mr K K
                  Maluleka, Mr H P
                  Matlala, Mr M H
                  Mbombo, Mrs N D
                  Mohamed, Prof I J
                  Motubatse-Hounkpatin, Ms S D
                  Mpaka, Ms H M
                  Njobe, Mrs M A A
                  Sonto, Mr M R


                  Magubane, Mr N E (Alt)
                  Moonsamy, Mr K (Alt)
                  Nogumla, Mr R Z (Alt)
                  Nwamitwa-Shilubana, Mrs T L P (Alt)
                  Phungula, Mr J P (Alt)
                  Siboza, Mr S (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Kohler-Barnard, Ms D
                  Van der Walt, Mrs D


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Biyela, Chief B P


              United Democratic Movement


                  Mdaka, Ms N M (Alt)


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Mulder, Dr C P


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Pule, Mr B E
              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S


         Communications:


              African National Congress


                  Johnson, Mr M
                  Kholwane, Mr S E
                  Lekgoro, Mr M K
                  Magazi, Mrs M N
                  Maziya, Ms A M
                  Mohlaloga, Mr M R
                  Mokoto, Ms N R
                  Morutoa, Ms M R
                  Newhoudt-Druchen, Mrs W S
                  Pieterse, Mr R D


                  Khumalo, Mr K M (Alt)
                  Matlala, Mr M H (Alt)
                  Nogumla, Mr R Z (Alt)
                  Nonkonyana, Chief M (Alt)
                  Yengeni, Mrs L E (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance
                  Haasbroek, Mr S F
                  Smuts, Ms M


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Vos, Ms S C


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Green, Mr L M


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Mulder, Dr P W A


         Correctional Services:


              African National Congress
                  Bloem, Mr D V
                  Chikunga, Mrs L S
                  Fihla, Mr N B
                  Makgate, Ms M W
                  Moatshe, Mr M S
                  Modisenyane, Mr L J
                  Mthethwa, Mr E N
                  Rwexana, Ms S P
                  Tolo, Bishop L J
                  Tshivhase, Mrs T J


                  Magau, Ms K R (Alt)
                  Mahote, Mr S (Alt)
                  Ramgobin, Mr M (Alt)
                  Sosibo, Ms J E (Alt)
                  Xolo, Mr E T (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Morkel, Mr C M
                  Selfe, Mr J


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Seaton, Mrs S A


              Independent Democrats


                  Wang, Mr Y (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Swart, Mr S N


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Mfundisi, Mr I S (Alt)


         Defence:


              African National Congress


                  Booi, Mr M S
                  Diale, Mr L N
                  Dlali, Mr D M
                  Koornhof, Dr G W
                  Makasi, Mrs X C
                  Molefe, Mr C T
                  Monareng, Mr O E
                  Nhlengethwa, Mrs D G
                  Nkuna, Ms C
                  Ntuli, Mr S B


                  Fihla, Mr N B (Alt)
                  Huang, Mr S (Alt)
                  Makgate, Ms M W (Alt)
                  Moatshe, Mr M S (Alt)
                  Rexwana, Ms S P (Alt)
                  Tolo, Bishop L J (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Sayedali-Shah, Moulana M R
                  Schmidt, Adv H C


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Mncwango, Mr M A


              United Democratic Movement


                  Holomisa, Mr B H (Alt)
              Independent Democrats


                  Burgess, Mr C V


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Madasa, Adv Z L (Alt)


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Groenewald, Mr P J


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Likotsi, Mr M T


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D


         Education:


              African National Congress


                  Bhamjee, Mr Y S
                  Mabe, Ms L L
                  Mashangoane, Ms P R
                  Mayatula, Prof S M
                  Mentor, Ms M P
                  Mnandi, Ms P N
                  Mosala, Mr B G
                  Vadi, Mr I
                  Van den Heever, Mr R P Z


                  Baloyi, Mr M R (Alt)
                  Gcwabaza, Mr N E (Alt)
                  Maloney, Mrs L (Alt)
                  Mgabadeli, Ms H C (Alt)
                  Mthembu, Mr B (Alt)
                  Sikakane, Mr M R (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Boinamo, Mr G G
                  Zille, Ms H


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Mpontshane, Mr A M


              United Democratic Movement


                  Madikiza, Mr G T (Alt)


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Dudley, Mrs C


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Spies, Mr W D (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Mfundisi, Mr I S


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D


         Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


              African National Congress


                  Arendse, Mr J D
                  Chalmers, Mrs J
                  Kalako, Mr M U
                  Mokoena, Mr A D
                  Moss, Mr M I
                  Ndzanga, Mrs R A
                  Phadagi, Mr M G
                  Ramotsamai, Ms C M P
                  Thabethe, Ms E


                  Khunou, Ms N P (Alt)
                  Maja, Mr S J (Alt)
                  Rasmeni, Mr S M (Alt)
                  Sefularo, Dr M (Alt)
                  Turok, Prof B (Alt)
                  Zita, Mr L (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Ellis, Mr M J
                  Morgan, Mr G R


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Zulu, Prince N E


              United Democratic Movement


                  Sigcau, Ms S N


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Durr, Mr K D S


         Finance:


              African National Congress


                  Asiya, Mr S E
                  Fubbs, Ms J L
                  Gabela, Mr L S
                  Hogan, Ms B A
                  Joemat, Mrs R R
                  Mnguni, Mr B A
                  Moloto, Mr K A
                  Nene, Mr N M
                  Ramodibe, Ms D M
                  Zulu, Mr B Z


                  Bhamjee, Mr Y S (Alt)
                  Johnson, Mr M (Alt)
                  Koornhof, Dr G W (Alt)
                  Mabe, Ms L L (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Rabie, Dr P J
                  Taljaard, Ms R


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Vezi, Mr T E


              United Democratic Movement


                  Stephens, Mr M


              Independent Democrats


                  Wang, Mr Y


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Durr, Mr K D S


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S
              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J (Alt)


         Health:


              African National Congress


                  Cachalia, Mr I M
                  Luthuli, Dr A N
                  Madumise, Mrs M M
                  Manana, Ms M N S
                  Mashigo, Ms R J
                  Ngcobo, Ms B T
                  Ngculu, Mr L V J
                  Njikelana, Mr S J
                  Nxumalo, Mr S N
                  Tshwete, Ms P


                  Direko, Ms I W (Alt)
                  Kasienyane, Ms O R (Alt)
                  Makgate, Ms M W (Alt)
                  Nxumalo, Ms M D (Alt)
                  Nzimande, Mr L P M (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance
                  Coetzee, Mr R
                  Waters, Mr M


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Rabinowitz, Dr R


              United Democratic Movement


                  Nkabinde, Ms N C


              Independent Democrats


                  Wang, Mr Y


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Dudley, Mrs C


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Pule, Mr B E (Alt)
              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S


         Home Affairs:


              African National Congress


                  Chauke, Mr H P
                  Gxowa, Mrs N B
                  Ludwabe, Mrs C I
                  Mabe, Ms L L
                  Maunye, Mrs M M
                  Morwamoche, Mr K W
                  Sibande, Mr M P
                  Skhosana, Mr W M
                  Van Wyk, Ms A
                  Vundisa, Mr S S


                  Kondlo, Ms N C (Alt)
                  Mathibela, Ms N F (Alt)
                  Phala, Mr M J (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance
                  Kalyan, Mrs S V
                  Swart, Mr M
              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Mdlalose, Ms M M


              United Democratic Movement


                  Diko, Mr M (Alt)


              Independent Democrats


                  Wang, Mr Y


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Swart, Mr S N


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Mulder, Dr C P


              United Christian Democratic Party
                  Mfundisi, Mr I S


         Housing:
              African National Congress


                  Dambuza, Ms B N
                  Dodovu, Mr T S
                  Kota, Ms Z A
                  Mabena, Mr D C
                  Mkhize, Mr Z S
                  Montsitsi, Mr S D
                  Ntombela, Ms S H
                  Ramakaba-Lesiea, Ms M M
                  Schneemann, Mr G D
                  Tsenoli, Mr S L


                  Khumalo, Mr K K (Alt)
                  Masala, Mr M M (Alt)
                  Sonto, Mr M R (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Masango, Mr S J
                  Steyn, Mr A C


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Dhlamini, Mr B W


              United Democratic Movement


                  Sigcau, Ms S N


              Independent Democrats


                  Batyi, Ms F (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Pule, Mr B E


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Likotsi, Mr M T


         International Affairs:


         Subcommittee on Foreign Affairs:


              African National Congress


                  Asmal, Prof A K
                  Bapela, Mr K O
                  Huang, Mr S
                  Jacobus, Ms L
                  Magau, Ms K R
                  Mahomed, Mrs F
                  Maunye, Mrs M M
                  Nkuna, Ms C
                  Ramgobin, Mr M
                  Sithole, Mr D J


                  Gxowa, Ms N B (Alt)
                  Ludwabe, Ms C I (Alt)
                  Sibande, Mr M P (Alt)
                  Vadi, Mr I (Alt)


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Joubert, Mr L K


              United Democratic Movement


                  Diko, Mr M


              Independent Democrats


                  De Lille, Mrs P


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Madasa, Adv Z L (Alt)


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Mulder, Dr P W A


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Ditshetelo, Mr P H K


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Pheko, Dr S E M (Alt)


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D (Alt)


         Subcommittee on African Union:


              African National Congress


                  Bapela, Mr K O
                  Davies, Dr R H
                  Hajaig, Ms F
                  Magazi, Mrs M N
                  Motubatse-Hounkpatin, Ms S D
                  Njobe, Mrs M A A
                  Sithole, Mr D J
                  Turok, Prof B


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Skosana, Mr M B
              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Madasa, Adv Z L


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Ditshetelo, Mr P H K (Alt)


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Pheko, Dr S E M


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J


         Justice and Constitutional Development:


              African National Congress


                  Chohan-Khota, Ms F I
                  Jeffery, Mr J H
                  Magwanishe, Mr G B
                  Mahlawe, Ms N M
                  Malahlela, Mr M J
                  Masutha, Mr T M
                  Meruti, Ms M V
                  Ramathlodi, Mr N A
                  Sibanyoni, Mr J B
                  Solomon, Mr G


              Democratic Alliance


                  Camerer, Mrs S M
                  Delport, Dr J T


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Van der Merwe, Mr J H


              Independent Democrats


                  Burgess, Mr C V


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Swart, Mr S N


         Labour:


              African National Congress


                  Anthony, Mr T G
                  Lishivha, Ms T E
                  Maduma, Mr L D
                  Manie, Mr M S
                  Moss, Ms L N
                  Mzondeki, Mr M J G
                  Ngcengwane, Ms N D
                  Olifant, Mr D A A
                  Oliphant, Mr G G
                  Rasmeni, Mr S M


                  Dambuza, Mr B N (Alt)
                  Dodovu, Mr T S (Alt)
                  Mkhize, Mr Z S (Alt)
                  Ntombela, Ms S H (Alt)
                  Phungula, Mr J P (Alt)
                  Tinto, Mrs B (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Henderson, Mr R K
                  Lowe, Mr C M


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Zulu, Prince N E


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Madasa, Adv Z L


              Freedom Front Plus
                  Spies, Mr W D


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Godi, Mr N T


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S


         Minerals and Energy:


              African National Congress


                  Goniwe, Mr M T
                  Kekana, Mr C D
                  Louw, Mr S K
                  Mathibela, Ms N F
                  Mofokeng, Mr T R
                  Ngaleka, Ms E
                  Ngcobo, Mr E N N
                  Oliphant, Mr G G
                  Tinto, Mrs B
                  Vundisa, Mr S S
                  Abram, Mr S (Alt)
                  Blose, Ms H M (Alt)
                  Combrinck, Mr J J (Alt)
                  Matlala, Mr M H (Alt)
              Democratic Alliance


                  Morkel, Mr C M
                  Schmidt, Adv H C


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Lucas, Mr E J


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)
                  Harding, Mr A


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Spies, Mr W D


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania
                  Pheko, Dr S E M (Alt)


         Provincial and Local Government:


              African National Congress
                  Bhengu, Ms P
                  Carrim, Mr Y I
                  Gumede, Mrs M M
                  Lekgoro, Mr M M S
                  Mashiane, Ms L M
                  Mogase, Mr I D
                  Mshudulu, Mr S A
                  Nonkonyana, Chief M
                  Ramphele, Mr T D H
                  Solo, Mr B M


                  Holomisa, Adv S P (Alt)
                  Kekana, Mr C D (Alt)
                  Montsitsi, Mr S D (Alt)
                  Nwamitwa-Shilubana, Mrs T L P (Alt)
                  Tsenoli, Mr S L (Alt)
                  Vundisa, Mr S S (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Doman, Mr W P
                  Swathe, Mr M M


              Inkatha Freedom Party
                  Smith, Mr P F


              United Democratic Movement


                  Mdaka, Ms N M


              Independent Democrats


                  Batyi, Ms F (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Mfundisi, Mr I S


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Likotsi, Mr M T


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D


         Public Enterprises:


              African National Congress


                  Frolick, Mr C T
                  Louw, Mr T J
                  Martins, Mr B A D
                  Mnandi, Ms P N
                  Mpaka, Ms H M
                  Ngcengwane, Ms N D
                  Nogumla, Mr R Z
                  Nonkonyana, Chief M
                  Yengeni, Mrs L E


                  Kholwane, Mr S E (Alt)
                  Mokoto, Ms N R (Alt)
                  Morutoa, Ms M R (Alt)
                  Pieterse, Mr R D (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Davidson, Mr I O
                  Minnie, Mr K J


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Bekker, Mr H J


              United Democratic Movement


                  Diko, Mr M (Alt)


              Independent Democrats


                  Harding, Mr A


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Madasa, Adv Z L


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Likotsi, Mr M T (Alt)


         Public Service and Administration:


              African National Congress


                  Baloyi, Mr M R
                  Gcwabaza, Ms N E
                  Gomomo, Mr P J
                  Luthuli, Dr A N
                  Maloney, Mrs L
                  Mentor, Ms M P
                  Mgabadeli, Ms H C
                  Mthembu, Mr B
                  Newhoudt-Druchen, Mrs W S
                  Sikakane, Mr M R


                  Mabe, Ms L L (Alt)
                  Mashangoane, Ms P R (Alt)
                  Mzondeki, Mr M J G (Alt)
                  Skhosana, Mr W M (Alt)
                  Van den Heever, Mr R P Z (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Minnie, Mr K J
                  Ntuli, Mr R S


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Roopnarain, Dr U


              United Democratic Movement


                  Madikiza, Mr G T (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Mfundisi, Mr I S


         Public Works:


              African National Congress


                  Bhengu, Mr F
                  Magubane, Mr N E
                  Moonsamy, Mr K
                  Nogumla, Mr R Z
                  Nwamitwa-Shilubana, Mrs T L P
                  Phungula, Mr J P
                  Ramotsamai, Ms C M P
                  Sekgobela, Ms P S
                  Siboza, Mr S


                  Anthony, Mr T G (Alt)
                  Gololo, Mr C L (Alt)
                  Kotwal, Mr Z (Alt)
                  Maduma, Mr L D (Alt)
                  Maluleka, Mr H P (Alt)
                  Schoeman, Dr E A (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Blanché, Mr J P I
                  Opperman, Mr S E


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Zondi, Rev K M


              United Democratic Movement
                  Mdaka, Ms N M


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C
              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Likotsi, Mr M T (Alt)


         Safety and Security:


              African National Congress


                  Mahote, Mr S
                  Maserumule, Mr F T
                  Maziya, Ms A M
                  Mngomezulu, Mr G P
                  Mthethwa, Mr E N
                  Ntuli, Mr S B
                  Sosibo, Ms J E
                  Sotyu, Ms M M
                  Van Wyk, Ms A
                  Xolo, Mr E T


                  Bloem, Mr D V (Alt)
                  Diale, Mr L N (Alt)
                  Dlali, Mr D M (Alt)
                  Molefe, Mr C T (Alt)
                  Monareng, Mr O E (Alt)
                  Nhlengethwa, Mrs D G (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Jankielsohn, Mr R
                  King, Mr R J


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Ndlovu, Mr V B


              United Democratic Movement


                  Madikiza, Mr G T (Alt)


              Independent Democrats


                  Burgess, Mr C V
              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Meshoe, Rev K R J


              Freedom Front Plus


                  Groenewald, Mr P J


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Ditshetelo, Mr P H K


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D (Alt)


         Science and Technology:


              African National Congress


                  Ainslie, Mr A R
                  Khumalo, Mr K M
                  Mahomed, Mrs F
                  Mashiane, Ms L M
                  Mlangeni, Mr A
                  Mohamed, Prof I J
                  Ngcobo, Mr E N N
                  Ngcobo, Ms B T
                  September, Ms C C
                  Zulu, Mr B Z


                  Cachalia, Mr I M (Alt)
                  Lekgoro, Mr M M S (Alt)
                  Madumise, Mrs M M (Alt)
                  Mtshali, Mr E (Alt)
                  Nxumalo, Mr S N (Alt)
                  Olifant, Mr D A A (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Blanché, Mr J P I
                  Mnyandu, Mr B J


              Inkatha Freedom Party
                  Chang, Ms E S


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Godi, Mr N T


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J


         Social Development:


              African National Congress


                  Bogopane-Zulu, Mrs H I
                  Direko, Ms I W
                  Kasienyane, Ms O R
                  Kondlo, Ms N C
                  Makgate, Ms M W
                  Nxumalo, Ms M D
                  Nzimande, Mr L P M
                  Phala, Mr M J
                  Saloojee, Mr E
                  Tshivase, Mrs T J


                  Chalmers, Mrs J (Alt)
                  Makasi, Ms X C (Alt)
                  Masutha, Mr T M (Alt)
                  Morwamoche, Mr K W (Alt)
                  Nxumalo, Mr S N (Alt)
                  Tshwete, Ms P (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Botha, Mrs C-S
                  Weber, Ms H


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Mars, Mrs I


              United Democratic Movement


                  Diko, Mr M
              Independent Democrats


                  Batyi, Ms F


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Dudley, Mrs C (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Pule, Mr B E (Alt)


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Godi, Mr N T (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Habedi, Mr N D


         Sport and Recreation:


              African National Congress


                  Dikgacwi, Mr M M
                  Frolick, Mr C T
                  Louw, Mr T J
                  Mlangeni, Mr A
                  Morobi, Mrs D M
                  Mtshali, Mr E
                  Ntshulana-Bhengu, Ms N R
                  Reid, Mr L R R
                  Sekgobela, Ms P S


                  Bogopane-Zulu, Mrs H I (Alt)
                  Louw, Mr S K (Alt)
                  Mngomezulu, Mr G P (Alt)
                  Ramakaba-Lesiea, Ms M M (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Lee, Mr T D
                  Masango, Mr S J


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Zikalala, Ms C N Z


              United Democratic Movement


                  Holomisa, Mr B H


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


         Trade and Industry:


              African National Congress


                  Davies, Dr R H
                  Hajaig, Ms F
                  Khunou, Ms N P
                  Mabe, Ms L L
                  Maja, Mr S J
                  Rasmeni, Mr S M
                  Sefularo, Dr M
                  September, Ms C C
                  Turok, Prof B
                  Zita, Mr L


                  Dikgwaci, Mr M M (Alt)
                  Mokoena, Mr A D (Alt)
                  Moss, Mr M I (Alt)
                  Njikela, Mr S J (Alt)
                  Ntuli, Mrs B M (Alt)
                  Schoeman, Dr E A (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Labuschagne, Mr L B
                  Nkem-Abonta, Dr E


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Bhengu, Mr M J


              United Democratic Movement


                  Stephens, Mr M


              Independent Democrats
                  Harding, Mr A (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Durr, Mr K D S


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Godi, Mr N T


              Minority Front


                  Rajbally, Ms S (Alt)


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J


         Transport:


              African National Congress


                  Ainslie, Mr A R
                  Cronin, Mr J P
                  Magubane, Mr N E
                  Mbombo, Mrs N D
                  Ntombela, Ms S H
                  Nxumalo, Ms M D
                  Phungula, Mr J P
                  Thomson, Ms B
                  Mashigo, Ms R J (Alt)
                  Morobi, Mrs D M (Alt)
                  Moss, Ms L N (Alt)
                  Phadagi, Mr M G (Alt)
                  Schneemann, Mr D G (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Farrow, Mr S B
                  Waters, Mr M


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Ngiba, Mr B C


              United Democratic Movement


                  Nkabinde, Ms N C


              Independent Democrats


                  Gore, Mr V C


              United Christian Democratic Party
                  Pule, Mr B E


              Azanian People's Organisation


                  Nefolovhodwe, Mr P J (Alt)


         Water Affairs and Forestry:


              African National Congress


                  Arendse, Mr J D
                  Kati, Mr Z J
                  Komphela, Mr B M
                  Lishivha, Ms T E
                  Masala, Mr M M
                  Mathebe, Mr P M
                  Ndzanga, Mrs R A
                  Ngwenya, Mrs M L
                  Phala, Mr M J


                  Bhengu, Ms P (Alt)
                  Gumede, Mrs M M (Alt)
                  Manana, Ms M N S (Alt)
                  Mogase, Mr I D (Alt)
                  Ramphele, Mr T D H (Alt)
                  Reid, Mr L R R (Alt)


              Democratic Alliance


                  Maluleke, Mr D K
                  Van der Walt, Mrs D


              Inkatha Freedom Party


                  Sibuyana, Mr M W


              United Democratic Movement


                  Bici, Mr J


              Independent Democrats


                  Greyling, Mr L W (Alt)


              African Christian Democratic Party


                  Durr, Mr K D S (Alt)


              United Christian Democratic Party


                  Ditshetelo, Mr P H K


              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania


                  Pheko, Dr S E M (Alt)


     (2)    Mr M K Lekgoro has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Communications with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (3)    Mr L J Modisenyane has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Correctional Services with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (4)    Mr M S Booi has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee
         on Defence with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (5)    Prof S M Mayatula has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Education with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (6)    Ms E Thabethe has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism with effect from 11
         May 2004.


     (7)    Mr L V J Ngculu has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Health with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (8)    Ms F I Chohan-Kota has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development with effect
         from 11 May 2004.


     (9)    Mr Y I Carrim has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Provincial and Local Government with effect from 11
         May 2004.


     (10)Ms N R Ntshulana-Bhengu has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Sport and Recreation with effect from 11 May 2004.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.


     (b)    Proclamation No R19 published in Government Gazette No 26111
         dated 2 March 2004: Commencement of the Bophuthatswana National
         Provident Fund Act Repeal Act, 2003 (Act No 13 of 2003).


     (c)    Proclamation No R18 published in Government Gazette No 26107
         dated 2 March 2004: Commencement of Sefalana Employee Benefits
         Organisation Act Repeal Act, 2003 (Act No 14 of 2003).

                           WEDNESDAY, 12 MAY 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees
     (1)    Mrs M A A Njobe has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Arts and Culture with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (2)    Ms B A Hogan has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Finance with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (3)    Mr H P Chauke has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Home Affairs with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (4)    Mr M S Manie has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Labour with effect from 11 May 2004.


     (5)    Mr B A D Martins has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Public Enterprises with effect from 12 May 2004.


     (6)    Ms M M Sotyu has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Safety and Security with effect from 12 May 2004.


     (7)    Ms Z A Kota has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee
         on Housing with effect from 12 May 2004.


     (8)    Mr B M Komphela has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry with effect from 12 May
         2004.


     (9)    Mr P J Gomomo has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Public Service and Administration with effect from 12
         May 2004.


    (10)    Prof A K Asmal has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on International Affairs with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (11)    Dr R H Davies has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Trade and Industry with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (12)    Mr E Saloojee has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Social Development with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (13)    Mr M T Goniwe has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Minerals and Energy with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (14)    Mr J P Cronin has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Transport with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (15)    Mr F Bhengu has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Public Works with effect from 12 May 2004.


    (16)    Mr N H Masithela has been elected chairperson of the Ad Hoc
          Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs with effect from 12 May
          2004.

                             MONDAY, 17 MAY 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Local Government: Municipal Property Rates Bill [B 19B - 2003] -
         Act No 6 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 May
         2004).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Public Investment Corporation Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance on 7 May 2004. Referred to the Ad Hoc
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in the Presidency


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
         for 2001-2002, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2001-2002 [RP 197-2003].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
         for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2004-2007.

                            TUESDAY, 18 MAY 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Assembly


     (a)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr T M Mbeki vacating his
         seat in the National Assembly with effect from 23 April 2004, had
         been filled by the nomination of N J Gogotya with effect from 14
         May 2004.


     (b)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr B Nair vacating his seat
         in the National Assembly with effect from 23 April 2004, had been
         filled by the nomination of O M Mogale with effect from 14 May
         2004.


     (c)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr M J Mahlangu vacating his
         seat in the National Assembly with effect from 23 April 2004, had
         been filled by the nomination of B L Mashile with effect from 14
         May 2004.


     (d)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr E Ebrahim vacating his
         seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1 May 2004, had
         been filled by the nomination of D V Mabuyakhulu with effect from
         14 May 2004.


     (e)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr M L Mokoena vacating his
         seat in the National Assembly, had been filled by the nomination
         of J J Maake with effect from 14 May 2004.


     (f)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms J Kgoali vacating her
         seat in the National Assembly with effect from 23 April 2004, had
         been filled by the nomination of N J Ngele with effect from 14 May
         2004.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health


     Strategic Plan of the National Department of Health for 2004-2007.

                           WEDNESDAY, 19 MAY 2004

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service for 2004-2007.

2.    The Minister of Transport
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund for
         2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2002-2003.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund for
         2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 10-2004].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority Urban for 2001-2002, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-2002.

                            THURSDAY, 20 MAY 2004

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs


     Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2004-2005.

                             FRIDAY, 21 MAY 2004

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     Strategic Plan of the National Treasury for 2004-2007.

                            TUESDAY, 25 MAY 2004

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Lebowa
     Mineral Trust for the period 1 April 1999 to 31 March 2003 [RP 34-
     2004].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     Report on the Review of the Organization and Post Establishment of the
     Office of the Public Protector for the period January to December 2002,
     tabled in terms of section 3(11)(a) of the Public Protector Act, 1994
     (Act No 23 of 1994).

