---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 October 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-10-26
---

TUESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2004
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 15:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.




                   RACIAL REPRESENTIVITY OF THE SPRINGBOKS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chair, I move without notice:

That the Council -


     1) notes that SA Rugby’s national selectors have grasped the nettle
        and included in the touring squad no less than eleven players who
        are not white, the colour that was once the monopolistic monochrome
        of Springbok teams that fraudulently claimed to represent South
        African rugby;

   (2)      welcomes the fact that, at long last, the new-look Springbok
         team has taken a giant leap towards reflecting the demographics of
         our great rugby-playing and rugby-loving democratic nation;


   (3)      agrees with national coach Jake White that the black Springboks
         were selected for their playing abilities and not on a quota
         basis, as some disgruntled and anti-transformation critics have
         alleged; and


   (4)      wishes the Springboks, holders of the Tri-Nations Cup, every
         success in their hunt for further glory in the Northern
         hemisphere.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    PRESIDENT MBEKI’S ASSISTANCE TO SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENS IMPRISONED IN
                                  ZIMBABWE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Nkk M N OLIPHANT : Sihlalo, ngizophakamisa ngaphandle kokunikeza isaziso:
Ukuthi uMkhandlu -

   (1)      uyawethakasela umsebenzi  owenziwe uMongameli wezwe, uMnu. Thabo
        Mbeki, wokuthi aphathe udaba lwamalungu aseNingizimu Afrika
        abegqunywe ejele laseZimbabwe ngobuhlakani nangobuchule ukuthi
        bakhululwe babuyele ekhaya;


     2) uyakubona lokhu njengobufakazi bohlelo lwezingxoxo phakathi
        kukaHulumeni waseNingizimu Afrika neZimbabwe;

        (3)      uyakuqaphela lokhu njengomphumela wokusebenza buthule
        okuthakazelwa nayimindeni;


      4) uyafisa futhi uyanxusa ukuthi kufanele
        amaqembu epolitiki abukele alalele isimo ayeke ukwanda
        ngomlomo kuhle okwembenge.
(Translation of isiZulu Draft Resolution follows.)

[Ms M N OLIFANT: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

That the Council -

  1) appreciates the diligent work that has been done by the President, Mr
     Thabo Mbeki, in handling the issue of South Africans who were detained
     in a Zimbabwean prison so that they could be released to go home;

  2) notes this as proof that there are negotiations between the South
     African government and Zimbabwe;

  3) also notes this as an outcome of quiet diplomacy which is even
     appreciated by the families; and

  4) wishes and appeals that we listen and watch as political parties and
     move away from talking too much.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        THE LATE MEC DUMISANI MAKHAYE





                             (Draft Resolution)


Mnu Z C NTULI: Mphathisihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

Ukuthi loMkhandlu –


      1) (1)     uzwakalisa okukhulu ukudumala nokumangala ngokushiywa
         iqabane,uDumisani Makhaye, ebesimazi ngoShombela, odlule emhlabeni
         ngomhla ka-24 Okthoba 2004;


         (2)     uyakuqaphela ukuthi uDumisani Makhaye impilo yakhe yonke
         kusukela ebusheni bakhe kuze kube uyasishiya emhlabeni, ubelokhu
         ebambelele ekukholelweni emzabalazweni wenkulelo yabantu
         baseNingizimu Afrika ne-Afrika yonkana;


         (3)     ukhumbula ukuthi uDumisani Makhaye ungomunye
         wezingqalabutho zomzabalazo wabantu wokulwisana nokucwasana
         ngokwebala, ngokobuzwe nangokobulili kanye nokulwelwa intando
         yeningi eNingizimu Afrika;

         (4)     uyakhumbula futhi ukuthi ngo-1991 uMakhaye waqokelwa
         esigungwini esikhulu sesifunda saseNingizimu neNatali;


         (5)     uyakhumbula futhi ukuthi ngesikhathi sokwedlula kwakhe
         emhlabeni ubeyilungu lesigungu esikhulu kuzwelonke embuthweni
         kaKhongolose;

         (6)     uMakhaye ubewusi ungeke ukhohlwe ukuthi hlalo ekomidini
         lezimali kwisishayamthetho sakwaZulu-Natali kusukela ngonyaka ka-
         1994 kuya onyakeni ka-1999 . . .


   [Kwaphela isikhathi.]
 (Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

That the Council -
 (1)  expresses its sadness about the death of Comrade Dumisani Makhaye,
        affectionately known as Shombela, who passed away on 24 October
        2004;


     2) notes that all his life, from his youthful days until his demise,
        Dumisani Makhaye has always held onto believing in the struggle of
        the liberation of the people of South Africa and Africa at large;


     3) remembers the fact that Dumisani Makhaye was one of the veterans of
        the people’s struggle to fight against discrimination on the basis
        of colour, race and gender and to fight for democracy in South
        Africa;


  (4) also remembers that in 1991 he was appointed to the Southern Natal
        provincial executive council;


  (5) also remembers that he was a member of the NEC of the ANC when he
        passed away;


  (6) will not lose sight of the fact that Makhaye was the Chairperson of
        the Portfolio Committee on Finance from 1994 to 1999 . . .

[Time expired.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE COUNCIL: Hon member, your time has expired.
The motion will become a notice of motion and printed in the Order Paper.

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chair.

Mnu Z C NTULI : Mphathisihlalo, ngiphakamisa ngaphandle kwesaziso:

Ukuthi loMkhandlu –


    (1)     uzwakalisa okukhulu ukudumala nokumangala ngokushiywa
        iqabane,uDumisani Makhaye, ebesimazi ngoShombela, odlule emhlabeni
        ngomhla ka-24 Okthoba 2004;


    (2)     uyakuqaphela ukuthi uDumisani Makhaye impilo yakhe yonke
         kusukela ebusheni bakhe kuze kube uyasishiya emhlabeni, ubelokhu
         ebambelele ekukholelweni emzabalazweni wenkulelo yabantu
         baseNingizimu Afrika ne-Afrika yonkana;


    (3)     ukhumbula ukuthi uDumisani Makhaye ungomunye wezingqalabutho
         zomzabalazo wabantu wokulwisana nokucwasana ngokwebala, ngokobuzwe
         nangokobulili kanye nokulwelwa intando yeningi eNingizimu Afrika;

    (4)     uyakhumbula futhi ukuthi ngo-1991 uMakhaye waqokelwa esigungwini
         esikhulu sesifunda saseNingizimu neNatali;
    (5)     uyakhumbula futhi ukuthi ngesikhathi sokwedlula kwakhe emhlabeni
         ubeyilungu lesigungu esikhulu kuzwelonke embuthweni kaKhongolose;

      6) uMakhaye ubewusi ungeke ukhohlwe ukuthi hlalo ekomidini lezimali
         kwisishayamthetho sakwaZulu-Natali kusukela ngonyaka ka-1994 kuya
         onyakeni ka-1999 . . .


      7) uyakhumbula futhi ukuthi kusukela ngo-1999 kuya ku-2004,
         ubewungqongqoshe womnyango woHulumeni baseKhaya, ezeziNdlu kanye
         nezeNdlu yabaHoli beNdabuko adlule emhlabeni esawenza lo msebenzi;

      8) uyaqaphela ukuthi uMakhaye usishiye nefa lobuqhawe nokusebenza
         ngokuzimisela.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I move without notice:

That the Council –

      1) expresses its sadness about the death of Comrade Dumisani Makhaye,
         affectionately known as Shombela, who passed away on 24 October
         2004;


    (2)     notes that all his life, from his youthful days until his
        demise, Dumisani Makhaye has always held onto believing in the
        struggle of the liberation of the people of South Africa and Africa
        at large;


    (3)     remembers the fact that Dumisani Makhaye was one of the veterans
        of the people’s struggle to fight against discrimination on the
        basis of colour, race and gender and to fight for democracy in
        South Africa;


    (4)     also remembers that in 1991 he was appointed to the Southern
        Natal provincial executive council;


    (5)     also remembers that he was a member of the NEC of the ANC when
        he passed away;


    (6)     will not lose sight of the fact that Makhaye was the Chairperson
        of the Portfolio Committee on Finance from 1994 to 1999 . . .


      7) remembers also that from 1999 to 2004 he was the MEC of local
         government, housing and traditional affairs until his death;


      8) realises that Makhaye left us with a heroic heritage, and working
         with determination.]


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Can somebody
be in control of the microphones, please. Mr Blanché, can you come
and use this one.


                 RAPE OF 60-YEAR-OLD WOMAN IN POTCHEFSTROOM


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I hereby move a motion without notice:

That the Council –

     1) notes that on Monday, 18 October 2004, a 60-year-old resident of
        Potchefstroom was raped;


     2) believes that this severely traumatised victim had to wait for two
        hours before she was examined by a district surgeon;

     3) further notes that the victim is still in hospital a week after the
        incident;

     4) calls upon this House to condemn this and other acts of violence
        against women and children;

     5) regrets the refusal of the President to address the serious issue
        of rape in our country; and

     6) acknowledges the suffering of women and children who are attacked
        on a daily basis.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                          DEATH OF MBONGENI NGOBENI


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

That the Council -


     (1)    notes with sadness the death of a former MP, Comrade Mbongeni
         Ngobeni, also former Secretary-General of Sanco from Witbank,
         Mpumalanga;


     (2)    believes that he was involved in a car accident and passed away
         on Sunday, 24 October 2004; and


     (3)    wishes to convey its  condolences  to  the  Ngobeni  family  and
         friends.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                LAUNCH OF NEW MARINE ANTI-POACHING OPERATION


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Chair of Chairs, I suppose you must just instruct the
staff that I am not a member of the DA. They are not supposed to sabotage
me. [Laughter.]

Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

That the Council -


   (1)      welcomes the launch of a major new marine anti-poaching
         operation, which will be a joint operation between the Department
         of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the South African Police
         Service and the Overstrand Municipality;


   (2)      notes that this new initiative will effectively replace the
         existing Operation Neptune; and


      3) further notes that the strategy is aimed at tackling  and  rooting
         out the causes of the serious decline in abalone stocks  and  that
         about R8 million in extra funding will be added  annually  to  the
         existing  Operation  Neptune  and  Overstrand  Marines   programme
         resources, which will bring the  operational  budget  to  well  in
         excess of R15 million per year.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                       TOURISM ACCOLADES FOR CAPE TOWN





                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr F ADAMS: Chair, I move without notice:

That the Council -


     (1)    notes that -


         (a)     according to the United Kingdom's 2004 Daily Telegraph
              Travel Awards, Cape Town has been voted the best city in the
              world by thousands of international travellers;


         (b)     the American 2004 Condé Nast Top 100 Readers' Choice
              Awards has also placed Cape Town at the top of the heap in the
              Best Category for Africa and the Middle East;


         (c)     if this is not enough, in the 2004 High Life Travel Awards
              British Airways voted Cape Town the best city in the world in
              which to eat out;


         (d)     the Telegraph has published its travel poll for the past
              seven years and in its poll Sydney and Venice take second and
              third places;


         (e)     according to the survey Cape Town is also home to one of
              the best hotels in the world as the Mount Nelson was voted
              third best city hotel in the world and it was the only South
              African hotel to make it onto the Telegraph awards list; and


     (2)    is of the opinion that -


         (a)     South Africa, and Cape Town in particular, has come a long
              way;


         (b)     receiving such an accolade is a great privilege for Cape
              Town; and


         (c)     more of our cities and hotels  will  receive  international
              recognition next year.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

             NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: AIR QUALITY BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chair of Chairs, hon members, South Africa is
recognised for its great natural beauty and abundant natural resources.
However, prior to 1994 it was better known for the brutal apartheid regime
that deprived the majority of its people of basic human rights. By law, and
occasionally at gunpoint, it dictated where people could live and what
their life chances would be. It did not stop at segregating people
according to their skin tone, white-owned industries required cheap and
expendable labour, and low waste-disposal costs.

To meet these needs, entire communities were relocated alongside polluting
industries. The apartheid government’s decision to allow industries to
continue with their ineffective environment control placed these
communities at risk of exposure to harmful industrial air pollutants.

In a broad policy statement the ANC stated in its Ready to Govern document
that it believes that all citizens of South Africa, at present and in
future, have the right to a safe and healthy environment, and to a life of
wellbeing. This places the environment on the agenda of community meetings,
including ANC branch meetings.

In terms of section 24 of our Constitution, people are afforded two
distinctive rights. The first one is the recognition that everyone has a
right to an environment that is not harmful to their wellbeing and health.
The second right requires the state to protect the environment through
reasonable legislative and other measures to prevent pollution.

The new National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill replaces the
outdated apartheid Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act, Act 45 of 1965.
This new Bill illustrates the government’s determination to enforce its
citizens’ constitutional right to a clean and safe environment. This Bill
is welcomed, considering the fact that poor air quality cost South Africa
millions of rands in health care and losses in production, money that could
be better spent on other needs.

This Bill, which has been described as a watershed to air quality
management in South Africa, aims to give effect to the state’s
constitutional duty in relation to air quality. Furthermore, it aims to
protect, restore and enhance air quality in South Africa and fulfil
everyone’s right to air that is not harmful to health and wellbeing. It
empowers the government to repeal the outdated, ineffective and
unconstitutional Act of 1965; it provides increased opportunities for
public involvement and participation in the protection of air quality; it
develops national ambient and emission standards; it develops a detailed,
comprehensive, coherent and integrated air quality management regime - the
National Air Quality Management Framework; it ensures that the public has
access to the relevant information about air pollution; and, it reduces
risk to human health and prevents decline in air quality.

An important aspect of the Bill is that it reduces the burden of proof by
the state regarding future health and environmental impacts. I would
therefore warn those industries that still consider monetary gains more
important than human rights to take note of this Bill or face the
consequences, especially industries in the hot spots. For a long time, many
South Africans have had to breathe air that gave them diseases. With this
Bill, people will, at long last, be able to breathe fresh air.

In conclusion, the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill
places South Africa, globally, in a leadership position regarding
environmental protection and sustainable development best practices. The
ANC therefore supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, that concludes the debate. I
shall now put the question and the question is that the Bill be agreed to.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the
House to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present?
Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declarations of vote, if they so wish.
We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting. The
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: Free State e a dumela. [Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyavuma Mgcinisihlalo. [We agree, Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: I-KwaZulu-Natal iyavumelana. [KwaZulu-Natal agrees.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re dumelana le yona. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Mr B J TOLO: Mpumalanga steun. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Noord-Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: North West supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, all provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the
Constitution.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution.

NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Rev P MOATSHE: Hon Deputy Chair and hon members, one of the key components
of the World Parks Congress held in 2003 in Durban was to review the global
status of protected areas and develop a new conservation agenda. A central
theme of the congress was the recognition that protected areas should not
be islands of conservation divorced from the social and economic context
within which they are located. They generate significant economic,
environmental and social benefits. This makes them powerful contributors to
poverty reduction and to the development targets set in the Millennium
Declaration and at the World Summit on Sustainable Development.

A new paradigm has emerged in South Africa in which synergies are sought
between conservation and development agendas. It is an era in which
protected areas play a vital role in achieving this synergy and integration
and provide benefits beyond boundaries. The paradigm encompassing protected
areas reviews and re-enforces the following: conserving diversity of plants
and animal species; maintaining ecosystems in preserving historic and
cultural resources; securing the beauty of landscape that enrich human
experience and protecting places of spiritual value.

The National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill seeks
to amend the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act of
2003. It contains provisions that will enable the aforementioned Act to
apply to the national parks and marine protected areas as part of the
general scheme of protected areas of the Republic.

In terms of this amendment the Minister may, in the Government Gazette,
declare an area specified in the notice as a national park and may also
withdraw that declaration. The Minister may also designate a national park,
or part thereof, as a wilderness area. This designation may be made to
protect the natural character of the environment, to provide outstanding
solitude, and to control access which, if allowed, may not be mechanised.
This designation must be made in consultation with the management of the
park.

The amendment contains further provisions regarding the functions and
general powers of national parks. This amendment does not seek to repeal
the National Parks Act, but certain provisions in that Act that deal with
the functions of national parks will be repealed by the proposals in this
Bill.
In conclusion, currently in South Africa there are 403 protected areas
covering 6,6 million hectares and this translates to 5,5% of the land area.
There are currently 22 national parks covering 53% of the total area of
land under protection. Protected area coverage has tripled over the past 20
years and has provided society with immeasurable benefits such as clean
water, fish stocks, food protection and reduction of poverty through
supporting sustainable livelihood. May this House support this statement. I
thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question. And the
question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall
first allow political parties to make their declarations of vote, if they
so wish.

Hon members, we shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Those in
favour say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Those against say “No”.

HON MEMBERS: No!

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I think the “Ayes” have it. The majority of
members have voted in favour. I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in
terms of section 75 of the Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

  AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
     FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE
   TAXATION AND THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON
                                   INCOME

                          (Consideration of Report)

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Madam Chair of Chairs and hon members, the proposed
double taxation agreement between the Republic of South Africa and Ethiopia
is a step forward in reaching a more equitable and transparent trade
environment. South Africa is now an important player in international trade
and commerce. Its role in Africa is in the process of being defined.

This  agreement  represents  a  new  convention  with  important  developing
countries. Ethiopia, our African cousin from the  north  of  our  continent,
which has recently been united  under  Nepad,  is  classed  as  an  emerging
market. South Africa can help with developing financial markets,  where  our
expertise is well developed.

It is therefore not  only  Ethiopia  that  will  benefit  from  this  double
taxation convention. It  is  a  reciprocal  relationship,  benefiting  South
Africa too.

The double taxation convention is intended  to  remove  trade  barriers  and
provide  certainty  of  tax  treatment,  reducing  withholding   rates   and
assisting in collection, resolution of tax disputes and interpretation.  The
convention closely follows the OECD model convention as its  foundation.  As
an example, the provisions  for  air  and  sea  transport  are  extended  to
include profits derived from rental  on  a  bare-boat  basis  of  ships  and
aircraft, if such profits are  incidental.  It  extends  the  convention  to
profits from the use of containers and  related  equipment.  Other  examples
are an agreement to 10% withholding tax on  foreign  dividends  and  20%  on
royalties. Academics carrying out  research  are  spared  tax  in  the  host
country for 2 years.

However, an  important  aspect  of  these  agreements  from  South  Africa’s
current perspective is investment capital from the overseas markets. We  all
agree we must grow faster. Here we need to improve our performance. In  2003
foreign direct investment was 50% lower than it was in  2002  -  this  in  a
country desperate to increase economic growth and job creation.

A KPMG survey found that South African’s tax rate  is  7%  higher  than  the
average for Latin America and the Asian Pacific. This means  that  companies
investing here face a tax bill 23% higher than if  they  invested  in  those
regions. This is an important  policy  challenge  for  our  competitiveness,
which we should discuss.

Personal income taxes have been steadily reduced over the  past  few  years,
for which the government is to  be  applauded.  But  business  activity  and
investment is the driver of the South African economy and  the  contribution
of corporate profits to total tax revenues almost doubled between  1999  and
2003. This has both positive and  negative  consequences,  which  we  should
debate.

Countries like Ireland have found that lowering corporate tax rates has
actually resulted in increased tax take through new investment. This fact
alone should be enough to persuade the authorities to undertake a
comprehensive review of taxation in the interests of attracting a fair
share of foreign direct investment that will help to boost our growth rate
and create jobs. Minister Manuel has called a tax colloquium. We must all
take an active interest in such a debate of our tax policies after the
dramatic changes to the tax system in recent years. The Select Committee on
Finance supports this agreement. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question and the question is that the report be
adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all the
delegation heads present?  Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall allow provinces an opportunity to make
their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to the
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order. Delegation
heads must indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Re a e thega. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: Agree.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyavuma. [We support.] The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES:
KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Kwazulu-Natal iyahambisana. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo agrees.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Agrees.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes Kaap steun [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.
[Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONVENTION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
 GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION
    AND THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

                          (Consideration of Report)

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Madam Chair, the proposed double  tax  agreement  between
our country and Bulgaria is a progressive initiative that should  facilitate
trade between our countries and could increase inward  investment  in  South
Africa. Since South  Africa  is  now  part  of  the  global  economy,  these
agreements should remove restrictive trade barriers. Double  tax  agreements
are an international phenomenon intended to encourage foreign investment.

We are pleased that  this  agreement  represents  new  conventions  with  an
important country. Bulgaria, a democracy in a fast-growing  Eastern  Europe,
will become part of the European  Union  in  the  foreseeable  future.  This
agreement should therefore encourage trade in  the  service  sector  of  the
economy, in manufacturing, and in tourism, which is  focused  in  the  Black
Sea.

By  our  count,  we  now  have  53  signed,  comprehensive  double  taxation
agreements  with  countries  around  the  world.  Many  of  these  are  with
developing countries, but the list includes  developed  countries  like  the
USA, the UK, Japan, Austria and Switzerland.

We have faith that the vast majority of these agreements  have  resulted  in
benefits for South Africans, South African companies,  and  the  SA  Revenue
Service, but our faith is  based  on  little  more  than  our  knowledge  of
classical trade theory.

It would therefore be very useful for policy-makers and  commentators  alike
to have a  comprehensive  and  detailed  view  of  the  relative  costs  and
benefits of each existing double taxation agreement. A published  review  or
audit of all of our existing agreements would be of great benefit to all.
Such a review would reveal the consequences  of  each  and  every  agreement
with an analysis of costs and benefits in  respect  of  government  revenue,
opportunity,  cost  and  investment.  This  review  would  assist   in   the
identification and evaluation of positions where  the  existing  agreements,
especially  those   with   developed   countries,   could   potentially   be
perpetuating  discriminatory  practises  that   have   negatively   impacted
developing countries for centuries.

It would also highlight gaps in policy, which could  be  judiciously  filled
by extensions of the agreements or the establishment of new agreements.

We applaud  the  principle  of  such  double  taxation  agreements  for  the
beneficial  effect  that  they  will  have  on  our  economy  and  on  trade
agreements.  The  Select  Committee  on  Finance  supports  this  agreement.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate. I shall now put
the question and the question is that the report be adopted. As the
decision is dealt in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain where all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must indicate to the
Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting. Eastern
Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: Siyavhuma. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Agreed.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal agrees.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo agrees.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Siyayixhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces voted in favour. I shall
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

         PROTOCOL ON LEGAL AFFAIRS IN THE SOUTH AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT
                              COMMUNITY (SADC)

                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr D A WORTH: Madam Chair, hon members, please bear with me, this is a very
technical protocol and I have condensed it as far as possible.

Some 14 Southern African member states will eventually have signed and
ratified this protocol in accordance with their various perspective
constitutional processes. The Republic of South Africa is one of these
member states.

The objectives of this protocol shall be, amongst others, to provide legal
assistance to all SADC member states and its institutions in matters
relating to the interpretation and implementation of the treaty, protocols
and subsidiary legal instruments;  provide legal advice and related legal
services to other SADC sectors; assist the various state parties in
developing legal capacities and expertise in specific legal areas of
concern; facilitate the adoption of appropriate schemes of co-operation in
criminal and civil matters;  promote the adoption of mutual assistance
agreements and arrangements in civil and criminal matters; facilitate the
harmonious implementation of decisions taken by the multilateral
organisations of which SADC states are members; develop common strategies
and standards for dealing with the administration of justice and law
enforcement; promote legal assistance to the SADC institutions; promote the
harmonisation of the administrative and legislative measures in civil and
criminal matters; facilitate the development within state parties of
facilities to enhance information sharing; and to undertake and promote
research on legal issues of common concern within the mandate of the SADC
countries.

To implement this protocol, the following functional institutions will be
established: the committee of ministers of justice/attorneys-general, the
committee of legal experts, and the legal sector co-ordinating unit.

The committee of ministers of justice/attorneys-general shall be
responsible for providing guidance and for co-ordination of policies,
programmes and projects for the legal sector; advise council on legal
matters arising from activities of SADC; and liaise with the SADC
Secretariat on matters pertaining to the legal sector.

The committee of legal experts shall consist of legal experts, one each
designated by each state party. Each member of the committee of legal
experts shall be the contact point in each state party for the legal sector
and shall establish and maintain effective consultations with the co-
ordinating unit on matters concerning the legal sector.

The committee of legal experts shall examine legal aspects of all reports
and documents submitted to it by the co-ordinator, SADC Secretariat,
commissions, and other SADC institutions; advise the committee of ministers
on issues, proposals and projects to be presented to the council for
approval; and review any sectoral programme of action in order to ensure
that it is consistent with the objects of the legal sector and those of
SADC.

The legal sector co-ordinating unit shall be the executing agency of the
legal sector. The legal sector co-ordinating unit shall be established in
the ministry or department responsible for justice or legal affairs of the
co-ordinating country. The legal sector co-ordinating unit shall be headed
by a co-ordinator appointed by the state party responsible for co-
ordinating the legal sector, and he or she shall be assisted by such
supporting staff of professional, administrative and secretarial personnel
as the co-ordinator may deem necessary.

The legal sector co-ordinating unit shall provide leadership in the
articulation of the objectives and policies of the legal sector; facilitate
the development of SADC policies and strategies and those of the state
parties where this may be required; facilitate the sharing of information
in the legal field on matters falling under the objectives of the legal
sector; advise the state parties on matters pertaining to the activities of
the sector; organise and manage or assist in organising and managing all
meetings of the legal sector; prepare the annual reports of the legal
sector; mobilise financial and technical resources for the implementation
of the programmes and projects of the legal sector; and carry out any
duties aimed at the promotion of the work of the legal sector, and in
general of SADC programmes.

With regard to the financial provisions, state parties shall endeavour to
allocate the necessary funds for the effective implementation of this
protocol. The cost of administering and managing the affairs of the co-
ordinating unit shall be borne by the co-ordinating country. Programmes and
projects of the legal sector may be financed by funds legitimately
solicited from various sources, including the international donor community
and other parties. The legal sector may accept legacies, grants and gifts
in conformity with the guidelines set by the council.

This protocol shall enter into force 30 days after the deposit of the
instruments of ratification by two-thirds of the member states. Any state
party wishing to withdraw from this protocol shall give to the Executive
Secretary 12 months’ written notice of its intention. Such state party
withdrawing from this protocol shall cease to enjoy all rights and benefits
from the effective date of the withdrawal and remain bound to the
obligations assumed under this protocol until the withdrawal takes effect.

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs recommends that
this Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution approve this
protocol. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: I shall now put the question in respect of
the Fifth Order. The question is that the Report be adopted. As this
decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I need
to ascertain whether all delegation heads are present. Are all delegation
heads present? Yes.

I shall now also allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations
of vote in terms of Rule 71 if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: Re a dumela. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyahambisana. [We are in agreement.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyahambisana. [We are in agreement.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?
Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re dumelana nao. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: We support

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Re a dumela. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke wa rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ons steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the Report adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

PROTOCOL OF THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE AFRICAN UNION
                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, it is a privilege for me to report on the
Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union. The Select Committee
on Security and Constitutional Affairs met and discussed the above matter.
This protocol deals with judicial matters and procedure in relation to the
Constitutive Act that establishes the Court of Justice of the African
Union. Therefore, it must be understood that whatever decision is arrived
at, all heads of states and governments of the union must be part of such a
decision-making process.

There are two fundamental principles that must be adhered to. The first one
is that the court established by Act shall function in accordance with the
provisions of the Act. Secondly, the court shall be the principal judicial
organ of the union. The composition of judges shall consist of seven judges
who are nationals of states’ parties. The Assembly may, when it deems it
necessary, review the number of judges. Another aspect that is of
importance is that no two judges shall be nationals of the same state.

In the court as a whole, the representation of the principal legal
traditions of Africa shall be adhered to and assured. It is also important
to note that each state party may nominate only one candidate who holds the
necessary qualifications as enshrined in article 4 of this protocol. Due
consideration will be given to adequate gender representation in the
nomination process. This is a milestone for the emancipation and
recognition of African women as a whole, because they have valuable
contributions to make towards the success of this court.

In relation to the many atrocities still suffered by women on our continent
with regards to crimes and war against women as well as the countless human
rights abuses that women have suffered, this court must become a beacon of
hope for all the women of Africa as well as women of the world who were
previously aggrieved, discriminated against and abused.

The court must alleviate the pain suffered and distress caused
by ensuring that the perpetrators face the wrath of the law. The inclusion
of women in this judicial structure of the African Union must serve as an
instrument and channel for highlighting continental crimes against women in
order to create a more just society for the growth and development of all
the women on the African continent.
Another crucial aspect is that of allowing for hearings in court to be
public unless the court, on its own motion or application by the parties,
agrees that the public should not be admitted. Transparency of this nature
is critical as a vehicle for transmitting the rule of law and order across
the African continent.

It is of great importance that all our people across the continent are made
aware of the proceedings of this court. This will go a long way, I believe,
in creating a common spirit that justice can be served in Africa, with
specific relation to upholding human rights and lifting the flag of peace
and stability in Africa. This court must strive to be transparent,
accessible as well as being a symbol and vehicle of African unity.

Another unique process is the tenure of office. The judges shall be elected
for a period of six years and may be re-elected only once. The term of five
judges elected at the first election shall expire at the end of four years
and other judges shall serve the full term. The select committee is of the
opinion that there is no need to comment on the procedure now but rather to
allow the processes to be set in motion first.

Another good aspect is that of the election of a judge to replace another
judge whose term of office has expired. The replacement judge shall be from
the same region and shall hold office for the remainder of the
predecessor’s term. An aspect that is also of critical importance is that
the court shall elect its own president and vice-president for a period of
three years. These two may be re-elected once. The president may reside on
the seat of the court. The rules of the court shall set out modalities for
the election of the president and the vice-president as well as other
functions.

In terms of dealing with questions of a quorum, when sitting in chamber,
the court shall only examine cases if it has a quorum of at least seven
judges. The quorum for a special chamber shall be set out in the rules of
the court.
An important aspect of the protocol is that it allows for the court to
submit to each ordinary session of the Assembly a report on its work during
the previous year. The report shall specify in particular the case in which
a state has not complied with the court’s judgment. However, there is no
mention on how the court will deal with states that do not comply with the
court’s judgement. This is of grave concern, especially in relation to
peacekeeping and establishing law and order on the African continent, as
well as bestowing respect on and honouring this important judicial
structure.

Let me briefly talk about the rules of the court. The court shall frame
rules for carrying out its functions and generally give effect to this
protocol. In particular, it shall lay down rules of procedure and terms of
conforming to this protocol. The court may from time to time, in one or
more chambers composed of three or more judges as the court may determine,
deal with particular categories of cases. These procedures do not differ
from other procedural courts. I therefore propose, on behalf of the select
committee, that this House accepts this report. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon member. That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question and the question is that the report be
adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are
present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation
heads present?
In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first give provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Ons steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: We support it.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Ons stem ten gunste daarvan. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re sepedisana le yona. [We vote in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: We vote in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Ra dumellana. [We vote in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We vote in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Iyayixhasa. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, all provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    TREATY BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
             GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA ON EXTRADITION
                          (Consideration of Report)

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, hon Chair of Chairs, I want to find out if I can
extend my time with five more minutes. [Interjections.] Chairperson, there
is the desire between the government of South Africa and the government of
India to make more effective their co-operation in the prevention and
suppression of crime by concluding a treaty on extradition, and affirming
the respect for each other’s legal systems and judicial institutions.

Each contracting state agrees to extradite to the other, in accordance with
the provisions of the treaty, persons who are wanted for trial, prosecution
or the imposition or enforcement of a sentence in the requesting state for
an extraditable offence. For the purpose of this treaty, extradition shall
be granted for conduct which constitutes an offence under the laws of both
contracting states and punishable by deprivation of liberty for at least
one year or by a more severe penalty.

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Treaty Between the
Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
Republic of India on Extradition, recommends that the Council approves the
said treaty. I thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: That concludes the debate. I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province.
The delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in
favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyavumelana. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: Ke ya rona. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr S SHICEKA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Siyayixhasa. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a e thekga. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Siyayisekela. [We support it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: We vote in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [We vote in favour.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, all provinces voted in favour.
I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 17:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Mrs W S Newhoudt-Druchen has been elected Chairperson of the
         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons with effect from 22
         October 2004.


     (2)    Mr D D Gamede has been elected Deputy Chairperson of the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons with effect from 22
         October 2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Insert No 1 from "2ATC1022"

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Finance Bill [B 13 -
     2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 22 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77),
         referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Petroleum Pipelines
     Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 22
     October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 77), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal
     Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
     and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
     dated 22 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Democratic Republic
         of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

     Report to be considered.

5.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Convention between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
     the Republic of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 22
     October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
         of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.

     Report to be considered.


                           MONDAY, 25 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Government Notice No R1128 published in Government Gazette No
         26853 dated 30 September 2004: Policyholder Protection Rules
         (Short-term Insurance), 2004, in terms of the Short-term Insurance
         Act, 1998 (Act No 53 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No R1129 published in Government Gazette No
         26854 dated 30 September 2004: Policyholder Protection Rules (Long-
         term Insurance), 2004, in terms of the Long-term Insurance Act,
         1998 (Act No 52 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1130 published in Government Gazette No
         26860 dated 30 September 2004: Statement of the National Revenue,
         Expenditure and Borrowing as at 31 August 2004 in terms of the
         Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (d)    Government Notice No 2174 published in Government Gazette No
         26863 dated 4 October 2004: Draft Preferential Procurement
         Regulations, 2004, in terms of the Preferential Procurement Policy
         Framework Act, 2000 (Act No 5 of 2000).

2.    The Minister of Health


     (a)    World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco
         Control, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the World Health Organisation (WHO)
         Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Replies from the Minister of Arts and Culture in regard to the 109th
     report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, 2003:

     Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Protocol on Legal Affairs in the Southern African Development
     Community (SADC), dated 25 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Protocol on Legal Affairs in the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC), referred to it, recommends that the Council, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Protocol.

         The Committee took note of the new approach that has been
         initiated by the National Council of Provinces in taking provinces
         on board on matters dealing with protocols, conventions and
         treaties, especially those matters mentioned in section 231 of the
         Constitution.

         The Committee appreciates that this recent approach will further
         enhance active participation by and input from provinces, thereby
         fulfilling the expectations emanating from the core mandate of the
         National Council of Provinces.

     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, dated 25
     October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, referred to
         it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

         The Committee took note of the new approach that has been
         initiated by the National Council of Provinces in taking provinces
         on board on matters dealing with protocols, conventions and
         treaties, especially those matters mentioned in section 231 of the
         Constitution.
         The Committee appreciates that this recent approach will further
         enhance active participation by and input from provinces, thereby
         fulfilling the expectations emanating from the core mandate of the
         National Council of Provinces.

     Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
     and the Government of the Republic of India on Extradition, dated 25
     October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
         the Government of the Republic of India on Extradition, referred
         to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of
         the Constitution, approve the said Treaty.

         The Committee took note of the new approach that has been
         initiated by the National Council of Provinces in taking provinces
         on board on matters dealing with protocols, conventions and
         treaties, especially those matters mentioned in section 231 of the
         Constitution.

         The Committee appreciates that this recent approach will further
         enhance active participation by and input from provinces, thereby
         fulfilling the expectations emanating from the core mandate of the
         National Council of Provinces.

     Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
     and the Government of the Republic of India on Mutual Legal Assistance
     in Criminal Matters, dated 25 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
         the Government of the Republic of India on Mutual Legal Assistance
         in Criminal Matters, referred to it, recommends that the Council,
         in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
         Treaty.

         The Committee took note of the new approach that has been
         initiated by the National Council of Provinces in taking provinces
         on board on matters dealing with protocols, conventions and
         treaties, especially those matters mentioned in section 231 of the
         Constitution.

         The Committee appreciates that this recent approach will further
         enhance active participation by and input from provinces, thereby
         fulfilling the expectations emanating from the core mandate of the
         National Council of Provinces.

     Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)


         (ii)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 22 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         26 October 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 October
         2004:


         (i)     National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill [B 62D
              - 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76(2))
         (ii)    National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
              Amendment Bill [B 2B - 2004] (National Council of Provinces -
              sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
     (a)    Medium Term Budget Policy Statement 2004 [RP 201-2004].
         Referred to the Joint Budget Committee and the Portfolio Committee
         on Finance for consideration in accordance with their respective
         mandates.


     (b)    Adjustments Appropriation Bill, 2004 [RP 21-2004].

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
         and report.


     (c)    Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2004 [RP 22-2004]

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
         and report.


     (d)    Adjusted Estimates of National Expenditure 2004 [RP 202-2004],
         which includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Adjustments Estimates,
              2004-2005;
         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
              Information System", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Science and Technology",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Social Development",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Sport and Recreation",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Correctional Services",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Defence", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Safety and Security",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Agriculture", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Communications", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Housing", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Land Affairs", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Minerals and Energy",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;
         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Adjustments
              Estimates, 2004-2005;
         34. Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Adjustments Estimates, 2004-2005;

         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
         and report.

   1. The Minist
   2. er of Public Enterprises
     Report and Financial Statements of Arivia.kom for 2003-2004, including
     the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
     2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 - Department of Trade and
     Industry for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2003-2004 [RP 110-2004].



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Choice on
     Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72B - 2003] (National
     Assembly - sec 76), dated 26 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill
         [B 72B - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it,
         reports the Bill with an amendment [B 72C - 2003].

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the
     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004] (National Council of
     Provinces - sec 76), dated 26 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004]
         (National Council of Provinces - sec 76), referred to it, reports
         the Bill with amendments [B 12A - 2004].


