---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-04
---

THURSDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The House Chairperson (Mr G Q M DOIDGE) took the Chair and requested
members to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.


ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col.000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I would have preferred to move this as a motion
without notice, but there was an objection from the ANC:

  That the House –

     1) notes the re-election of George W Bush as President of the United
        States of America;


     2) notes that he received the majority of votes, as well as electoral
        . . . [Interjection.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Hon member, may I address you on that motion?

Mr K D S DURR: Yes, Mr Chairperson, you may.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Notices of motion are specifically for giving notice
to the House of a subject that you would like debated. That sounds to me
like a motion without notice. If there is not agreement that it be moved as
a motion without notice, then we cannot accept it as a notice of motion.

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairperson . . .[Interjection.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Durr, I would suggest that you familiarise
yourself with the Rules.

Mr K D S DURR: Mr Chairperson, I intend moving this as notice of motion to
be moved on the next sitting of the House because of the consequences of
the developmental benefits of the re-election of Mr Bush . . .
[Interjection.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Hon member, I will allow you to move the
motion and we will have to consider it. Please, proceed.

Mr K D S DURR: Thank you, Chairperson. I move:

   That the House-

     1) notes the re-election of Mr George W Bush as President of the
        United States of America;


     2) further notes that he received the majority of votes, as well as
        electoral votes;


     3) takes pleasure in congratulating Mr Bush and his party on this
        great electoral victory for the Presidency, as well as the Senate
        and the House of Representatives;


     4) given the fact that Mr Bush’s administration has been the most
        supportive of African development of any US administration to date,
        welcomes his re-election;


     5) notes the congratulations of President Mbeki to Mr Bush and the
        American people, which this House endorses with the hope of the
        promise of even greater co-operation with South Africa and our
        region in the future; and


     6) that the House will discuss the implications of this election.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of order: I
think you were correct when you suggested that members need to familiarise
themselves with the traditions of the House. In the case of a substantive
matter where the House must pronounce itself, it is proper to work through
the channels that are established. Parties are consulted before there is
agreement, and usually as to who would be suitable to convey that kind of
sentiment as inclusive of the sentiments of this House. I think that is
very important.

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order: I think we have
followed all the Rules. We have circulated this motion to all the political
parties at 12:30. The agreement is that at 12:00 we need to know which
political parties will raise objections. It was at 12:30 when we got the
objection from one of the secretaries of the ANC to say that you were not
going to support this motion.

So, we followed all the Rules. The only option left for us is to do it now
with notice.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: We will continue. I think the Chief Whips should
observe the opportunity when they meet every week in the Chief Whips’ Forum
to revisit the matter and consult each other further. The motion as tabled
by Mr Durr will be considered in terms of compliance and will either appear
or not appear on the Order Paper.


                           MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE


 PRESIDENT MBEKI’S CONGRATULATIONS TO THE PEOPLE OF BOTSWANA AND THE UNITED
                              STATES OF AMERICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I hereby move as follows:

  That the House-

     1) endorses the congratulations and good wishes extended to the people
        and governments of Botswana and of the United States of America by
        President Mbeki;


     2) affirms that successful democratic elections in Africa and in
        America strengthen democracy around the world; and


     3) trusts that the excellent relations which South Africa enjoys with
        Botswana and the United State of America, and the presidents of the
        two countries, will be strengthened in order to tackle the problems
        of poverty, underdevelopment and fair trade in Africa and the world.

Agreed to.

Dr C P MULDER:  Chairperson, I rise on a point of order: I would like to
know if it is in order for the DA to move a motion of congratulations to
President Bush when the same DA two days ago, in this very House through
the hon Waters, expressed the DA’s public support for Senator Kerry? Is
that in order, Mr Chairperson? Or is it just an example of the DA’s
opportunism? [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: It shows that members are paying attention to the
business of the House!




                      CONDOLENCES TO THE BOPAPE FAMILY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice as
follows:

   That the House –

     (1)    notes with shock and profound sadness the death of Mr David
           Bopape, who passed away on 2 November 2004;

     (2)    recognises that Mr Bopape was a veteran of the National
           Liberation Struggle, a South African patriot who throughout his
           life demonstrated unwavering commitment to the liberation of the
           people of this country and the continent of Africa;

     (3)    remembers Mr Bopape as one of the stalwarts and founding members
           of the ANC Youth League, together with Anton Lembede, Oliver
           Tambo, Walter Sisulu, Nelson Mandela and others;

     (4)    recalls that -

           (a)   David Bopape was since 1940 and 1942 a member of the South
                 African Communist Party and the African National Congress
                 respectively;

           (b)   in 1944 he was secretary of the ANC's Anti-Pass Campaign
                 and also Secretary of the then Transvaal Association of
                 African Teachers on the East Rand; and


           (c)   he was among the first to receive banning orders by the
                 apartheid regime, along with J B Marks, Dr Y M Dadoo, Moses
                 Kotane and others;

     (5)    believes that the life of this great revolutionary, educator and
           fighter for freedom and justice bequeaths to our country and
           people a legacy that epitomises heroism and dedicated service;
           and

     (6)    conveys its condolences to the Bopape family, the African
           National Congress and the South African Communist Party.



Agreed to.




                   BEST WISHES TO SPRINGBOKS AGAINST WALES


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairperson, I hereby move without notice as follows:

      That the House congratulates all those rugby players selected to play
      for the Springboks in the test match against Wales on Saturday and
      looks forward to a sparkling winning game.

Agreed to.


                             MEMBERS’STATEMENTS



              DEATH THREATS TO WESTERN CAPE GOVERNMENT MEMBERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M SOTYU (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. During his state of the nation
address, President Mbeki committed government, through the SAPS, to arrest
the 200 most wanted criminals in South Africa. Since that time numerous
reports of success in apprehending and charging these crime bosses have
been reported.

Over the weekend it became public that the Premier of the Western Cape, Mr
Ebrahim Rasool, and the MEC for Safety and Security, Mr Leonard
Ramatlakane, had received death threats. These threats were a direct result
of the successes achieved in the Western Cape in arresting suspected
criminal kingpins. The police and other agencies in the criminal justice
cluster must be congratulated for the successes that they have achieved in
ridding society of these criminal elements. It is only through their
determination, commitment and hard work that we can take the streets of our
communities back from the criminals.

The message to the criminals out there is loud and clear: The ANC
government will not rest before you are behind bars. Crime does not pay and
you will pay for your greediness and exploitation of society. If anything,
your action will serve as a further motivation to seek you out wherever you
may be hiding, find you and bring you to the courts where you will face the
full might of the law. There is no safe place for criminals in South
Africa. We will catch you. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]


                          LAND RESTITUTION PROCESS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A H NEL (DA): Die DA verwelkom die uiteindelike erkenning van die
Minister van Landbou en Grondsake dat die afhandeling van die
restitusieproses finansiering van R13 miljard benodig. Dit is ‘n feit dat
as mens eers die probleem herken, dit makliker is om dit te hanteer en
oplossings daarvoor te soek. Die vraag is dus: Hoe finansier ons dié reuse
bedrag? As ‘n mens die begroting van die departement oor die volgende drie
jaar neem, is dit ongeveer       R5 miljard - dit beteken dat R8 miljard
gevind moet word. Dit moet binne die begroting en deur moontlike
internasionale skenkings gevind word.

Artikel 7(2) van die Grondwet bepaal dat die regte daarin vervat deur die
staat gerespekteer, beskerm, bevorder en uitgevoer moet word. Dit is dus
baie duidelik dat dit die staat se verpligting is om die herstel van
grondregte en grondhervorming te finansier. Dié verpligting mag nie op die
huidige grondeienaars afgeskuif word nie.

Ons kan nie slegs 46 000 grondeienaars verantwoordelik hou vir al die
onregte ten opsigte van grond wat in die verlede plaasgevind het nie. Baie
dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr A H NEL (DA): The DA welcomes the fact that the Minister for
Agriculture and Land Affairs has finally admitted that the conclusion of
the restitution process requires financing of R13 billion. It is a fact
that as soon as one recognises the problem, it is easier to deal with it
and to find solutions for it. The question is thus: How do we finance this
vast amount? If one takes the department’s budget over the next three
years, it is about R5 billion – which means that R8 billion has to be
found. It must be found within the budget and through possible
international donations.

The Constitution provides in section 7 (2) that the rights contained
therein must be respected, protected, promoted and  fulfilled by the state.
It is therefore very clear that it is the responsibility of the state to
finance the restitution of land rights and land reform. This obligation may
not be shifted to the current landowners.

We cannot hold only 46 000 landowners responsible for all the injustices
with regard to land that took place in the past. Thank you.]

      VIOLENCE AGAINST CHILDREN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, recently a report has brought to our
attention the severity of crime and violence committed against children in
our country, as well as the pain suffered by children and their families
due to such traumatic processes.

These crimes range from rape to abuse and murder. The Sowetan of 3 November
features two stories of crime committed against children. One of the
stories was about a nine-year-old girl who was raped at her home in
Bronkhorstspruit, Mpumalanga.

Since the incident of rape took place in 2002, the girl is said to have
never recovered and suffers constant nightmares in fear that the man who
raped her might return to recommit his crime. The girl’s mother who
testified in the Pretoria High Court was sobbing during her testimony, and
said that the rapist had destroyed her only child’s life.

The story in the Sowetan of 3 November also features a story of an eight-
year-old boy in KwaZulu-Natal who had been chained to a wheelbarrow by his
grandmother as punishment every time he misbehaved. The boy also said that
his uncle sodomised him every time he was chained to the wheelbarrow, which
was usually over weekends.

I am sure we all remember Rafique, the boy from the Cape Flats who was
kidnapped and murdered a few months ago. His mother has recently been
reported to be experiencing severe trauma and is unable to find peace due
to the fact that her baby’s killer is still at large.
These violent crimes committed against children . . .[Time expired.]




                      DISTASTEFUL COMMENT BY DA MEMBER


                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The ANC
expresses its utmost displeasure and total rejection of the false and
distasteful statement made by hon A C Steyn in this august House on
Tuesday, 2 November 2004. The comments made by him are informed by
insensitivity, characteristic of a party that knows no bounds in its quest
to balkanise our nation into hostile racial groups, while preserving white
supremacy and privilege are merged through commission of a crime against
humanity. The time has come for all those who have the interests of their
motherland at heart to turn their backs on the racial intolerance and
divisive ways of the DA and join the unstoppable march to a truly
democratic nonracial, nonsexist South Africa, where the dignity of all
South Africans is affirmed, regardless of race, colour or creed. Comrade
Dumisane fought and sacrificed for the attainment of a better life for all
the people of our country, none of which can even be imagined of his DA
critics. The unsubstantiated allegations are a desperate attempt by
reactionaries who yearn for the evil days of white supremacy. It is
precisely this anti-African conduct of not respecting even the dead, that
makes these reactionaries unworthy of the noble support of our people. Long
live the spirit and memory of Comrade Dumisane Makhaya. [Time
expired.][Applause.]


                         INTERNATIONAL RETAIL BANKS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M STEPHENS (UDM): Thank you, Chair. The UDM notes with some ambivalence
the interest of large international retail banks to enter the South African
market. Apart from Barclays Bank, Standard Chartered Bank is also seriously
considering their options. We want these banks and others who might yet
come to know that we applaud them with two hands: On the one hand, if they
come to increase competition in retail banking, we welcome them. If they
bring low and zero-cost banking products such as are available in the
countries they operate in, we embrace them. If they come to add value to
the lives of all South Africans, including the poor and disadvantaged, we
salute them. On the other hand, if they come to join the existing complex
monopoly, if their intentions are to share in the spoils of unjust
predatory and discriminatory banking practices, let them be warned: Things
will not remain as they are. We are wholly dedicated to protect and promote
South African consumers. We shall demand of them what we demand of all
banks: fair and just treatment, transparent rules and a free basic bank
account for all South Africans. [Applause.]


                         DA SCORING POLITICAL POINTS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C B JOHNSON (NNP): Geagte Voorsitter, die ledeverklaring wat die agb
Steyn van die DA eergister in die Huis gelewer het oor die LUR vir
Behuising in KwaZulu-Natal, ene Mnr Dumisane Makhaya, het hopelik aan almal
hier in hierdie Huis, en ook aan die publiek daar buite, presies gewys net
hoe laag die DA sal daal in ‘n poging om politieke punte te probeer wen.
[Applous.] Die vraag of iets binne orde of buite orde is in terme van die
Parlementêre Reëls en Prosedure is iets waaroor die Speaker weldra ‘n
beslissing sal gee. Ek gaan my nie daaroor uitlaat nie. Die ander meer
belangrike punt … (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, the member’s statement made by the hon Steyn of the DA in
the House the day before yesterday, with regard to the MEC for Housing in
KwaZulu-Natal, one Mr Dumisane Makhaya, has hopefully demonstrated to all
in this House, and to the public at large, precisely to what level the DA
will sink in its attempt to score political points. [Applause.] The
question whether something is in order or out of order in terms of the
Parliamentary Rules and Procedures, is a matter on which the Speaker will
soon be giving a ruling. I shall not go into it. The other more important
point…]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: I understand that the
presiding officer is going to rule on the matter and therefore it is sub
judice at the moment. [Interjections.] It shouldn’t be the subject of
further discussion by hon members.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): May I remind members that after
numerous points of order were taken on the matter, the Deputy Speaker then
ruled that she would take advice on the matter. That ruling is outstanding
and I must caution members that we should not pre-empt it.

Dr C P MULDER: Yes, Chairperson, I would agree. Could I assist Mr Gibson
with regard to the Rules? Rule 76 that deals with sub judice indicates that
if a decision is pending before the courts in South Africa, then it cannot
be discussed. This is not before the courts and it is not sub judice.
[Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: May I address you on that point, Chairperson?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): No, hon Gibson. I think in terms
of the Rule quoted by the hon member, he is correct.

Mr D H M GIBSON: But I did not quote that Rule, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): The matter is under advisement and
a ruling is pending. Ms Johnson, I’ll now leave you at that point, unless
there is something else you want to add to your statement, without
referring to the pending ruling.


                           CROSSING OF OUR BORDERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson, people who
cross the borders of the Republic of South Africa and come into South
Africa illegally remain a problem. The UN High Commissioner for refugees
recently said that from January 2004 there were 26 900 recognised refugees
and a further 90 600 awaiting determination of their asylum applications.
According to Lauren Landau, research director of the University of the
Witwatersrand, more and more people are coming to South Africa as refugees
and asylum seekers. She puts the figure at 150 000. There are also other
claims that state that as many as between 2 to 3 million people are
illegally in South Africa. It is important to note that it was reported at
the Human Rights Commission’s hearings yesterday in Johannesburg, that
anyone with the most modest of resources could cross the border and that
this opened them to abuse. Some non-nationals complain that the police see
them as walking automatic teller machines. We are also aware of the fact
that there were some recent arrests in the SAPS with regard to these kinds
of things. The Freedom Front Plus expresses its serious concern. We would
like to see that our borders are secured and that this kind of corruption
is absolutely prevented, also in our police service.


                        THE LATE MEC DUMISANI MAKHAYE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nk P N MNANDI (ANC): Sihlalo woSihlalo, uKhongolose uyabonga kubo bonke
abantu baseNingizimu Afrika nabasemazweni angaphandle, ababhonge emswaneni
kanye nathi ngokulahlekelwa umholi neqhawe lomzabalazo, uqabane uDumisani
Makhaye. UKhongolose namhlanje wedlulisa amazwi okuxolisa emndenini
wakwaShombela okuthe kungakapheli nsuku zatshwala efihliwe uqabane
uDumisani, wenziwa indaba egudwini kule Ndlu yiqembu le-Democratic Party.
UKhongolose uyawahlonipha kakhulu amasiko ezinhlanga zonke zakuleli.
KwaZulu thina  isehlo esinjengalesi asisho ukuthi yihlazo kodwa sithi
yichilo. Emndenini wonkana wakwaMakhaye sithi nxeseni. Kulabo ndlavini
beqembu ... [Ubuwelewele.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr P N MNANDI (ANC): Chair of Chairs, The ANC conveys its gratitude to all
the people of South Africa and the international community who mourned with
us the demise of our leader, a cadre, comrade Dumisani Makhaye. The ANC
wishes to apologise to the family of KwaShombela (Makhaye) in that shortly
after the death of comrade Dumisani, his name (Dumisani Makhaye) was made a
matter of discussion by the Democratic Alliance.

The ANC respects cultures of all races of this country. With us, in the
case of an incident such as this, we do not say it is an embarrassment, but
we say it is a disgrace. To the family of Makhaye we say sorry. To those
hooligans of ... [Interjections.]]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member is making
a statement exactly contrary to the ruling you have just given. She must
know that. Will you ask her to stop?

The CHAIRPERSON: We will afford the member time to finish, Mr Gibson,
because I was listening to it.

Nk P N MNANDI: Kulabo ndlavini beqembu le-Democratic Party sithi abalibambe
lingashoni. Shombela, lala ngoxolo! [Ihlombe.] [Mr P N MNANDI: The
Democratic Party, woe unto you! Shombela rest in peace! [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON: I would just like to remind members that I had cautioned
or reminded members on the pending ruling, and would ask Whips to assist us
in this regard. I now come to the DA.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, can I get clarification?
When a ruling is pending on a matter, does it mean that the freedom to
express opinion on what was said, not on the content of whether it is
parliamentary or not, is affected? Can we have clarification on that point?


The CHAIRPERSON: I will take advice on that, Mr Goniwe, and come back to
you. The hon DA!

                    BICENTENARY CELEBRATIONS IN UITENHAGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Chair, Uitenhage, founded in 1804, is celebrating its
bicentenary this year. This garden town is the oldest in the Eastern Cape
and the fifth oldest in South Africa. Being 16 years older than Port
Elizabeth, Uitenhage can legitimately be called the mother town of the
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality.

In his preface to the commemorative book on Uitenhage published last month,
the Deputy Mayor, Mr Bicks Ndoni wrote the following, and I quote:

      The history of Uitenhage is essentially a history of South Africa.
      This town is a microcosm of all that is our country. Some flourished
      and others suffered immeasurable levels of poverty and trauma.
      Uitenhage holds a special place in the history of the struggle against
      apartheid. Langa, the scene of the 1985 massacre on Soweto day, is
      also the birthplace of Enock Sontonga, the man who wrote and composed
      Nkosi Sikelel’I-Afrika. We are deeply proud of that.

Today, Uitenhage is filled with tolerance and goodwill. In conveying our
good wishes we say: God bless Uitenhage and God bless South Africa, and I
would like to congratulate the DA on the major role that it has played in
the metro in bringing about this wonderful reconciliation that has taken
place.

 THE DA LEADER’S STATEMENTS AGAINST THE EXPRESSION OF RACISM BY BLACK PEOPLE
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE (Azapo ): Chairperson, Azapo is highly concerned about
repeated statements emanating from the leader of the DA in his attitude to
black experience when Black people indicate their disgust and opposition to
racist practices in our contry.

Each time reference is made to the painful experiences that characterised
black life during the days of apartheid and in present day South Africa,
the DA’s reaction sounds like that of a person with a guilt-ridden
conscience. The DA’s attempt to make it uncomfortable for black people to
talk about the disdain displayed by the racists in our country in
unacceptable.

The attack on any black person who speaks against racism and the accusation
about playing a racial card suggests that it is wrong, unacceptable or even
malicious for black people to talk about their existential conditions and
the hurting past whose results are still evidenced today. Apartheid and
racial oppression are part of the important and bitter experiences of our
history, and the DA should be happy that there are millions of black people
who are very reconciliatory and are prepared to work for one nation in our
country.




                        THE LATE MEC DUMISANI MAKHAYE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D M GUMEDE(ANC): UKhongolose uzwakalisa okukhulu ukushaqeka ngesenzo se-
DA kanye nabanye bamaphephandaba sokwethuka, sihlukumeze sibuye sithunaze
nesithunzi sabaholi abanikela ngakho konke nezimpilo zabo uqobo ekulweni
nobandlululo. Babizwa ngamasela, ngabadlwenguli nangababulali mihla le.
Isenzo sokuthunaza isithunzi sikaShombela kusaziliwe sikhombisa ukuthi
kwabaningi izenzo ezivusa uhlevane ezazenziwa uhulumeni wobandlululo
babezithakasela. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The ANC wishes to express its shock at what the DA and some newspapers are
doing by insulting, offending and tarnishing the image of the leaders who
gave their all, and even their lives, in fighting apartheid.

Day by day they are called thieves, rapists and killers. The deed of
tarnishing the image of Shombela whilst people are still in mourning shows
that many enjoyed the ill deeds of the apartheid government . . .

Mr D H M GIBSON: On a point of order Chairperson, this hon member is doing
exactly what that one did, what that one did and that one did. I ask you
now to stop them, either that or we will all repeat everything and discuss
every ruling before the Chair has given the ruling.

The CHAIRPERSON: Can we allow that member to finish and I shall respond to
the House.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson!

The CHAIRPERSON: No, Mr Gibson.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Chairperson, may I ask why the member must finish when it
is in contravention of the ruling that you gave. Either the Chair upholds
its rulings or it does not.

The CHAIRPERSON: Order! I am going to allow the member to finish, Mr
Gibson, and respond to the point of order raised by Mr Goniwe, which will
assist you in being up-to-date as to how we are dealing with this matter.
Please continue, hon member.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Thank you, Chairperson.  OkaShombela wancama ukufa
kunokuphila ngaphansi kobandlululo, ukushiya ukufudumala kwekhaya lakhe
ayolala nezingonyama nezinhlwathi ehlathini, kanye nokubhekana nababulali
bobandlululo ukuze kube khona ubulungiswa, amalungelo kanye nenkululeko
yethu sonke.

OTambo, oHani noLuthuli bathi sithule sithini uma kunje? Abe-DA abayeke
ukuvula amanxeba engakapholi. Esavumelana ngakho ukuhloniphana, ukuvikelana
isithunzi nokuqeda ubandlululo. Lala uphumule Shombela, qhawe
lamaqhawe![Ihlombe.] [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr Shombela opted for death over living under apartheid; he left the
warmth of his home and slept with the leopards in the bush, and faced the
apartheid killers so that there would be justice, rights and freedom for
all of us.

Tambo, Hani and Luthuli would be wanting to know what we are saying if
things are like this.  DA people should stop opening unhealed wounds. What
we agreed upon was mutual respect, mutual protection of dignity, and
putting an end to apartheid. Rest in peace, Shombela, hero of heroes.
[Applause.] [Time expired.]]

The CHAIRPERSON: In response to the point of order raised by the Chief Whip
of the Majority Party, the Deputy Speaker was requested on a point of order
to consider the remarks contained in the DA statement. The matter is
currently under consideration and members should extend presiding officers
the courtesy of not referring to the issue until the ruling is given. Now,
can we proceed along those lines and, hopefully, when the presiding
officers respond, we can then debate the issue further.


          TEACHERS’ UNION DISPUTE WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H ZILLE (DA): The DA supports the four teachers’ unions that have
declared a dispute with the Education Department after a deadlock in the
Education Labour Relations Council yesterday.

We strongly urge the government to honour its commitments to address the
eight-year promotions and salary backlogs for teachers, and introduce from
January 2005 the integrated quality management system, which includes a
performance-based pay approach. Unless the government honours these
commitments it will be very difficult to negotiate the end to disputes
because its credibility will be undermined by a history of broken promises.


All parties to the Public Service wage negotiations agreed that a plan was
put on the table and accepted to end the salary negotiation deadlock in
October. The Government must now find an additional             R180
million required for the implementation of this plan. Thank you.


              EMPLOYERS IMPOSING HIV TESTS ON DOMESTIC WORKERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP):  Chair, Liesl Gerntholtz who works for the Aids Law
Project has stated that there is an increase of domestic workers who are
being pressured by their employers to take HIV tests against their will.
She also stated that on occasion employers would manipulate circumstances
by taking their domestic workers for HIV tests under false pretences. These
domestic workers are then dismissed if their test results return positive.

An HIV test done without the consent of a patient is illegal. It is also
illegal to dismiss an employee on the basis that he is HIV positive. It is
imperative that with regard to the HIV pandemic in South Africa, more is
done to educate all South Africans about HIV and how it is transmitted. It
is clear that there are still many ignorant people in our country who would
be so cruel as to dismiss poor people and disconnect their livelihood, thus
leaving them at the mercy of the disease. It is clear that domestic workers
need protection from such discriminatory practices, and government has to
intervene promptly by taking steps to educate domestic employers. A new
culture of acceptance, love and compassion needs to be cultivated in our
society from poor to affluent communities similarly.

HIV is not a death sentence. It is life threatening for the poorest of the
poor who cannot afford to buy healthy foods and drugs.




              CONGRATULATIONS TO THE MOSES KOTANE MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC):  Mmusakgotla, ka boikokobetso ke kopa gore ntlo ya
gago e akgole lekgotla le ramotse wa mmasepala wa Moses Kotane, Peter
Molelekeng. Mo letsatsing la Lamatlhatso, 30 Diphalane, ramotse Peter
Molelekeng o ne a eteletse pele Lekgotlatoropo le baagi, ba sirolola
sefikantswe sa setshwano sa ga Moses Kotane. Moswi Moses Kotane e ne e le
mokwaledi-kakaretso wa Lekgotla la Makomonisi la Aforika Borwa, SACP [South
African Communist Party]. Gape e ne e le moeteledipele wa lekgotla la
bosetšhaba la NEC ya African National Congress. O robaditswe kwa serapeng
sa baswi sa Moscow, Russia. Re lebogela mme mma Kotane, ba losika le bana
fa ba abelane Moses Kotane le setšhaba sa Aforika Borwa yotlhe. Go a
itumedisa gore lekgotlatoropo le le eteletsweng pele ke ANC, le bone go le
botlhokwa gore godimo ga go bitsa motse wa bona ka Moses Kotane, ba mo
tlotle ka mokgwa o re o tlhalositseng. Re le ANC re ipiletsa go
makgotlatoropo a mangwe le ditheo tse dingwe tsa puso go batlisisa ka
bagale botlhe motse le motse mme ba ba tlotle, ba ba rorise ka mokgwa
mongwe. Halala Moses Kotane, halala.

MALOKO A A TLOTLEGANG: Halala. [Legofi.]  (Translation of Tswana member’s
statement follows.)

[Dr M SEFULARO (ANC):  Madam Speaker, I humbly ask that you congratulate
the committee and municipality council of Moses Kotane, Peter Molelekeng.
On Saturday, 30 September Councillor Peter Molelekeng was leading the
community and town council to unveil the tombstone of Moses Kotane. The
late Moses Kotane was the General Secretary of the SACP (South African
Communist Party). He was also the leader of the national committee, or NEC,
of the African National Congress. He was laid to rest at a cemetery in
Moscow, Russia. We thank Mrs Kotane, relatives and children for sharing
Moses Kotane with the whole nation of South Africa. It is impressive to see
that the town council that is led by the ANC has seen the importance, in
addition to naming the town after Moses Kotane, of honouring him in the way
we have explained. As the ANC, we call upon other town councils and other
government institutions to look for heroes, town by town, and to honour and
praise them in the same manner. Well done, Moses Kotane!

HON MEMBERS: Well done!


                          LAND RESTITUTION PROCESS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS:  Ngiyabonga Mphatsisihlalo,
wena lomdzala. Ngitsandza kuphendvula lilunga lelihloniphekile lelikhulume
lapha ngendzaba yekwabiwa kwemhlaba, ikakhulukati imibango yemhlaba
njengobe sati ngekweMtsetfosisekelo walelive kusigaba 25, lokhuluma kabanti
ngekutsi emalungelo ebuninimhlaba ebantfu balelive atakwabiwa kanjani.

Lokunye lokubaluleke kakhulu kutsi nome siwavikela emalungelo alabo
labanawo kodvwa kufanele futsi kutsi sigucule simo salabo bantfu
labebacindzetelekile ngaphambili.

Ngiyatsandza-ke kusho kutsi kute hulumende lakuphikako kutsi kungumsebenti
wakhe kubuketa lomsebenti wekubuyiselwa kwemhlaba. Sibonile ngendlela
hulumende lasebente ngayo eminyakeni lelishumi leyendlulile; timali
letibekiwe, takhiwo letenta kutsi lomhlabatsi ubuyele kubantfu.  Angikholwa-
ke kutsi nyalo sesingatsi hulumende utawehluleka kwenta loko latsite
utimisele kukwenta.

Mhlawumbe-ke kubalulekile kutsi nasibuka lenkhulumo yelilunga
lelihloniphekile letsi asingabeki tinkinga tekwabiwa kwemhlaba kubalimi
labanemhlaba nyalo. Ake ngibute umbuto nje, kutsi kantsi bona labo balimami
nangabe umhlaba wabo bebawutsetse kubantfu kutakwentiwa njani-ke; ngoba
phela kufanele siwutsatse kubo. Lokumnandzi-ke kutsi sitsi sitawutsatsa
kubo siphindze sibabhadale. Asitsi sitawutsatsa ngalendlela lowatsatfwa
ngayo nguhulumende ngaphambili.

Malunga lahloniphekile, ngiyetsemba kutsi angeke sibe siloku sicocisa
ngaloludzaba sengatsi asati kutsi sentani. Siyati kutsi umtsetfo utsi
asente njani, sitawulandzela njengobe usho lomtsetfo walevive kodvwa wona
umhlaba sitawubuyisela kubanikati. Hulumende utawuyibeka imali. Umnikati
kumbe Indvuna lephatselene netetimali itawusho ngaFebhuwari lapha
kulePhalamende kutsi usiniketa malini. Asingajaki, sime nje nine bekunene.
Ngiyabonga kakhulu. (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows)

[Thank you, hon Chairperson. I would like to respond to the hon member who
has spoken about land distribution, and the conflicts over it as stated in
Section 25 of the Constitution. This section deals mainly with how land
ownership rights of the citizens of this country are going to be
distributed. Another thing which is very important is that, although we
protect the rights of those that have them, we also have to change the
attitudes of those people who were previously oppressed.

I would also like to say that the government does not refuse that it is its
responsibility to deal with the issue of land restitution. We have seen how
the government has performed in the past ten years; the monies set aside,
and the infrastructure that enable the land to be taken back to the people.
 I do not believe that we can now say the government will fail to do what
it said it is prepared to do.

Maybe it is important that when we look into the member’s speech that we
should not leave the land restitution problems for the farmers who are
currently owning land. I would like to ask the question: If those farmers
took the land from the people, what is going to happen now, because we must
take it back from them? However, the wonderful thing about it is that we
will take it back and compensate them. We are not saying that we will take
it in the same manner as the apartheid government did.

Hon members, I hope that we will not go around in circles, debating this
issue as if we do not know what we are doing. Let us not be hasty, good
people; let us be steady. Thank you very much.

    REQUEST FOR AN OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND TO ACCUSATIONS MADE AGAINST THE
                            LATE DUMISANI MAKHAYE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, I think we are now done with umhlaba
[land]. Can I proceed with housing? [Laughter.]

USIHLALO WENDLU (Mnu G Q M Doidge): Yebo, ngezezindlu. [The House
Chairperson (Mr G Q M Doidge): Yes, regarding housing.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much. Chairperson, I believe I have
a right to respond to some of the comments that were made about somebody
who served in the portfolio of Housing, the late MEC Makhaye. However, I do
recognise your ruling that it will be improper for us to deal with this
matter until it has been resolved by the Deputy Speaker. I therefore
request permission that, after that finding has been announced to the
House, I, in my capacity as Minister of Housing, be given an opportunity to
issue a statement in relation to the accusations that were made against
Dumisani Makhaye, who is no longer able to answer on his own behalf. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That will be considered, hon
Minister.

                   GOVERNMENT STANCE ON DEALING WITH CRIME

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, I’m responding to two
statements: Firstly, that which was made by the Chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, and the one made by the hon
Velaphi Ndlovu regarding crime.

The JCPS cluster which comprises the Departments of Safety and Security,
Justice, Correctional Services, Home Affairs and Defence is a formidable
cluster that has zero tolerance for crime. As government, we have stated
before that criminals have no place in our streets and our society. We have
to go after them, apprehend them, sentence them and lock them up.

We will also endeavour to work at their behaviour to correct and
rehabilitate them, if possible. It is therefore important that families and
communities out there help and assist us, as government, to report crime
and to stop criminals dead in their tracks. Thank you.

                           WORKERS AND HIV TESTING

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Sihlalo, ndifuna nje ukwenza isicelo kumalungu
ahloniphekileyo ale Ndlu, sokuba sincedisane nabasebenzi basemakhaya.
Ngamanye amaxesha ikwasithi zinkokheli abathi bakhuphe iintetho ezimbaxa.
Ikwasithi nabathi abantu mabahambe baye ezikliniki baye kuvavanywa ukuba
ngaba banaso na isifo uGawulayo.

Kudala sisithi xa abantu bethe benziswa loo nto ngenkani, banyanzelwa, kuye
kwenzeke eza zinto kanye zibikwa lela lungu lihloniphekileyo. Akukho namnye
umsebenzi omakanyanzelwe ukuba aye kuvavanywa. Baziseni abasebenzi ukuba xa
benyanzelwa, mabangayi, kuba uxam wakholwa ngamantintinti.

Ngoko ke akunyanzelekanga ukuba umntu abanjwe ngofele lwentamo asiwe
kugqirha engafuni. Kungcono ukuba kuthi kanye ngelo xesha lesinyanzelo,
abaleke umsebenzi aye nakweliphi na isebe lezabasebenzi, aye kuthi: ”Nanku
umntu endibamba ngofele lwentamo, endinyanzela ukuba ndiye kwagqirha
ndingafuni.”

Masithethe into ibenye ke, malungu ahloniphekileyo. Yekani ukuthetha le
namhlanje, nithethe le ngomso, ngoba loo nto ibeka abantu bakowethu
engozini. Sanukumamela aba ndlebe zikhany’ilanga bathetha kakhulu isilungu,
kuba bona abachaneki, yaye kunjalo nje ezi zifo zingathi azibadli bona,
zonzakalisa isizwe sakowethu, isizwe soobaw’ omkhulu. (Translation of Xhosa
minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, I would like to appeal or make a
request to the hon members of this House to work hand in hand with the
domestic workers. Sometimes it is we, the leadership, who make
contradicting statements. It is also we who say people must go to clinics
to be tested to ascertain whether or not they are HIV positive.

For a long time we have been saying that when people were forced to do
something or to undergo a process then, being pressed, those things
mentioned by the hon member used to happen. Not a single worker should be
forced to go for testing. Inform the workers that if they are forced, they
should not go, because for people to understand something, they believe it
should be repeated.

Therefore it is not necessary that a person be grabbed forcefully by the
neck and taken to a doctor against his will. It is better that, precisely
during that period of force, he should run from his work and go to any
department of workers and say, “Here is a person grabbing me by the neck,
forcing me to go to a doctor against my will.”

Let us speak with one voice, hon members. Stop saying one thing today and
say something else tomorrow, because that sort of thing puts our people in
danger. You must not listen to these white people who always speak English,
because they are not affected. What is more, it seems these diseases do not
affect them; they injure our nation, the nation of our forefathers.


                   GOVERNMENT HAS NOT RENEGED ON AGREEMENT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I think it is very important that
members of this House do not base the statements that they have the
opportunity to make on incorrect information. Government has not reneged on
the agreement that was signed in the Public Service Bargaining Chamber.
That agreement stands and government is committed to it.

The amount of R500 million stipulated in that agreement is an undertaking
that government is acting on. That fund is available to be distributed in
terms of the agreement through a model that the Education Labour Relations
Council will work out and stipulate. Therefore, there cannot be a new
series of engagements and agreements determined.

The agreement, as signed at the conclusion of a protracted process of
negotiation, is the agreement that must be executed. Any new form of
requirement would have to form part of a new process. There is therefore no
reneging by government, by myself – the Minister of Education - by the
Department of Education, nor by the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, who is the principal negotiator.

There is an agreement that emerged from the bargaining chamber and it has
signatures of trade unions attached to it. There may be a new range of
demands being put out in the public domain, but there is an agreement and
government will act on the basis of that agreement. [Applause.]

                           THE LATE MR B G MOLEWA




                           (Motion of Condolence)


Mr P J GOMOMO: Chairperson, I move on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party:

  That the House –


   (1)      notes with sadness the untimely death of Mr Bernard Gilbert
           Molewa, who passed away on the 29th of October 2004;


   (2)      recognises that Mr Molewa was a South African patriot who lived
           a selfless life, making an enormous contribution to the struggle
           for democracy in this country;


   (3)      notes that he had been detained several times under apartheid,
           went into exile in 1964, that he served as an ANC representative
           in the then German Democratic Republic, Hungary and Cuba, and
           also as a member of the Provincial Executive Committee of the
           SACP of the North West Province;


   (4)      acknowledges the dynamic contribution that Mr Molewa made to
           Parliament from 1994 to 2004;


   (5)      believes that he  leaves  a  legacy  of  heroism  and  dedicated
           service to the people of South Africa; and


   (6)      conveys its condolences to the entire Molewa family, his loved
           ones, the African National Congress and the South African
           Communist Party.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, there
will be responses from the other parties.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Are there any responses from the other
parties?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I’m not sure whether the
other parties were expecting to respond. I’m very happy to do so on behalf
of the DA and to join with the ANC in the motion being presented before
this House.

The person concerned is somebody who left deep marks in South Africa. My
party joins in wishing his family and all the people who loved him all of
the best during this very difficult time.

Mnu A M MPONTSHANE:  Mphathisihlalo, uma kufiwe uyokhala esifweni
awumenywa, uyaziyela nje uma usuzwile ukuthi kukhona odlulile emhlabeni.
Ngisukuma nje ngoba sesizwile ukuthi umfowethu uMolewa usesishiyile.

Yindoda lena ebesike sibe nayo ekomidini lezemfundo. Ubuthi uma uyinikeze
ithuba lokuthi ikhulume, ingakhulumi ngalelo phuzu enikhuluma ngalo, kepha
ikhulume ngomzabalazo uSihlalo aze abe nenkinga ukuyithulisa. Ngakho-ke
yindoda engiyaziyo ukuthi bekuyindoda emadodeni.

Siyakhala-ke thina njengabe-IFP, sikhalele umndeni wakhe omkhulu
obekunguKhongolose nomndeni wakhe omncane okungmndeni wakhe wangempela,
nayo yonke iNingizimu Afrka neNdlu le yonkana. (Translation of Zulu speech
follows.)

[Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, one should not be invited to express
condolences after hearing that someone has passed away. One should just go
there to mourn. I stand up because I’ve heard that our brother Molewa has
passed away.

He was a man. We were with him on the Portfolio Committee on Education.
When given an opportunity to talk, he would talk about the struggle rather
than the issue under discussion and the chairperson would not know how to
stop him. I know that he was a man amongst men.

The IFP wishes to convey its sincere condolences to his family, the African
National Congress, South Africa as a whole and this House.]

Mnr C H F GREYLING: Voorsitter, dit is met spyt dat die Huis kennis neem
van die heengaan op 29 Oktober 2004 van oorlede mnr Bernard Gilbert Molewa.
Sy heengaan is ‘n groot verlies vir die mense van Suid-Afrika én die
Parlement. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr C H F GREYLING: Chairperson, it is with regret that the House notes the
passing away on 29 October 2004 of the late Mr Bernard Gilbert Molewa. His
passing is a great loss for the people of South Africa and this
Parliament.]

Today we bid farewell to a man who offered himself and his knowledge to the
struggle and his people. His contribution will not be forgotten. I wish to
express our deepest condolences to his family and his loved ones. Thank
you.

Mr L M GREEN:  Chairperson, we want to support the motion. We associate
ourselves with the motion and we also want to express our condolences to
the family, the loved ones, and particularly to the ANC for losing a man of
the late Mr Molewa’s calibre. We know that he has made a huge contribution
to South Africa and to what has been achieved in this nation. May his soul
rest in peace and may God bless him and his family.

Mr J BICI: Enkosi Mhlalingaphambili. I-UDM iyazibandakanya kwilizwi elithi
akuhlanga lungehlanga kusapho lwelungu elisishiyileyo. Siyeva ke ukuba
ibilitsha-ntliziyo lomzabalazo eMzantsi Afrika. Silapha nje kungenxa
yomzabalazo wakhe. Sithi nathi sigxwal’ emswaneni, akuhlanga lungehlanga.
Langa ilungu lingalala ngoxolo. Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Thank you, Chair. The UDM also shares in the words of condolence to the
family of the deceased member. We heard that the member was also an
activist in South Africa. We are here because of his contribution in the
struggle. We are with the family in our hearts during this difficult time.
May the member rest in peace. Thank you.]

       Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Mudzulatshidulo, vha muta wa ha Molewa, mirado
na vharangaphanda vha ANC na vha SACP, rine vha Azapo ri a ni lilisa. Ri ri
ho wa muthu muhulwane nga maanda. Muthu we a ri lwela, a ri swikisa fhano
hune ra vha hone. Ri ri kha vha muta ha Molewa: Ri a vha lilisa nga tshino
tshifhinga. Ndaa! (Translation of Venda paragraph follows.)


[Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, Molewa’s family, members and leaders of
the ANC and SACP, we as AZAPO send our condolences to you. We say we have
lost a very great person, a person who fought for our liberation, and
brought us here where we are. We say to Molewa’s family: we send our
condolences in this difficult time. Thank you.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF associates itself with the
message of condolence to Mr Bernard Gilbert Molewa’s family. We all know
that death does claim us, and we cannot say no. When the call comes, we
must be ready.

The MF sends its deepest condolence to the ANC on the loss of the great
stalwarts it has suffered recently. Your pain is our pain. Thank you very
much.

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, the PAC joins the House in passing condolences
and expressing its solidarity with the Molewa family, the ANC and the SACP
on the occasion of the passing away of the late Bernard Molewa. It should
be noted that on countless occasions we have had to come to the podium to
pass our condolences to stalwarts of our liberation struggle who have
passed on, and we wish to express our deepest sympathy. Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Geagte Meneer die Voorsitter, dit is aangenaam om ons namens
die VF Plus te assosieer met die voorstel wat voor die Huis dien, en ons
opregte medelye uit te spreek teenoor die naasbestaandes van die agb Molewa
wat oorlede is, asook met die ANC wat ‘n kollega verloor het. Ons dra ons
simpatie en sterkte oor, en ook ons medelye met die familie van die
oorledene. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Mr Chairperson, it is pleasure to associate ourselves on
behalf of the FF Plus with the motion serving before the House, and to
convey our heartfelt condolences to the next of kin of the hon Molewa, who
has passed on, as well as to the ANC, who have lost a colleague. We would
like to convey our sympathy and offer our condolences to the family of the
deceased. Thank you.]

Mr L N DIALE: Modulasetulo, legatong la lapa la gaMolewa, bahlabani bao ba
lego gona le Ntlo ye, ke rata go fetola tšohle tšeo di boletšwego ka fa
Ntlong ye e kgethegilego.

Bernard Molewa o belegetšwe Limpopo ka la 15 Setemere 1921 moo a thomilego
sekolo, efela a se ke a fetša gabotse. O ile a tloga a ya Alexandra ka
1943, moo a ilego a ba leloko la African National Congress le lekgotla la
basomi la South African Congress of Trade Unions - SACTU. Gona fao o
thomile go tshwenywa ke sephodisa sa maloba; moo a ilego a be a tlogela
naga ye a ya moše. O be a sa sepele fela gobane o be a sepela ka tsela le
ditaelo tša ANC, SACP le SACTU mo ntweng yeo re bego re e hlabana
kgahlanong le pušo ya apartheid.

Bernard Molewa ke yo mongwe wa bao ba boilego maloba ge go tlošitšwe
mapheko ao a bego a iletša ANC le makgotla a mangwe. Go tloga fao o ile a
swaragana le tšohle tšeo di kgonagetšego mo ditherišanong. Gape ke yo
mongwe wa ba mathomo, bjaloka rena, go ba Maloko a Palamente.

Bjale re re modirišani ka rena a robale ka khutšo. Anke bana ba gagwe ba
thekge dipelo.

Nna ke tsebane le Bernard Molewa gona mo Palamenteng. E be e le mogwera wa
ka yo mogolo. Gape ke tsebane le morwa wa gagwe wa ramelao ka mengwaga ya
bo1980 ge re be re boloka ngwana yo a bego a bolailwe ke sephodisa sa
maloba, se mo lahletše godimo ga mokgokgotha kua go la Sekhukhune. Bjale
morwa wa gagwe, ka go hloka mahlatse, ke ile ka kwa gore le yena o bolailwe
go la Soweto. Feela ga go ne taba, e be e le tsela ya tokologo.

Bagešo, re re moya wa modirišani ka rena o sepele ka khutšo. A re tšeeng
lerumo la gagwe re tšweleng pele, re hunolleng ekonomi ya naga ye ya rena
yeo e sa swerwego ke matšwakgole.

Pele ka moya wa B G Molewa, pele!

MALOKO A PALAMENTE: Pele!

Mr L N DIALE:  Pele ka moya wa B G Molewa, pele!

MALOKO A PALAMENTE: Pele! [Legofsi.] (Translation of Sepedi follows.)

[Mr L N DIALE: Chairperson, on behalf of Molewa’s family, the freedom
fighters that are present and this House, I would like to reply to all that
was said in this House.

Bernard Molewa was born on 15 September 1921 in Limpopo, where he started
school, but he never completed his studies. He left in 1943 and went to
Alexandra, where he was a member of the African National Congress and of
the council of workers of the South African Congress of Trade Unions,
Sactu. The police at the time started to harass him, until he left this
country and went abroad. He left on the orders and instructions of the ANC,
the SACP and Sactu in the war that we fought against the apartheid
government.

Bernard Molewa was one of those who returned from exile when the hurdles
that prohibited the ANC and other parties were removed. From there he was
involved with all the things that were achieved in the negotiations. Again,
like us, he was one of the first people to be a member of Parliament.

Now we are saying that our comrade must rest in peace.

I met Bernard Molewa in Parliament. He was my best friend. Then again, I
knew his son, who was a lawyer in the 1980s, when we were burying a child
who had been killed at the time by the police, who threw him on a thorn
tree in Sekhukhune. Unfortunately, I heard that his other son was also
killed in Soweto, but it is okay; it was a way to freedom.

Comrades, we say, may his soul rest in peace. Let us take his spear and
continue to free our country’s economy that is still in the hands of
foreigners. Forward with the spirit of B G Molewa, forward!

HON MEMBERS: Forward!

Mr L N DIALE: Forward with the spirit of B G Molewa, forward!

HON MEMBERS: Forward! [Applause.]]
Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

DEBATE ON REPORT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN MEMBERS OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT
ON THE SECOND ORDINARY SESSION OF THE PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

Adv Z L MADASA: Hon Chairperson and hon members, it is with great gratitude
that I take part in this debate to report back to our Parliament that
elected us as a delegation to the Pan-African Parliament. The report has
been made available for perusal to all the members. I am also very proud
that our country is now the permanent seat of the Pan-African Parliament.

The members of the current Pan-African Parliament, all in one voice, have
agreed that South Africa is the best place to host the Parliament.
Therefore, hon members, if we do our oversight well in South Africa, that
is what the Pan-African Parliament may copy. On the other hand, if we do
not do it well, that is also what they may copy.

For any institution to do well it must have good leadership. The Pan-
African Parliament has good leadership in President Mongela and has four
vice presidents. The Pan-African Parliament also has good leadership based
on the quality of the members that constitute it. It was refreshing to
listen to and to be part of debates of such a high quality. The Pan-African
Parliament has high levels of skills and knowledgeable members.

I am confident that that Parliament is going to deliver on its mandate. As
you can see in the report, we have debated in a space of only 10 days not
less than six major subjects. Our delegation participated in all the
debates. The debates were enriching and varied. They were honest, frank and
sometimes robust, and all of them, without exception, were constructive.

We debated rules of procedure. To highlight just one debate, the debate on
rules was marked by an attempt by some to impose regional parliamentary
traditions on the new Parliament. There was a marked difference between the
French traditions and the English traditions, with the French having a
closed system, and the English with a somewhat open one. Eventually, as I
said, because of the leadership of the President of the Parliament,
agreements were reached, not on the basis of preferred colonial tradition,
but on a proper interpretation of the Pan-African Parliament protocol and
the African Union Constitutive Act.

The Parliament did not avoid the controversial issues, as you would have
expected of a new parliament with new members and with people who are
strangers to each other. We debated the issue of Dafur thoroughly and
openly. Divergent views were fearlessly expressed about that crisis, and as
you know, it was resolved to send a mission to Sudan. This is still
pending. The mission has been mandated to record its findings, report back
to that Parliament and also to make recommendations on how to solve the
Dafur crisis.

The Parliament already has established 10 committees that are the same as
the technical committees of the African Union. We, your delegates, have all
been placed in committees. Unfortunately the rules there do not allow for a
member to serve on more that one committee, or even to alternate.

Each committee has a maximum of 30 members and each of the five regions
must have at least five members in each committee. The committees can be
restructured according to their roles as the need arises.

Many commentators and armchair critics have raised concerns on whether the
Pan-African Parliament will deliver on its mandate, because they say that
it has no legislative powers. Well, the Pan- African Parliament is
delivering already, because, as I have said, it is sending a mission to
Dafur.

The Parliament has been set up with 10 committees already, and the rules of
debates have been finalised. The Parliament has already debated various
subjects. Though the Parliament has no legislative powers yet, it has the
power to make recommendations to the Assembly of the African Union on any
matter. The Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the African Union are
mandatory and they compel that Assembly to respond to all Pan-African
Parliament recommendations.

The obvious challenge that is facing the Pan-African Parliament is
inadequate funding. As you know, the Pan-African Parliament works through
committees. In this case membership of committees is spread across the
continent. Therefore, a lot is money is going to be needed if this
parliament is to work effectively. There are also still political
challenges that the Pan-African Parliament has to face, for example, some
member states do not have elected parliaments, but have what is called
deliberative organs. The question is: How long will the Pan-African
Parliament allow delegates from such countries without proper parliaments
to participate in the Pan-African Parliament?

We must remember that the objective of establishing the Pan–African
Parliament was to ensure that the peoples of Africa participate actively in
the affairs of the African Union. On the other hand, such deliberative
organs tend to be mouthpieces of the executive which appointed them in the
first place. However, we are of the view that we cannot force these
matters. We have to take people on board and the situation is evolving.

We, as a delegation, are grateful also to our government that an amount of
about R545 million, which the Minister of Finance announced, has been made
available to the African Fund. This money will obviously indirectly help
the Pan-African Parliament. We therefore call on all African member states
to contribute financially to the African Union, proportionate to their
economic sizes. We believe that money is available, but it is a matter of
setting priorities.

Countries cannot complain about domestic needs when money is wasted on the
bureaucracy and not used for the poor. We must have a balance and remember
that a contribution to the African Union is a contribution to the poor
through a collective route. However, we must also balance and make sure
that we do not neglect domestic needs.

Members, regarding my experience at the Pan-African Parliament, I want to
say that I have learnt to work together with other members of our
delegation as a caucus from South Africa and with other regional caucuses.
I have also learnt that we are not a South African delegation, but we are a
delegation from South Africa for the African people. I have also learnt
that the issues there require one to focus on the needs that affect the
entire continent beyond ideological, ethnic, linguistic and cultural
divides.

It was a refreshing experience, because without recognition that we cannot
represent African peoples if we are divided, it would have been easy for
members to revert to their own factions, but this did not arise in the
African Parliament.

Thank you very much. The slogan of the African Parliament says: One Africa,
one voice. [Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, this is the first time that I have had the
opportunity to thank every member of this House for affording me the honour
and the privilege of serving our country in the Pan-African Parliament. I
must also thank my party for placing its trust in me and for its way of
allowing me, an obviously white South African, to truly be an African in
such a public way, not as a white African, not as a female African, but as
African who cares about Africa and all of its peoples, irrespective of
their race, class, gender, language, religion, nationality, or whatever
other subject matter is used to categorise members of the human race.

Another thank you must go from me to Madam Speaker, to the hon Mahlangu,
the hon Hajaig and the hon Madasa. The South African team really was a team
of which I was certainly very proud to be a member.

The rich, the diverse and the glorious tapestry of the peoples of the
continent of Africa was there for all to see at the second session of the
Pan-African Parliament held, as you know, at the Gallagher Estate.

The executive summary report of the South African members of the Parliament
has been tabled, as well as its many annexures, and I really urge hon
members to study this report and to communicate publicly and privately with
those of us whom you have elected to represent you.

It is critical that this Parliament and its members now begin an open and
constructive multiparty dialogue on our very visions and expectations on
all matters relating to the Pan-African Parliament.

As you are aware, the protocol of the Pan-African Parliament states in an
article that members of the Pan-African Parliament shall vote in their
personal and independent capacity. So, today in the time that I have, I
would like to give members a brief personal perspective of my experience in
these early days of this new and extraordinary parliament.

The detail of our work, so far, and I keep emphasising so far, is in the
report, the resolutions and the recommendations as set out. That is what we
have had to say initially. However, what was it really like for me to be
there, and what are some of the issues that are not captured in the report
before you, or to my mind not sufficiently emphasised in the report before
you? What are my observations, hopes, and frustrations? Because, I must be
very honest with you, there is not a day or night that goes by when I do
not worry about the fact that I may not be fulfilling my own mandate in the
work that I have committed myself to do for the Pan-African Parliament.

The members you have elected to this parliament all feel an individual and
collective responsibility to ensure the success of this Parliament, and in
tandem, of course, the implementation of the recommendations and
resolutions that have been tabled so far.

I have made 10 brief observations. Most of the members of the Pan-African
Parliament present from throughout Africa demonstrated extraordinary
intellect, experience and commitment to assist in the human, economic and
spiritual development of Africa. These were honest men and women of
calibre.

They bravely spoke from their hearts of the problems of Africa, past and
present, and they were not sparing in their criticisms of Africa’s
politicians and its leadership. However, then there were some members, a
few, who made no secret of the fact that they had wanted to come to South
Africa to further their business interests or to start businesses. They
were driving South African cars, and were openly boasting of their
properties in this country and their seats were often empty.

In a way, and in the ignorance of their arrogance, to my mind they were
walking advertisements of what we have to change regarding the leadership
of Africa. The majority of members, though, those whom I have already
praised, and who have become new friends, I know also share the concerns
that I am sharing with you today. Some members have not conceptualised, as
advocate Madasa has just said, that this parliament is a new parliament. It
is a uniquely African Parliament, and yet they wanted, as he said, to
import old colonial parliamentary structures and processes into the rules
and procedures of this new Parliament.

The President, Mrs Mongella, has to be praised for her determination to
block this from the start. Although, in truth, it is clear that many still
do think in terms of English, French or Arabic power blocs of North, East,
South, West and Central. That was coming through all the time.

The Pan-African Parliament lacks the critical capacity to do its work
efficiently and effectively. The President, Mrs Mongella, cannot be
expected to drive the successful development of this parliament, unless she
is given the basic human and economic resources required to do so.

It is clear that there are problems and tensions - I will try to put it
delicately - with regard to certain of the leadership of the AU and their
commitment to the development and the independence of the Pan-African
Parliament. The members you have elected to serve you from this Parliament
do not have the necessary support structures to enable them to do their Pan-
African parliamentary work.

I have been elected the rapporteur of the Pan-African Parliament’s
committee on transport, industry, communications, energy, science and
technology. I urgently need assistance to liase with fellow members
throughout Africa and with the AU and Nepad to compile and research the
documentation required to effectively allow members of the Pan-African
Parliament to exercise their mandated oversight roles.

Finally, something has to be done about the image of the Pan-African
Parliament. There is an Afropessimistic perception that it is a waste of
time, that it is simply pap and gravy. There are people, even in this
House, who think that the five of us who have been elected by you earn
extra salaries, are getting extra money. There are very damaging
perceptions about this Parliament, and we must ensure that this critical
initiative is understood and supported and appropriately publicised.

In essence, the Pan-African Parliament will be what the members of
parliaments throughout Africa make it to be, because if it fails, it will
fail because we, the members of Parliament, have failed it. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, I have no doubt at all that the Pan-African
Parliament has already, in its short history, made a major impact both in
Africa and abroad. It’s doing that, in my experience – and I have had some
experience of this – because it reflects the aspirations of the continent
as a whole in a way which is new, which is dynamic and which is quite
important.

I want to talk about the vision and mission of the African Parliament. I
was not a delegate there. I was an observer at the first session of the Pan-
African Parliament in Addis Abeba, and I had the pleasure of attending the
opening of the second session in Midrand. So, I’ve had some personal
experience of the atmosphere generated in the Pan-African Parliament. It
was wonderful to see how Africa’s diversity was reflected in that entirely
new situation.

I also want to bring out what has already been said about the President of
the Pan-African Parliament, Mrs Gertrude Mongella, who is an outstanding
personality on the continent. She shows remarkable leadership, and she is
highly respected by everyone.

I’d like to focus on two particular aspects. The first aspect is  the Pan-
African Parliament as a representative body of the people of Africa. That
is a very important issue - the way it represents Africa both on the
continent and in the world. The second aspect is the Pan-African Parliament
as an institution of parliamentary democracy, and this is something that
needs emphasis.

I was in Europe two weeks ago at a conference in Berlin where these two
issues were brought to the fore. I want to recount a little bit of what
happened there, because it reflects on the point I am making - that the Pan-
African Parliament is already making history, not only on the continent
but, in fact, globally.

The conference was attended by Mrs Gertrude Mongella, the President of the
PAP. She spoke in a most remarkable way and made a tremendous impression as
the authentic voice of Africa, and as an elected representative of our
parliaments. The conference was clearly very anxious to hear her voice and
what she had to say. It came home to me immediately that the stronger and
more united the Pan-African Parliament is, the more attention it will
attract worldwide. It certainly attracted a great deal of attention at that
particular conference.

The conference was attended by senior officials of the German government,
by quite a number of German members of parliament, by the Deputy Minister
of Development Co-operation, and by about 60 African members of parliament.
So, in total there were about 100 people at the conference, which was held
in the German parliament, that in itself being quite symbolic. The
conference also sent delegations to meet with the German Chancellor and the
German Deputy Chancellor. So, clearly, there was something quite important
happening there.

Mrs Mongella spoke of the vision of the Pan-African Parliament and of the
long tradition on the continent of the aspiration for African unity. This
Pan-African Parliament has deep roots in the political history of the
continent. She said that the seed was planted long ago, but she also said
that the seed did not grow. She thought that the reason the seed of African
unity did not grow from the days of Kwame Nkrumah, and even before then,
was because the aspirations for African unity were somehow dissipated by
the struggle for independence in individual countries and by the struggle
for democracy. So, the cause of African unity was somehow lost in the more
isolated struggles of individual countries.

She also said that the struggle for independence was a struggle to overcome
poverty, disease and ignorance. These, clearly, are some of the items in
the vision and mission of the Pan-Africa Parliament. However, she said that
the situation had changed now. In trying to explain the origins of the Pan-
African Parliament and the dynamic that was driving it, she said that the
drive – and this is a very important point – towards globalisation and
integration across the world was stimulating Africa to re-examine its own
role in the global context.

Global issues, clearly, have become very important. And, as we see from the
election in the United States, which has brought back President Bush, this
is something that is going to give Africa cause for thought. The election
in the US is an example of how global issues make an impact on us, on South
Africa, and indeed will do on the whole continent.

As you know, the ANC has congratulated President Bush on his victory, but
it’s also clear that the Pan-African Parliament will have something to say
on this issue. It’s clear that the Pan-African Parliament will have to
relate to all the parties in the US congress and senate. It will also
attempt, I hope and believe, to build people-to-people relations between
the people of Africa and the people of the United States and, indeed, of
Europe and the rest of the North.

The global situation facing Africa is leading to a new political and
economic momentum based on the idea of continental and regional unity. This
is what lies behind the creation of the African Union, the Pan-African
Parliament and, indeed, Nepad.

Mrs Mongella made a speech at that meeting in Berlin that has made a great
impact on my mind and that, I feel, will make a great impact inside the Pan-
African Parliament itself and on its various committees at the next
meeting. What she had to say was this: that there must be an engagement
between the Pan-African Parliament and indeed all the parliaments in Africa
individually with other parliaments across the world and with continents,
and that this should not be a simple event here and there, like the event
in Berlin that we attended, but that there should be a process.

Indeed, Mrs Mongella insisted to the German Foreign Ministry and the
Ministries of Development Co-operation that having one conference in Berlin
- a few weeks ago - was by no means enough, and that there had to be
continual engagement between the Pan-African Parliament and the people in
Europe and, indeed, in the North as a whole.

Furthermore, she stressed that we needed a new relationship between Europe
in particular and Africa as a whole. We needed, she said, a joint agenda
between Europe and Africa, and that we needed too to ensure that we
monitored what had been done, what was being done in co-operation between
Europe and Africa, and why it was being done.

She made a very strong point: that what was wanted now on the basis of the
existence of the Pan-African Parliament were partnerships and not welfare.
We needed, she said, a new mindset in Europe; the days of paternalism are
over. Europe must focus now not on welfare, but on the genuine
opportunities which exist in Africa, because there are real development
benefits for all in the development co-operation between Germany in
particular and Europe as a whole, as well as the continent. She urged the
European parliamentarians that for this to succeed they must counter
negative images of Africa in Europe. Too many press stories in journals
like The Economist portray a very negative image of Africa.

You all know about the issue of The Economist, which had a map of Africa on
the front-page with the heading: “The hopeless continent”.  More recently,
the African editor of The Economist produced a book about Africa and one of
the chapters – I forget the title for the moment – has a very nasty heading
about the kind of state that you find in Africa, the tyrannical state or
some such label.

She called upon the people of Europe to adopt a new attitude towards Africa
as a whole and to the Pan-African Parliament in particular. She also said –
and I think this was very important – that Africa now must influence the
global agenda. It seems to me that the existence of the Pan-African
Parliament provides a wonderful platform for Africa to do exactly that.

And, rather teasingly, Mrs Mongella said to the audience consisting of
German members of parliament, officials and Ministers: Why is it that we
always read about a European agenda for Africa? Why is there no African
agenda for Europe? She turned to the African MPs who were sitting there,
many of whom were from Francophone countries who don’t normally engage in
this way, and said to them: Why don’t we go away and caucus and develop an
African agenda for Europe? In a strange way, the Europeans themselves
welcomed this point and there was a loud applause for the idea. Clearly,
the South African Parliament could very well develop an agenda for Europe.
I think that’s not a bad idea.

So, clearly, what she was arguing for was a new relationship between
European parliaments and the Pan-African Parliament on the basis of mutual
interest. However, we had to take note of the fact that the European
parliamentarians were very concerned about terror and the war on terrorism.
This came up time and time again, whereas the African members of parliament
at that meeting and elsewhere, as I have already described, were concerned
about poverty.

So, Mrs Mongella said: Can’t we find a way of combining these two terribly
important issues – the European and indeed the Northern concern with the
war on terror and the African concern with the war on poverty? It seems to
me that there is a lot to be said for that. Let us come together - Europe
and Africa - and examine how the mutual interests and concerns might be
reconciled in a common agenda.

I also want to inform the House that I myself happened to be in Germany,
because I was part of a delegation of the Nepad contact group of African
parliamentarians. I think I reported previously that we had set up a
contact group with members of parliament from many African countries on the
issue of Nepad. Three of us - a delegate from Zambia, Burundi and me - were
asked to go on a tour of the Scandinavian countries to talk about Nepad.

Well, we met with foreign affairs officials in Denmark, Norway and Sweden
and also with the parliamentary foreign affairs committees in those
countries and had discussions with them. Interestingly enough, the same
sort of concerns that were mentioned in Berlin came up in those meetings. I
want to convey them to you, because I think they are of major importance
for this House.

It’s clear to me that the major donor countries in Europe are reviewing
their policies in relation to Africa. There is a huge concern that the old
kinds of aid were not always functional, and that there were certain
difficulties with the kinds of aid and aid policies that had been developed
in the past. Countries like Norway, and foreign affairs and development co-
operation Ministries have developed new documents, which were given to us,
on what is now called “Economic co-operation and partnership”.

We were quite surprised as a delegation that when these foreign Ministries
and Ministries of development co-operation were going into this exercise,
the word “parliament” did not occur once. We looked at one of the
documents, for example an extensive document done by one of these countries
over many years in great detail, and at no point was there a reference to
the fact that the parliaments of Africa were also players and stakeholders
in the question of European development co-operation and partnership.

So our delegation put this forward and said to them: How can you possibly
negotiate co-operation with Africa as a whole without the inclusion of
parliamentary consultations and discussions? The point was accepted
immediately. It just needed someone to put the point on the table.

The same point was then made by Mrs Mongella in Berlin. It seems to me to
be something that the Pan-African Parliament must put forward very
strongly. There must be no negotiations between North and South without the
involvement of the parliaments of Africa and without the involvement of the
Pan-African Parliament in particular. The Pan-African Parliament will be
able to make a contribution to these discussions and negotiations. That is
not simply a matter for our executives alone; it is not simply an executive
issue. The parliaments of Africa must be involved in the notion of
parliaments between North and South and development co-operation. Of
course, as previous speakers have said, our own parliaments and in
particular the Pan-African Parliament will not be able to play an adequate
role unless we attend to the question of human, financial and technical
resources.

Mrs Mongella also made an important point that I want to convey here. She
said that we must now begin to define the roles of different levels of
parliaments, the roles of the Pan-African Parliament, the roles of the
regional parliaments - Ecowas and so on - and the roles of the national
parliaments, and that we must differentiate between their roles and examine
exactly what they should do.

Of course, she said, and insisted quite strongly, that a parliament that
did not have relations with civil society was not a proper parliament. She
insisted that the Pan-African Parliament, in looking forward to its future
agenda, must ensure that its relationships with civil society were properly
spelt out, otherwise, she said, the Pan-African Parliament would become an
elitist institution. This is something that I think we all understand.

I then want to turn to my second point, Chairperson, and that is Parliament
as a democratic institution. In our discussions in Europe, and also at the
Berlin meeting, and in many other discussions that we have had, we read
documents from the World Bank and other institutions of expertise, which
call upon Africa to exercise good governance. Good governance has become
the new mantra. A colleague of mine in Europe said to me, good governance
is a substitute for the word democracy.

Well, I would not want to go that far, but clearly some members of
parliament - and this happened in Berlin as well - especially some of the
Francophone parliamentarians talked about good governance as though it is
simply a matter of getting finances right, as if it is a matter of good
administration, and as if you behave according to a certain style which
perhaps has been laid down in Europe. Well, it is quite wrong.

The conclusion we arrived at in Berlin, and also at the various meetings
that we had in Scandinavia, was that good governance is not a technical
question, but primarily a political question. Of course we have to get our
finances right, of course we have to get our administration right, but
fundamentally, if you do not have a good democratic system and a good
democratic parliamentary system, you will not have good governance. In
other words, getting only the finances and the administration right is
insufficient.

So, the point came across at all these meetings that good governance, the
mantra of the World Bank, the IMF and many other international
institutions, cannot stand alone as a purely technical issue. Fundamentally
it is an issue of the parliamentary system and of democracy. That means
that right across Africa we have to have good political parties, good
parliaments and good executives, and all three must function together in a
democratic parliamentary system, in a way which will be brought together
and which will be highlighted by the Pan-African Parliament itself.

And so, colleagues let me wind up by saying that, as one who spent many
years in many parts of Africa and who spent many years studying the
development economics in many African countries and the political history
of the continent, I feel absolutely delighted by firstly, Mrs Mongella, an
outstanding leader of the continent, and secondly, by the very substantial
progress and vision that has come out of the Pan-African Parliament.

I have really enjoyed talking to you. Thank you.

Mr S F HAASBROEK: Chairperson, hon members, I wish to reiterate that the
Pan-African Parliament is an achievement whose moment has irrevocably
arrived, and it is gratifying to reflect on some of the achievements during
the past session. However, the DA finds it highly regrettable that we are
not represented at the
Pan-African Parliament. Even the Zimbabwean government allows the MDC to be
represented. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon member, may I remind you that you
cannot reflect on a decision taken by this House in this session. Thank
you. Please continue.

Mr S F HAASBROEK: The DA notes that the Pan-African Parliament called on
the AU to exert all its efforts to resolve the conflict and to address the
humanitarian needs in Darfur. However, Chairperson, the DA calls on the Pan-
African Parliament to treat the conflict in Burundi with the same urgency.
In this context we agree with the Pan-African Parliament that the impact of
the armed conflict on women and children and the role of women in peace
building are important issues to be researched and the results should be
implemented as soon as possible.

We also note that the Pan-African Parliament is paying special attention to
skills development, and knowledge enhancement through continuing education
and capacity-building in partnership with African intellectuals and
experts. The DA is concerned about the fact that the President of the Pan-
African Parliament, Getrude Mongella, has called for private sector funding
of the Pan-African Parliament in the form of mining and other such levies.
Such a call has to be considered premature as many of the member states of
the Pan-African Parliament themselves have failed to meet their financial
obligations.

At the AU summit in July this year, it was reported that only 13 of the 53
member countries have paid their dues. The DA welcomes initiatives of the
African continent such as the Pan-African Parliament, as long as they are
able to make substantive improvements in the lives of all Africans.

However, we firmly believe that institutions such as the Pan-African
Parliament must constitute a collective effort by all African states, where
all the necessary financial responsibilities are shared, and that no single
state such as South Africa must be expected to shoulder the burden alone.
The DA therefore believes that the Pan-African Parliament must ensure that
there is a partnership of equals, where all members of the Pan-African
Parliament make a contribution based on their ability to do so. Where a
member state is genuinely unable to meet its obligations, solutions must be
found to ensure that they are able to make a contribution that they can
afford. However, in no way should member states simply be absolved of all
their responsibilities.

The DA will continue to monitor developments in this regard, and we will
work to ensure that neither the South African taxpayer, nor the private
sector is unduly prejudiced by funding proposals of the
Pan-African Parliament. Thank you, Madam Chair.

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Chair. The challenges facing the African
continent are immense. This is something that I witnessed for the first
time when I travelled through 26 African countries. Although I am not a PAP
delegate, I do share the pride of hon Vos and hon Turok at the creation of
this institution in forming common solutions to our shared problems.

The ID also finds it very heartening that the first meeting of the Pan-
African Parliament was characterised by strong positions and resolutions
being taken on a variety of issues. In particular, the ID welcomes the
strong stance that was taken on peace and security issues, and the
resolution that a delegation be sent to the Darfur region to assess the
human rights tragedy occurring there.

We would motivate that this delegation be sent as soon as possible, and
that its recommendations are acted upon. The ID is also heartened by the
fact that the Pan-African Parliament recognises the problem of corruption,
and urge all of its members to join the African Parliamentary Network
Against Corruption. The ID leader, Patricia De Lille, was in fact the first
and the only South African parliamentarian to join this network last year.

The South African Parliament should therefore follow the lead of the Pan-
African Parliament, and urge all of its members to join this important
network aimed at eradicating the scourge of corruption in our country and
on our continent. It is important for the
Pan-African Parliament to be not only a moral voice, but also a voice of
the African people.

The ID would strongly motivate for this institution and its resolutions to
be informed by the feelings of all African people. The ID would like to see
the work of this institution publicised at a local level, and that all of
us in this House take the information to our constituency offices and
disseminate it.

At this early stage of its history, the PAP must ensure that it becomes
thoroughly rooted in the people of this continent, and that they are
afforded the opportunities to share their experiences and vision for the
continent. Only in this way will we be able to bridge the divide between
political institutions and the people that all too often exist on this
continent. I thank you.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mev die Voorsitter, namens die VF Plus wil ons dankie sê
vir ’n baie volledige verslag oor wat gebeur het by die Afrika-Parlement.
Dit gee ’n mens insig in wat daar gebeur het.

Tydens die Koue Oorlog was Afrika ’n belangrike kontinent, want Afrika kon
die balans hou in ’n internasionale forum tussen die Ooste en die Weste. Na
die Koue Oorlog, in die nuwe wêreld, is Afrika nie meer belangrik nie.

Nou is daar groot ekonomiese blokke wat met mekaar kompeteer. Die Europese
Unie is besig met hul sake; Amerika, Mexiko en Kanada kompeteer aan die
eenkant, en dan die Oosterse blok met Japan, Korea en China aan die ander
kant. In hierdie geveg ignoreer almal vir Afrika.

Die punt wat ek probeer maak, is dat as ons in Afrika nie onsself kan red
nie, ekonomies en andersins, sal niemand anders dit doen nie. Dit is teen
hierdie agtergrond wat die VF Plus die stigting van die Afrika-Unie en die
Pan-Afrika Parlement baie sterk steun en glo dis die instrumente wat moet
slaag sodat ons onsself kan red.

Ons stem ook saam met die verskillende strategiese doelwitte soos hulle
uiteengesit is. Al wat ons wel wil doen, is om realisme te bepleit. Daar is
baie idealisme en sonder idealisme kom jy nêrens nie, maar sonder realisme
gaan ons ook nie daarby uitkom nie. Afrika sal konsensus moet kry oor ’n
gedeelde visie en agenda vir die toekoms waaroor ons almal saamstem.

Ekonomiese samewerking in Afrika is nodig, maar ons sal moet klein begin.
Op ekonomiese vlak sal ons moet begin, en samewerking op streeksvlak is
binne ons bereik. In SADC, in Suidelike Afrika, het ons reeds sukses
daarmee. Ons sal moet sorg vir ’n geïntegreerde infrastruktuur. Dis is
nodig, dis belangrik, dis prakties haalbaar. Suid-Afrika speel ’n groot rol
in elektriese kragnetwerke en in met spoorverbindings in Suidelike Afrika.

Wat is ons bekommernis as VF Plus? Dit is dat die Afrika-Unie, en veral die
Afrika-Parlement, op so ’n groot skaal aangepak word dat dit dalk kan
misluk. Ons moet eerder klein begin en dan groei, as wat ons hierdie reuse
ideale het wat in die grond wegsink omdat ons die ding te groot aangepak
het. Die Europese Unie het klein begin en gegroei. Ons moet nie dink ons
kan heel groot begin nie, want dan gaan ons misluk.

Mevrou, ons sal graag wil weet wat gaan die uitgawes vir die volgende vyf
jaar wees, asook wat daarmee saamgaan? Afrika moet homself red. As ons
misluk, gaan ons nie noodwendig ’n tweede kans kry nie. Dit is ons enigste
kans. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Chair, on behalf of the FF Plus we wish to thank
you for a very comprehensive report on what took place at the African
Parliament. It gives one an insight as to what transpired.

During the Cold War Africa became an important continent, because Africa
could maintain the balance in an international forum between the East and
the West. After the Cold War, in the new world, Africa is no longer
important.

Now there are large economic blocs that compete with each other. The
European Union is busy with its own business; America, Mexico and Canada
are competing on the one side; and the Asian bloc with Japan, Korea and
China on the other. In this battle everyone is ignoring Africa.

The point that I am trying to make is that if we in Africa cannot save
ourselves, economically and otherwise, nobody else will do it. It is
against this background that the FF Plus very strongly supports the
establishment of the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament, and we
believe that these are the instruments that have to succeed in order for us
to save ourselves.

We also agree with the different strategic objectives as expounded. What we
want to do, though, is to plead for realism. There is plenty of idealism,
and without it you will not progress, but without realism we shall not get
there either. Africa must reach consensus on a shared vision and agenda for
the future, agreed upon by all.

Economic co-operation in Africa is necessary, but we have to start on a
small scale. We shall have to start at the economic level, and co-operation
on street level is within our reach. Within SADC, in Southern Africa, we
have already achieved success in this regard. We shall have to provide for
an integrated infrastructure. It is necessary, important and is practically
attainable. South Africa plays an important role with its electrical power
supply networks and railway connections in Southern Africa.

What is our concern as the FF Plus? It is that the African Union, and
specifically the African Parliament, is being engaged on such a large scale
that it could possibly fail. We should rather start on a smaller scale and
grow, than having these huge ideals that might just collapse and fade
because we started this off too big. The European Union started off very
small and later expanded. We should not think that we can have this
elaborate start, just to be a failure in the end.

We would like to know, for the next five years, what will the concomitant
expenses be if Africa has to save itself. If we fail, we shall not
necessarily be given a second chance. This is our one and only chance.
Thank you.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! Deputy Chair, first of all, let me congratulate
members of the Pan-African Parliament on the second ordinary session of the
Pan-African Parliament. I’m sure our own members from this House have
learnt a great deal from interacting with their colleagues from the
continent.

The PAC supports the report. We agree that members of the Pan- African
Parliament must rise to the many challenges Africa and its people are
facing. Indeed, many of our people in our continent are looking to the Pan-
African Parliament for solutions to Africa’s problems. It is commendable to
note that the debate was preceded by a discussion of the vision, mission
and the strategic plan of the Africa Union, which is the mother of this
Parliament.

The PAC appreciates the resolutions on the recommendations passed, such as
the conflict resolution; the resolution on peace and security and the
resolution on women and children in armed conflict. The resolution for the
Pan-African Parliament to go to the Darfur region in Sudan for fact-finding
is a step in the right direction, and so is the one calling on members of
the African Parliament to become members of the African Parliamentarians’
Network Against Corruption.

I want to close by saying that the PAC is the pace setter and reliable
political barometer in this country, whether it is on land issues, Pan-
Africanism, antiprivatisation or free education. The PAC has been
vindicated today against those who call Pan-Africanists racists, and
believe that the ideas such as the Pan-African Parliament are instances of
daydreaming. Long live Nkrumah! Long live Sobukwe! Long live Sylvester
Williams! Long live George Padmore! Long live the PAC!

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is indeed an honour and privilege
for us here in South Africa to have hosted the second ordinary session of
the Pan-African Parliament from 16 September to 1 October 2004. This was
certainly history in itself.

The MF would like to take this opportunity to thank our hon President, who
was an exquisite host, as well as the hon Ms B Mbete, hon M J Mahlangu, hon
F Hajaig, hon S Vos and hon Z L Madasa. They proudly represented South
Africa in this session of the Pan-African Parliament.

Having looked at the Pan-African Parliament’s report, the MF acknowledges
that its second ordinary session was quite fruitful as a number of key
issues of African concern were earnestly addressed. In view of the key
issues discussed, it appears that rules on procedure appear to be intact,
including the voting device of the Chamber.

The vision, mission and strategic plan of the AU appears to have been
addressed adequately, and the role of PAP in Africa outlined effectively.

Further, the budget set for 2005 is also sufficient. It is also
acknowledged that a number of committees and regional caucuses were
established during this session. The MF is confident that South African
members of the PAP shall serve proudly on the committees they are assigned
to.

In view of the resolutions, the MF is very pleased with the stance PAP is
taking and believes that PAP is on the right track. This sentiment also
applies to the recommendations made.

The MF also has no problem endorsing the EPRM and PAP’s decision to send a
fact-finding mission to Darfur. We fully support the members of PAP and
trust that they are going to do a fine job. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Ms L JACOBUS: Thank you, hon Chairperson, for the opportunity to
participate in this debate as we engage in the report of the recent sitting
of the Pan-African Parliament.

The establishment of the Pan-African Parliament was indeed a historic
moment for Africa, and the amount of work done by all thus far should
indeed be commended. It is an illustration of the commitment of all members
of the Pan-African Parliament and their respective countries in realising
the African agenda and creating a better life for the peoples of Africa.

May I also take this opportunity to congratulate our delegation, very ably
led by our Speaker, and wish them well in their term of office and future
deliberations in the Pan-African Parliament.
At the first sitting of the Pan-African Parliament in its new host country,
South Africa of course, our President said the following to the delegates
gathered at the plenary, and I quote:

  The masses know the reality of civil wars, genocide, the conflicts that
  brought untold suffering to the innocent, the economic decay, social
  disintegration and cultural alienation that have defined the lives of
  many Africans. They know what others have done, which imposed on them the
  curse of poverty, hunger, famine, disease and underdevelopment. The
  African masses look to the Pan-African Parliament to change all that.

I am convinced it was with these words in mind that the PAP adopted a
resolution on conflict resolution in Sudan and another on peace and
stability, women and children in armed conflict. These two resolutions I
would view as particularly important since there are still various parts of
the continent dogged by armed conflict and hunger, and poverty is still the
order of day.

Most of us in this House will agree that these conflicts in various regions
of the continent are, in many instances, about resources and the control
thereof. It must also be noted that these conflicts are not always
domestically propagated or instigated, but that foreign hands may have
their fingers in the pie - those who wish to rob our continent of her
wealth and mineral and natural resources. It is also unfortunate that it is
always the poor, the vulnerable, women and children who form the bulk of
casualties in these conflicts.

The ANC Today of 18 to 24 June 2004, stated:


  The national vision of building a united, nonracial, nonsexest and
  prosperous society is also relevant to our vision for Africa. Coupled
  with this is the understanding that socioeconomic development cannot take
  place without political peace and stability.

On the other hand, it would also be very difficult to achieve political
peace and stability without socioeconomic development. It is therefore two
sides of the same coin. We must, therefore, bear in mind that the national
security of any country is closely linked to the human security of its
people. Interventions to achieve peace and stability should therefore
include socioeconomic development, poverty and other challenges related
thereto.

At the national policy conference of the ANC, held in September 2002, in a
resolution on peace, stability and an end to conflict, we committed
ourselves to building and strengthening the institution of the AU and
Nepad, aimed at the peaceful resolution of conflicts. I am therefore
particularly happy that this resolution has found its way into the Pan-
African Parliament.

Central to the oversight role of the PAP should therefore be the
socioeconomic development of all states; secondly, the promotion of peace,
stability and democracy throughout the continent; and, thirdly, the
creation of an environment in which all states will achieve their full
potential.

One of the recommendations of the Pan-African Parliament is support for the
establishment of an African stand-by force as one of the intervention tools
for peacekeeping and conflict resolution. Since members of this force will
be members of their respective countries’ defence forces and will therefore
not converge at a central point as a super army, I would further recommend
that issues of a uniform training programme and central co-ordination
should be attended to as matters of urgency. I don’t think we would want to
find ourselves in a situation in which each of the 51 countries has a
different understanding of the role and mandate of the African stand-by
force in the event of any deployment.

In conclusion, as the ANC, I think I can safely say that we welcome and
endorse the report as tabled, and we wish the Pan-African Parliament well
in its endeavours of creating a better Africa and indeed a better world.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

THE RESTRUCTURING OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND ITS AGENCIES TO SERVE AND
PROTECT THE POOR OF THE WORLD, WHO CONSTITUTE THE MAJORITY OF HUMANITY
                  (Subject for Discussion – Mr D J Sithole)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): May I call on the speaker? Can the
Whips enlighten me as to the absence of the speaker?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Could we proceed to the next
speaker?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, I’ll do that. Then I call
Mr Labuschagne, the hon Labuschagne.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Madam Chairperson, the question that we must ask
ourselves is whether the United Nations is relevant. The answer is,
obviously, yes, but the structures are not. As Kofi Annan said, and I
quote:

  All of us know that there are new threats that must be faced or perhaps
  old threats in new and dangerous combinations, new forms of terrorism and
  the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. But while some consider
  those threats as self-evidently the main challenge to world peace and
  security, others feel more immediately menaced by small arms employed in
  civil conflict or by so-called soft threats.

Of course, these soft threats will include persistence of extreme poverty,
disparity of income, infectious diseases such as HIV/Aids, climate change
etc, and Mr Annan finally added, and I quote again: “the struggle for human
rights, democracy and good governance”.

The DA concurs completely with the sentiments of the great UN Secretary-
General, and we look forward to the report of the UN Secretary-General’s
High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, which is due in
December 2004.

The DA fully supports United Nations reform, particularly the need for an
expanded Security Council and the review of the veto. We cannot accept the
concept of first and second-class permanent members of the UN. In
recognition of the importance of Africa, we unreservedly support the
concept of a permanent seat for Africa and consequently, we support the
government in seeking that seat for South Africa.

We must, of course, remember that Africa faces stiff competition from other
regions, the Middle East, Asia, Latin America and even from individual
countries as they jockey for their interests. There is a great onus on
Africa to fulfil the promise of the renaissance and Kofi Annan’s
requirements of human rights, democracy and good governance.

South Africa is the leading democracy on our continent and we cannot expect
responsible members of the United Nations to seriously consider claims by
undemocratic states calling for a democratised United Nations. Should
countries whose failing human rights records and lack of respect for
democracy play leading roles in permanent multilateral institutions, and
which profess to be of a democratic nature? Should they join the team if
they don’t follow the rules? Is it a credit to a soccer team or any other
team to be filled with dirty players?

We should ask ourselves: Why has the role of multilateralism diminished?
Why are certain nations ignoring a system which holds so many promises? Can
a country be blamed if all efforts to act multilaterally are thwarted by
inertia and prevarication? Had the UN acted swiftly, promptly and
effectively, would President Bush have invaded Iraq? An effective
multilateral approach would have been much better. Multilateralism,
however, must never be used as an excuse for inaction.

The world has changed since 1945. The Cold War is over and, most
importantly, we have seen Africa coming of age with the demise of
colonialism, as well as the birth of other new countries that now form the
basis of NAM. The UN Security Council reflects old power realities and not
the geopolitical reality of this century, and we find that the majority of
the world’s population is not represented. South Africa, India, Brazil are
cases in point. The winner-takes-all sentiment that dominated the postwar
period should now be replaced with “all must be winners in our new
century”.

A rules-based global, economic, social and political system that provides
security, certainty and predictability is essential. In our need for
review, we must be prepared to act firmly and swiftly in crises that
involve human rights, suffering, death and genocide. We cannot afford to be
overly sensitive to the sensitivities of a few presidents and their
henchmen, particularly undemocratic ones, when tens of thousands are dying.
Are we going to be prepared to put our money where our mouths are? These
are tough choices and serious commitments that must be faced if we are to
take up the challenge.

The UN is often the only vehicle where poor, small and marginalised nations
have a voice, and we must ensure that they will always be heard. In the
past, mechanisms existed where liberation movements and even individuals
could petition the UN; such avenues must be reopened. Where can the
oppressed go when their governments do not heed them or provide channels to
be heard? It worked in the past; it must be made to work again. A
democratic global society must not exclude the global individual.

In conclusion, let us hope that reform of the UN will not be delayed. We
and other members of the so-called developing world have waited long
enough. Thank you. [Applause].

Mr K O BAPELA: Thank you, Chairperson. History tells us that the first
person to coin the name “United Nations” was a United States President,
Franklin Roosevelt. It was first used in the declaration by the United
Nations on 1 January 1942 during the Second World War when representatives
of 26 nations pledged their governments to continue fighting together. They
referred to that as the “axis of powers” and that was during the time of
fascism.

The forerunner to the United Nations was the League of Nations, an
organisation conceived in similar circumstances during the First World War.
It was established in 1919, under the Treaty of Versailles, to promote
international co-operation and to achieve peace and security. As you will
know, it was through that Treaty of Versailles that Africa was annexed, had
its borders determined and split into colonies of the powerful states of
the time. The League of Nations ceased to exist or ceased its activities
after failing to prevent the Second World War.

In 1945, representatives of 50 countries met in San Francisco at the United
Nations Conference on International Organisations to draw up the United
Nations Charter. South Africa was a founding member of the original 50
member states of the United Nations, including the United States, United
Kingdom, Soviet Union, China and Poland joined soon after the signing of
the charter to be 51st member of the original members.

The United Nations officially came into existence on 24 October 1945.
Today, the United Nations is an international organisation comprising of
191 member states - the “town hall of global affairs”, as they call it. Its
work affects our life everyday. As the provider of information on
practically every area of human activity, it gives everyone something to
learn.

As stated in the charter, the mandates of the United Nations are, amongst
others: to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
occurred twice in our lifetime. While it says, “in our lifetime”, many of
us were not yet born during the First World War and even during the Second
World War, many were only being born, except the veterans in this House.
Other mandates are to affirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of
nations large and small; to be equal; to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained; to promote social progress
and better standards of life in larger freedom.

The charter continues and says, “for these ends, to practice tolerance and
live together in peace with one another as good neighbours; to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security; to ensure by the
acceptance of principles and the institutions of methods that arms force
shall not be used, save in the common interest; and, to employ
international machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples”. I have characterised or I have given the
background on the United Nations and it’s mandate.

The poor of the world continue to be poor and at the same time, the poor
are not fully protected from poverty, disease, conflicts caused by poverty
and greed, and lack of development. According to statistics and facts, most
poor people live in the developing countries in Latin America, in Africa -
mainly sub-Sahara - and also in Asia. It is estimated that two-thirds of
the world’s population, which is 6 billion, is vulnerable.

The ANC, through its leaders, in conferences, through its cadres and
activists, as early as 1914 - before the formation of the League of Nations
– had already advocated a just world order. Pixley ka Isaka Seme, a leader
of the ANC at the time, had this to say about the new world order:

  Oh! How I long for that day, when darkness and gloom shall have passed
  away because the righteousness has risen with the healing in his hand.
  This shall be the dawning of a brighter day for the people of the world.

The ANC, in its 1997 national conference in Mafikeng, characterised the
situation in South Africa, the transition to democracy and our
transformation process in its international context in the strategy and
tactics, as follows:

  The liberation of South Africa is both a local expression of a changing
  world and part of the catalyst to renewed efforts aimed at attaining
  international consensus on the most urgent questions facing humanity. Our
  transition was an element of dynamic political process of a world
  redefining itself with the end of the Cold War. To the extent that the
  new global situation has not resolved the contradictions within and among
  nations, between poverty and opulence; to the extent that ethnic,
  religious and other tensions continue to ravage parts of the globe; to
  this extent and more, the transformation taking place in our own country
  is closely intertwined with the search for a new world order.

The ANC, in 1999, in its election manifesto again boldly expressed and
mapped a programme to build a better world and Africa. The ANC called for
the reform and transformation of the United Nations and its agencies, and
the Bretton Woods institutions, that is the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organisation and others.

Today, in 2004, the call for transformation of this institution remains
valid, as the world is engaging in the same discussion to transform its
global institution. The recent developments in our history have even made
it urgent that we quickly move to transform the UN, its agencies and other
institutions. For example, in the Rwanda massacre and failure by the UN to
respond, millions of lives lost could have been saved; the war in Iraq and
calamity in that country could have been avoided, where two powerful
nations defied logic and undermined the UN and proceeded alone in the so-
called coalition of the willing.

The conflict in the Middle East and the unresolved question of Western
Sahara remain on the agenda because some amongst the nations refuse to co-
operate with the United Nations. Therefore, the call to reform and
transform the United Nations is more urgent and we need to do that. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Hon members, since the office years
of Excellencies Dag Hammarskjöld, General U Thant, Kurt Waldheim, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali to Kofi Annan, the agenda and responsibilities of the United
Nations grew beyond the decisions taken at Dumbarton Oaks Conference in
1944. The charter, which was subsequently agreed to at the San Francisco
conference between April and June 1945, was to establish an association of
sovereign states to succeed the League of Nations and maintain
international peace and security, and to achieve global co-operation in
solving problems of economic and cultural nature.

Then, it was hoped that this would be sufficient to provide the effective
approaches to regulate world affairs to the satisfaction of all member
states, rich and poor. However, the disintegration of European empires, the
inevitable process of decolonisation, the wars and civil strife for
political independence, the ravaging impact of poverty, underdevelopment
and diseases among billions of the poor demanded that world leaders face
other global and regional challenges, other than conflicts and terror.

This is the reason why South Africa brings to the international dialogue on
the future of the United Nations, not only the restructuring of the UN and
it’s organs, but also the transformation of the inequitable system of
global economic order, which concentrates the wealth in favour of the rich
nations at the expense of the poor ones.

This conspicuous absence of common concern for social justice for the
masses in the Third World continues to be in contradiction with the UN
Millennium Declaration which states that, among other things, and I quote:

      We have a collective responsibility to uphold the principles of human
      dignity, equality and equity at the global level. As leaders, we have
      a duty therefore to all the world’s people, especially the most
      vulnerable, in particular the children of the world to whom the future
      belongs.

Our position is and will continue to be that world peace and stability will
not be attained through the total exclusion of the war against poverty and
underdevelopment. The powerful and rich nations must have the political
will now to combine their interests with the needs of the powerless and the
poor nations. The challenges of the poor must now be the challenges of the
rich nations and the powerful - what President Mbeki, is his address to the
United Nations on 22 September 2004, New York, USA, referred to as a change
in the system of global governance. And, former President William Tolbert
saw this as a new consciousness emerging from the less developed countries.
However, both were strongly urging for a radical rethink of the diplomatic
tradition first propounded by Lord Palmerstone, and later Sir Winton
Churchill, then Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, that countries do not
have eternal enemies or perpetual friends, but that their interests are
eternal and perpetual. In other words, the strong must do what they will
and the weak must suffer what they must suffer.

In contrast, what we are saying now is that poverty and underdevelopment
should be eternal and perpetual to both the powerful and the powerless
nations. A significant part of the answer, we believe, lies in the
restructuring and the revitalisation of the UN and it’s organs. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, peacekeeping remains the overriding concern
of the United Nations and its endeavours to perform its task given to it
after World War II. In addition, the United Nations and its family of
agencies is engaged in a large variety of other activities, some for which
it has been awarded several Noble Peace Prizes over the years. One of such
UN’s activities is the alleviation of poverty and economic development.

According to the UN’s own assessment of its achievements, more attention
and resources have been devoted to the promotion of development of human
skills and potential; and disbursements, including loans and grants, amount
to more than US$10 billion. The United Nations’ Development Programme,
UNDP, supports more than 5 000 agricultural projects worldwide with a
budget of US$1,3 billion. The World Bank has given out US$333 billion in
loans for development since 1946.

Unicef spends more than US$800 million a year on nutrition, health care,
basic education, immunisation etc in 138 countries. Since 1951 the UN High
Commissioner has aided more than 30 million refugees, about half of whom
are women and children. The Africa Project Development Facility has
financed small businesses in 25 countries, completed 130 projects with an
investment of US$233 million and created 13 000 new jobs.

Unifem, that is the United Nations Development Fund for Women, and the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
have supported programmes and projects to improve the quality of life of
women in more than 100 countries. These statistics are provided by the UN
itself. However, the question is: Is this enough, particularly when we
consider the fact that the world is populated by 6 billion people, two-
thirds of whom - and that means 4 billion - live in poverty?

Many of the poor are to be found in areas of conflict, or where there has
been conflict either between nations or within nations. Africa is not
spared this scourge. Despite the numerous UN aid programmes, and as
correctly noted by the ANC conference held in Stellenbosch in 2002, I
quote:

  The world remains divided between the rich developed nations and the poor
  developing nations. This gap is widening, as is the gap between the rich
  and poor within all societies. The South African reality of a divided
  society, one section being rich and well-resourced, and the other poor
  and underresourced, reflects this international dichotomy.


At its 1997 Mafikeng conference, the ANC also noted that, and I quote:

  The process of globalisation is uneven, leading to a widening gap between
  the rich and the poor, both in developing and industrialised countries.


The policies of the free market have demonstrated themselves to be
hopelessly incapable of redistributing wealth in order to eradicate poverty
and disease, and to address the social basic needs of the majority of the
world population today. The African continent, particularly sub-Saharan
Africa benefits least from the process of globalisation. Instead, it has
experienced a general decline in living standards, and poverty is on the
increase.


One of the reasons cited for this worsening situation, that is the poor
becoming poorer, is that some UN member states, especially those in the
Security Council, lack the political will to resolve international and
national conflicts. President Thabo Mbeki, in his address to the recent UN
Assembly, noted that this world organisation has not produced the grand
results expected from its vision, a vision of, and I quote, “a world of
peace, free of war; a world characterised by shared prosperity, free of
poverty”. He attributed this failure to the UN’s inability to seriously
confront the difficult issues that relate to the uses and, perhaps, abuses
of power.

The African Union, meanwhile, is demonstrating to the world that where
there is political will, both international and national, conflicts can be
resolved, as demonstrated by the efforts to resolve conflicts in the DRC,
Burundi, Rwanda and elsewhere. With South Africa now venturing into one of
the worst conflicts in the world, between Israel and Palestine, there is
definitely hope for the poor in that region.

While all UN members are agreed that both terrorism and poverty are a
serious threat to the world’s population, however, emphasis by the powerful
and disempowered nations differs. The wealthy and powerful nations see
terrorism as a central principal threat and challenge and because they are
powerful, their prioritisation assumes a global context. The poor and
disempowered nations see poverty as the central principal threat and
challenge to humanity but do not have the means to directly respond to the
threat.

In conclusion then, the ANC is saying, rather than wealthy nations wielding
power over poor nations on the question of terrorism - I must emphasise
here that the ANC condemns terrorism - we believe that there should be a
multilateral campaign with a comprehensive programme to combat terrorism,
but also to address the root causes.

On multilateral institutions, the ANC notes that most do not serve the
interests of the poor and therefore there is a need to redefine the
mandates of these institutions. For example, the World Bank and the IMF
should focus on fighting poverty and assisting in building the economies of
the developing countries. The UN should restructure and democratise.

Lastly, the ANC believes that the process of globalisation can be used to
eradicate poverty if all nations strive towards achieving peace and
stability. Conflicts do result in displacement of people and, therefore,
they worsen the suffering of the poor. As presently structured and through
the way it functions, the UN cannot adequately address the real roots of
poverty. Therefore, it must transform. The developing world seeks
partnerships rather than conditional donor aid. I thank you. [Applause.]







Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, the debate over whether Africa deserves a seat
on the all-powerful United Nations Security Council is far more important
than a beauty contest and a struggle for prestige between some of Africa’s
pivotal states: South Africa, Nigeria, Egypt or Senegal and other aspiring
states. It is fundamentally about the nature of power in the world, about
legitimacy in the global order and giving a voice to the voiceless in world
affairs.

The notion of permanent member states on the Security Council stems
directly from the idea of winners and losers at the end of the Second World
War, but there has always been something wrong with this composition. What
should underline the restructuring process are common norms and values of
both national and international democratic governance, peace, security,
economic integration and collective security.

If the world order is to be stabilised and democratised, there will have to
be a greater effort at bringing about a rule-based order, an order that is
able to convince rich and poor and big and small to play by legitimately
arrived rules. It is only through such a rule-based multilateral order that
both the developed and developing countries can defend their interests and
their rights.

However, the UN is not the only organisation to be transformed. It is also
important to transform the broader global governance architecture. The
entire unaccountable Bretton Woods Institutions - the World Bank, the IMF,
the World Trade Organisation - should not only be brought back into the UN
fold, but these institutions too need transformation. The UN will have to
fight hard to reassert its own sovereignty and for the accountability of
these other bodies. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Geagte Voorsitter, die Verenigde Nasies het in 1945, net
na die Tweede Wêreldoorlog, tot stand gekom. Daarom is die Verenigde Nasies
grootliks ’n produk van die magsverhoudinge in die internasionale politiek
van daardie tyd. Veral die Veiligheidsraad, met sy vetoreg, illustreer dit
perfek.

Vandag is ons in ’n nuwe wêreld met nuwe magsverhoudinge. Kom ek gee vir u
een voorbeeld: Duitsland en Japan, wat na 1945 totaal onaanvaarbaar was as
die ou vyande, is vandag ekonomiese reuse wat nie geïgnoreer kan word as
daar oor internasionale ekonomiese aangeleenthede, in watter verhouding
ookal, gepraat word nie. Daarom is die VF Plus ten gunste van ’n
herstrukturering van die Verenigde Nasies om hierdie nuwe magsverhoudinge
weer te gee.

Ek dink egter ons moet eerlik met mekaar wees. Daar is twee werklikhede om
in ag te neem as ons werklik wil sukses hê uit ’n Suid-Afrikaanse oogpunt.
Die eerste werklikheid: Die Verenigde State van Amerika maak tans die
grootste finansiële bydrae tot die Verenigde Nasies en het ’n vetoreg in
die Veiligheidsraad. Sonder die samewerking van die Verenigde State sal die
Verenigde Nasies nie geherstruktureer kan word nie. Dis ’n harde
werklikheid wat ons nie kan ignoreer nie, veral nie in hierdie Huis waar
daar maklik kritiek uitgespreek word en aan Amerika klappe uitgedeel word
nie. Ons sal nie daarby verby kom nie.

Die tweede werklikheid: Afrika sal moet duidelikheid kry oor presies hoe
ons die Verenigde Nasies wil herstruktureer. Daar is tans baie verskillende
menings en baie verskillende standpunte. Uit die VF Plus se oogpunt, dink
ons nie dis verkeerd dat elke kontinent minstens sittingsregte op die
Veiligheidsraad kry nie. Ons dink ook nie dat dit verkeerd is dat daar nuwe
vetoregte kom nie – ook vir Afrika.

Die werklikheid is dan egter dat Afrika moet besluit presies hoe hy dit wil
hê. Wie gaan ons daar verteenwoordig? Is dit dan nou Nigerië, Egipte of
Senekal, en is ons strukture - en ek praat ook van die Pan-Afrikaanse
Parlement - al sover ontwikkel dat ons duidelikheid kan kry?

Daar is netnou gesê dat die Pan-Afrika Parlement se slagspreuk “One
Parliament, one voice” is. Die tweede werklikheid is dat as ons nie “one
voice” rondom die Verenigde Nasies se herstrukturering het nie, gaan die
wêreld ons ignoreer. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Hon Chairperson, the United Nations was established in
1945, just after the Second World War. That is why the United Nations is to
a large extent a product of the balance of the power in the international
politics of that time. The Security Council, with its veto rights,
illustrates this perfectly.

Today we live in a new world with a new balance of power. Let met give you
an example: Germany and Japan, who were completely unacceptable as the old
enemies after 1945, are today economic giants that cannot be ignored when
international economic affairs, in whatever relation, are mentioned. The FF
Plus is therefore in favour of restructuring the United Nations in order to
reflect the new balance of power.

However, I think we have to be honest with one another. There are two
realities that we have to consider if we really want to be successful from
a South African point of view.  The first reality: The United States of
America is currently the largest financial contributor to the United
Nations and has veto rights in the Security Council. Without the co-
operation of the United States the transformation of the United Nations
will not be possible. This is a hard reality that we cannot ignore, in
particular also in this House where America is easily criticised and
cuffed. We will not be able to get past this.

The second reality: Africa will have to get clarity on exactly how we want
to restructure the United Nations. At present there are many different
opinions and views. From the FF Plus’s point of view, we do not think it is
wrong that every continent should at least have the right to a seat on the
Security Council. We also do not think that it will be wrong if new veto
rights are to be established – also for Africa.

However, the reality is that Africa must then decide exactly how they want
it.  Who will represent us there?  Will it be Nigeria, Egypt or Senegal,
and are our structures – and I am also talking about the Pan-African
Parliament – advanced enough for us to get clarity on this?

It was mentioned just now that the Pan-African Parliament’s slogan is “One
Parliament, one voice”.  The second reality is that we will be ignored by
the world if we do not speak with “one voice” on the restructuring of the
United Nations. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms K R MAGAU: Chairperson, hon members, a week ago, when responding to a
parliamentary question on what role the government and the people of South
Africa must play in establishing a united movement of the people of the
world to create a better world, the hon President of South Africa said:

        Today we are faced with a world characterised by an uneven
          economic and social order; a world where the voice of the
    majority of the people of the world, who are also poor, is
    silenced by the voice of a powerful few. It is a world dominated
    by a single world power; a world where terrorism is not a far-
    fetched threat, but a reality that visits many innocent people,
    especially children and women.

          In this world, we are faced with illegal wars, suicide bombings,
        illegal regime changes and extra-judicial killings. This is a
    world where a tiny minority lives in extreme opulence, while the
    overwhelming majority ekes out a living of acute poverty.

My brief is about transforming or reforming the United Nations and its
agencies, and I believe the above quote from our own President gives us a
clear picture of the world today and why we should pursue debates on the
United Nations reform and its agencies.

The background information about the establishment of the United Nations
has already been provided by speakers before me. I will speak about the
United Nations Security Council and the need for it to be reformed in an
attempt to do away with the world that has been depicted above.

Briefly, I will talk about the composition of the United Nations Security
Council. It consists of 15 members of the United Nations and the following
countries are permanent members, that is the Republic of China, France,
Russia, Great Britain and America. The Assembly also elects 10 other
members of the United Nations to be nonpermanent members.

The Security Council’s primary responsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its functions are: To investigate any
dispute or situation that might lead to international friction, to
recommend methods of adjusting such disputes or terms of settlement and to
formulate plans for the establishment of a system to regulate armaments.

The Security Council has the noble ideals of bringing peace and security to
the world, but these noble ideals and objectives will never be realised as
long as the Security Council’s operations are based on the context that
their interventions should not in any way tamper with the interests or the
sphere of influence of the world’s powerful countries, as is the case
currently. The veto power enjoyed by these powerful countries defeat
democratic processes.

This then explains why the Security Council’s intervention is exclusive in
some cases. I’ll give an example. More than 800 000 innocent people died in
Rwanda in a hundred days while the world sat back and watched, but in the
Palestine and Israel situation, where the Security Council has another
interest, they are highly involved in making sure that the issues and the
problems there are resolved.

Representation in this Security Council is not calculated according to
membership. For example, developing countries now make up more than two
thirds of the total of the UN membership, but are grossly underrepresented
on the Security Council. This can be explained by the fact that many did
not exist as sovereign independent states at the time that the organisation
was formed. It is on this basis that developing countries argue that the
Security Council is not reflective of the current realities of the post-
Cold-War situation.

Therefore, representation of the developing countries in the Security
Council is now more important than ever before. The more representative the
council, the more legitimate its actions will seem and the easier it will
be to build consensus and have actions carried out.

To be able to respond to the challenges of the world today, the Security
Council also has to be democratised. To truly democratise the council, we
need to advocate for the creation of regional seats and also consider
expanding the Security Council to a total of about 26 members.

We therefore call for a reformed Security Council that has an increased
number of permanent seats, which will have improved transparency in its
decision-making, and will ensure equitable representation of all UN member
states. It should not be forgotten that the UN is an institution created by
its members, as is the Security Council.

Therefore, reinforcing the legitimacy of the UN will only be possible if
member states are determined to commit to the reform.
It is the commitment of member states, particularly the permanent members
of the council, that are likely to decide the future of the Security
Council in years to come. We plead to them that they must take a decision
that will benefit the majority of the world and that those nonpermanent
members should unite and pursue this objective, so that, in the years to
come, the face of the world, as stated by the President of South Africa is
changed for the betterment of the lives of the majority of the inhabitants
of the world. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairperson the restructuring of the United Nations and its
agencies to serve and protect the poor of the world is long overdue. Let it
be remembered that the United Nations was formed in 1945. The UN Security
Council still operates exactly as it did those many years ago.

The Security Council, which is the supreme organ of the United Nations,
must be reformed. It must represent all the regions of the world as
permanent members instead of confining its representation to only five
members with a veto. The other alternative is to have a security council,
which is elected every five years. It is important that Africa has one or
two seats on the Security Council if this organ remains as it is at
present.

In terms of providing global leadership, the UN has in recent years become
less effective in response to geopolitical issues. The hegemony of some
member states undermines the effectiveness and the role of the UN. The
perception that the UN rubberstamps decisions of a few countries, is
persisting.

The restructuring of the UN to benefit the poor of the world, who are the
majority, will help to give renewed legitimacy to this world body, which
countries like US have undermined. The restructuring of the UN is urgent
because it is perceived as irrelevant to the present world conditions. Its
credibility is terribly dented. The role of the United States government,
especially in Iraq, and the economic and military strength of some
countries that pursue their own interest does not help the image of the UN.
The United Nations, if not restructured and reformed to meet the needs of
all mankind today, will sooner than later collapse in the same manner its
predecessor, the League of Nations, did. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is a sad global reality that the
majority of humanity is plagued by poverty, unemployment, warfare and
bloodshed. It is the United Nations that serves to mediate, curtail and
restore. However, it is often not seen in such a positive light.

The issues regarding Afghanistan, Iraq, Israel, Palestine and even those of
the African continent, have been tabled by the United Nations, but
interventions have not always yielded positive results. The Minority Front
praises the UN efforts to attain peace globally and acknowledges its
efforts when South Africa was exposed to the ills of the apartheid regime,
but the reality of the world is that chaos prevails in many countries. The
consequences of chaos are poverty, starvation, disease and so much more.
The Minority Front feels that the UN has a very crucial role to play in the
alleviation of poverty globally.

It is felt that the UN needs to address poverty from the bottom up to
ensure a proper attack on poverty and not merely buttering the surface as
camouflage. The structure of the UN and its agencies plays a very crucial
role in advocating the effectiveness and efficiency of poverty alleviation
globally.

Here in Africa, Nepad’s efforts should reach the UN to assist in the
situation in Africa. However, the Minority Front feels that poverty
alleviation is a global responsibility and the UN is a sure way of
channelling the global commitment to poverty alleviation and, hopefully,
world peace. I thank you.

Ke a leboga modula-setulo, ka moka ba boletše, ke leboge gagologolo bao ba
boletšego lehono mo sehlogong se sa lehono seo Ntlo-Kgolo e se beilego ka
taba ye, ye kgolo ya United Nation. Ke leboge le gore re kwane ka polelo ya
rena gore ka moka ga rena re a dumelelana gore United Nation le makgotla a
yona ka moka a fetošwe gore dinyakwa tša batho ba lefase bao e lego gore ba
hlophegile gagolo ba fihlelelwa dinyakwa tša bona. Ke lebogile gagolo gore
re kwane ka moka ga rena bjalo ka ba tšea karolo gore re fihlelele moo.

Gape le boletše ka tlala e kgolo yeo e lego gona gomme e tseneletše batho
ba bantšhi ba mo ga borena mo Third World countries, le boletše ka malwetši
ao e lego gore a bakwa ke ditlala tšeo, le boletše ka bohlakišwa (lack of
development) bjoo bo lego gona, le boletše ka dintwa tšeo le bonago gore di
ka fedišwa fela ge United Nation e ka ema ya fetoga gomme ya prioritisa
programme tša yona gore e kgone go fihlelea dilo tšeo e lego gore ke di
nyakwa tša batho ba bantšhi. Empa, go nale o tee fela yoo e lego gore o
dumelelane le rena a bolela ka multilateralism. Ge a bolela ka yona
multilateralism o e dumetše empa ge a e dumela a boela gape a re America le
UK ge di tsena mola Iraq di ile tša tsena bjalo, ebile a di hlohleletša
gobane di be dišarakantšhwa ke batho bao ba lego ka mo gare ga United
Nation. Ga bjalo, ke a tshepa gore ga se ka mokgwa woo re tlilego go thekga
multilateralism ka gona. Multilateralism ke gore ka moka ga rena re tšee…

[Mr K O BAPELA: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to thank mostly those
who have already spoken on today’s topic as tabled by the National Assembly
on the issue of the United Nations. I would also like to express my thanks
for the fact that, through our debate, we all agree that the United Nations
and all its organs must be changed so that the needs of the people who
suffered the most are met. I am very grateful that we have agreed as
stakeholders so as to reach this stage.

You also spoke about the poverty that has affected most of our people in
Third World countries, the diseases it has caused there, the slavery there
and the wars that could easily be stopped if only the United Nations could
change and prioritise its programmes to cater for most people’s needs.
However, there is only one person who agreed with us on multilateralism. He
agreed when we spoke about it, but he went on to say that it was the same
method as the one that America and the United Kingdom used to invade Iraq,
and even encouraged it because people within the United Nations were
disrupting it. For now I believe that it is not the way we are going to
support multilateralism. Multilateralism is that all of us should take a .
. .]

. . . decision for the common purpose of the world and ensure therefore
that we act on that particular common purpose. No country should be allowed
to act unilaterally, however powerful it may be, unless it goes through the
United Nations. That is the only point that I wanted to remark on and to
say I do not think it was in order. In fact, I think it was out of order. I
thank you.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:34.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 4 November
         2004:


         (i)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66B - 2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 76)

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 4 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 161, classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (i)     Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

National Assembly

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by Council on 4
         November 2004 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
         proposed amendments:


         (i)     Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist
              and Related Activities Bill [B 12B - 2003 (Reprint)] (NA - 75)
              (for proposed amendments, see Announcements, Tablings and
              Committee Reports, 2 November 2004, p 1075).

              The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Safety and Security of the National Assembly for a report on
              the amendments proposed by the Council.

2.    Referrals to Committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and report:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 - National
              Treasury for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2003-2004
              [RP 141-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for
              Public Deposits for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics
              South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 for
              2003-2004 [RP 163-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Reserve Bank for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
              Intelligence Centre for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              189-2004].

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investments
              Commissioners for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              99-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank
              for 2004.

         (b)     The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve
              Bank on 24 August 2004.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Minerals and Energy. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Electricity
              Distribution Industry Holdings (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 - Department of
              Minerals and Energy for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              85-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
              (CEF) Group of Companies for 2003-2004, including the Reports
              of the Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 132-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Diamond Board (SADB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 194-2004].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts and the Ad Hoc Committee on the Office of the
         Auditor-General for consideration and report:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
         General for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 177-2004].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Department of
              Health for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2003-2004
              [RP 179-2000].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical
              Schemes for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 135-
              2004].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government. The Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee
         on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 - Department of
              Provincial and Local Government for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 5 for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
              Government Association (SALGA) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal
              Demarcation Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              165-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
              Traditional Leaders for 2003-2004.


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Provincial and Local Government and the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements to be referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
         Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
         Linguistic Communities for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 167-
         2004].


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Works. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
         Trust (IDT) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 86-2004].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry. The Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 143-2004].


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of The Presidency for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 180-2004].


     (11)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Department of
              Agriculture for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2003-2004
              [RP 186-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 - Department of
              Land Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for
              2003-2004 [RP 168-2004].


     (12)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Quality Institute for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
              Administration Commission of South Africa for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 188-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
              Empowerment Fund for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme
              for Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              2003-2004.

         (e)     Annual Report of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of
              Weapons of Mass Destruction for 2002-2003.


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance Regulatory
         Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December 2003.


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry and the Joint Monitoring Committee on the
         Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women:

         Report and Financial Statements of Technology for Women in
         Business (TWIB) for 2003-2004.


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration. The Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the South African Management
         Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 127-2004].


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Service and Administration and the Portfolio Committee on
         Foreign Affairs:

         Report of the Public Service Commission on the Investigation into
         the Appointment of Professional Cubans in the South African Public
         Service.


     (17)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Public Enterprises. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 - Department of Public
         Enterprises for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2003-2004 [RP
         143-2004].


     (18)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Transport. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 157-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
              Navigation Services Company Limited for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company
              South Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport
              Fund (UTF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 191-
              2004].

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
              Transport Agency for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP
              27-2004].

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company
              South Africa and Air Navigation Services Company Ltd for 2003-
              2004.


     (19)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of
         Correctional Services for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2003-
         2004 [RP 192-2004].


     (20)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Housing. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Department of
              Housing for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2003-2004
              [RP 125-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan
              Fund (RHLF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing
              Solutions (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
              the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing
              Foundation for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing
              Finance Corporation Limited for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004.

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban and
              Reconstruction Agency (NURCHA) for 2003-2004.


     (21)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 - Department of
              Sport and Recreation for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for
              2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Sports Commission for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (22)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development. The Reports of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Department of
              Justice and Constitutional Development for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements of Vote 24 for 2003-2004 [RP 182-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Special
              Investigating Unit (SIU) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 128-2004].


     (23)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development:

         Government Notice No R.889 published in Government Gazette No
         26603 dated 10 July 2004: Designation of a body for the purpose of
         section 212(4)(a) and (8) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act
         No 51 of 1977).


     (24)   The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Letter from the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
              Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
              of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
              explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
              the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2003-2004.

         (b)     Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 1
              October 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
              of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
              (Act No 1 of 1959), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
              Annual Report of Arivia.kom for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Letter from the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
              dated 23 September 2004 to the Speaker of the National
              Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance
              Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1959), explaining the delay
              in the tabling of the Annual Report of Inala Farms for the
              year ended February 2004.

         (d)     Letter from the Minister of Health dated 10 September 2004
              to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
              65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
              of 1959), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
              Report of the National Health Laboratory Services for 2002-
              2003 and 2003-2004.

         (e)     Letter from the Minister of Health dated 5 October 2004 to
              the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
              65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
              of 1959), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
              Report of the Department of Health for 2003-2004.

         (f)     Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 28 September
              2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
              section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
              (Act No 1 of 1959), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
              Annual Report of the Government Employees Pension Fund for
              2002-2003 and 2003-2004.

         (g)     Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 19
              October 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
              of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
              (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
              Annual Report of the Department of Social Development for 2003-
              2004.

         (h)     Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 13 October 2004
              to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
              65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1
              of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
              Report of the Public Investment Commissioners for 2003-2004.

         (i)     Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 21
              October 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms
              of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
              (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the
              Annual Report of the National Development Agency (NDA) for
              2003-2004.


     (25)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 - Department of Arts
         and Culture for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2003-2004.


     (26)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

         The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
         September 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
         Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
         National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Burundi.


     (27)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 - Department of Home
         Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 4 for 2003-2004 [RP 175-2004].


     (28)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour. The Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of National Economic Development
         and Labour Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (29)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:

         Annual Review of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration
         of Public Office-Bearers, 2004.


     (30)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher Education
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (31)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Education:


         (a)     Government Notice No 983 published in Government Gazette
              No 26692 dated 18 August 2004: Appointment of a replacement to
              serve as a member of the South African Qualifications
              Authority (SAQA) in terms of section 4(4) of the South African
              Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).

         (b)     Government Notice No 285 published in Government Gazette
              No 26119 dated 3 March 2004: Appointment of members to serve
              on the proposed management structures with the aim of
              developing additional subjects to be included in the National
              Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of the
              National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and
              the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

         (c)     Government Notice No 995 published in Government Gazette
              No 26711 dated 23 August 2004: Amendment to the names of
              members to serve on the Ministerial Project Committee and
              Associated Subject Working Groups for the development of
              subject statements to be included in the National Curriculum
              Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of the National
              Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette
              No 26767 dated 8 September 2004: Appointment of members to
              serve on the proposed subject working groups in terms of the
              National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and
              the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

         (e)     Government Notice No 1080 published in Government Gazette
              No 26788 dated 15 September 2004: The development of a
              National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) - Second
              phase: Call for written submissions from the Stakeholder
              bodies and members of the public in terms of the National
              Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).

         (f)     Government Notice No 981 published in Government Gazette
              No 26690 dated 18 August 2004: Extension of the term of office
              of the current members serving on the Second South African
              Qualifications Authority for the period 26 April 2004 until 26
              October 2004 in terms of the South African Qualifications
              Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).

         (g)     Government Notice No 982 published in Government Gazette
              No 26691 dated 18 August 2004: Calling for nomination of
              persons to serve as members on the Third South African
              Qualifications Authority for the period 27 October 2004 until
              26 October 2007 in terms of the South African Qualifications
              Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).

         (h)     Government Notice No 820 published in Government Gazette
              No 26560 dated 8 July 2004: National Policy regarding further
              Education and Training programmes: Approval of Additional
              Languages as National Education Policy to be listed in the
              National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms
              of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996)
              and the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

         (i)     Government Notice No 1081 published in Government Gazette
              No 26789 dated 17 September 2004: National Policy regarding
              further Education and Training programmes: Approval of the
              draft policy document, National Policy on the Conduct,
              Administration and Management of the Assessment of the Senior
              Certificate as National Education Policy in terms of the
              National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and
              the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


     (32)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Communications. The Reports of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements for Vote 27 - Department
              of Communications for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for
              2003-2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International
              Marketing Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              174-2004].


     (33)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Social Development. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 - Department of Social
         Development for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2003-2004 [RP
         198-2004].


     (34)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry:


         (a)     Government Notice No 1012 published in Government Gazette
              No 26731 dated 27 August 2004: Notice of list of protected
              tree species under the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84
              of 1998).

         (b)     Government Notice No 1031 published in Government Gazette
              No 26749 dated 3 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of
              water for agricultural use and for domestic and industrial use
              from the Gamtoos River Government Water Scheme (The Kouga Dam
              and the Gamtoos Canal) in the Fish-to-Tsitsikamma Water
              Management Area (WMA 15) in the Eastern Cape Province, in
              terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (c)     Government Notice No 1042 published in Government Gazette
              No 26752 dated 10 September 2004: Correction notice in respect
              of lists of protected tree species in terms of the National
              Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette
              No 26807 dated 17 September 2004: Notice to protect a tree in
              terms of section 12 of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No
              84 of 1998).

         (e)     Government Notice No 1098 published in Government Gazette
              No 26799 dated 23 September 2004: Water Research Fund: Rates
              and Charges in terms of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No
              34 of 1971).

         (f)     Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette
              No 26799 dated 23 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of
              surface water for agricultural purposes and urban and
              industrial purposes from any resource in the catchment of the
              Loskop Dam (Secondary Catchment B1 and B2) in terms of the
              National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (g)     Government Notice No 1104 published in Government Gazette
              No 26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Upper
              Komati River Water User Association, Magisterial District of
              Belfast and Carolina, Mpumalanga Province, Water Management
              Area Number 5 in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No
              36 of 1998).

         (h)     Government Notice No 1105 published in Government Gazette
              No 26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Lower
              Modder River/Krugersdrift Water User Association, Districts of
              Boshof, Bloemfontein, Petrusberg and Jacobsdal, Province of
              the Free State, Water Management Area Number 13 in terms of
              the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (35)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Home Affairs for consideration:

         Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into
         Allegations of Undue Delay, Unlawful and Improper Conduct and
         Prejudice in the rendering of services at Braamfontein Refugee
         Reception Office (Now Rosettenville Premises).


     (36)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Foreign Affairs. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 - Department of Foreign
         Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2003-2004 [RP 203-2004].


TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Annual Report of Parliament, 2004, including the financial statements
     for the year ending 31 March 2004 and the Report of the Auditor-General
     thereon.

         Note: This Report replaces the "Annual Report of Parliament, 2003"
         tabled in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 31
         August 2004 (p 639 of the reprint of that ATC) as "Report and
         Financial Statements Parliament of the Republic of South Africa
         for 2003-2004", which contained technical errors and is
         accordingly withdrawn.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Adjustments
     Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 3
     November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 77), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC1104e


