---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 May 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-05-05
---

WEDNESDAY, 5 MAY 2004
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Madam Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the  next
sitting I will move:


  That the Council -


  (1) condemns in the strongest terms the blatant misuse of MEC7 forms  and
       the utter disregard of the Electoral Act that is taking place at  the
       municipal elections of Lekwa Teemane (Bloemhof Christiana) which took
       place on Wednesday, 5 May 2004;


  (2) notes that people who are  registered  in  other  municipalities  and
       provinces are being permitted to vote in direct contravention of  the
       electoral laws of this country;


  (3) further notes that this appears to  be  an  orchestrated  attempt  to
       gerrymander the results in favour of the majority party, the ANC; and


  (4) recognises that despite numerous requests to the IEC,  this  practice
       has continued unabated throughout the day.


  [Applause.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that at the  next  sitting
of the Council I shall move:
  That the Council -


  (1) notes that the Eastern Cape is becoming the most sought-after tourist
       destination in South Africa;


  (2) acknowledges that we must jealously protect our flora and  fauna  and
       especially our unspoilt beaches;


  (3) calls on the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to  state,
       as a matter of urgency, his and  his  department's  position  on  the
       proposed dune mining of the Pondoland coast; and


  (4) requests the Minister  to  state  whether  mining  rights  have  been
       granted to an Australian mining company.

[Applause.]

                          BRENDA FASSIE'S CONDITION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Kgoshi L M MOKOENA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (l) notes with jubilation the news report this morning that the health of
       South Africa's diva  and  the  icon  in  music,  Brenda  Fassie,  has
       improved;


  (2) further notes the reports that her condition has stabilised and  that
       she is now breathing on her  own,  without  the  assistance  of  life
       support systems;


  (3) also notes that this is  contrary  to  what  we  have  been  made  to
       believe, namely that she was already brain dead;


  (4) believes that it was through the prayers of South Africans  in  their
       large numbers and support shown by the general leadership that Brenda
       has recovered;


  (5) acknowledges the inspirational role  her  music  has  played  in  the
       liberation struggle resulting in some of  her  songs  such  as  "Good
       Black Women" and "Black  President"  being  banned  by  the  previous
       regime; and


  (6) calls upon all South Africans to  continue  praying  for  her  speedy
       recovery and on the media to report responsibly  in  this  period  of
       grief for the Fassie family and her music fans.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON AND PERMANENT DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with delight the appointment of Ms Joyce  Kgoali  and  Mr  M  J
       Mahlangu as Chairperson  and  Permanent  Deputy  Chairperson  of  the
       National Council of Provinces, respectively;


  (2) believes their appointments are in  recognition  of  the  outstanding
       contributions they have made in the activities of  the  Council  over
       the past few years, in  particular  the  role  they  have  played  in
       fostering  sound   intergovernmental   relations   and   co-operative
       governance and in promoting the ideals  of  participatory  democracy;
       and


  (3) congratulates the presiding officers on their appointment and  wishes
       them well in their new responsibilities.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          ELECTION VICTORY RESULTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes with delight the  emphatic  electoral  victory  scored  by  the
       African National Congress during the recent national election;


  (2) believes the results confirm that  South  Africans  from  across  all
       communities have  responded  positively  to  the  ANC's  call  for  a
       people's contract to build a better life for all; and


  (3) further believes the results are an expression of confidence not only
       in the achievements of the ANC during the first decade of freedom but
       also an expression of confidence by the masses that only the ANC  can
       sustain the struggle for the fulfilment of their  aspirations  during
       the next decade of freedom.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection? Is that  an  objection?
The motion is objected to and will appear on the Order Paper.

                  DONATION TO UNITED NATIONS FOOD PROGRAMME

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev  P  MOATSHE:  Chairperson,  allow  me  to  congratulate  you   on   your
appointment and for leading this House during this  time.  I  move   without
notice:


  That the Council -


  (1) notes our  ANC-led  Government's  unwavering  commitment  to  poverty
       alleviation and similar projects  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  through  a
       grant of R100 million to the United Nations after a request from  the
       UN Food Programme;


  (2) further notes that this donation follows on  an  allocation  of  R170
       million made last year that  is  to  be  utilised  to  stabilise  and
       improve agricultural production, the strengthening of livelihoods and
       to provide assistance to community-based projects;


  (3)  also  notes  that  this  humanitarian  gesture  by  our   Government
       demonstrates  our  collective  consciousness  as  a  people  of   the
       fluctuations in food production owing to erratic climatic conditions;
       and


  (4) acknowledges our Government's resolve to continue to devote time  and
       resources to assist our neighbours in ensuring  that  our  vision  of
       agricultural and social integration is indeed realised.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I have nothing against  the  three  motions  that
were moved. I stand to seek clarity. Is it  perhaps  procedural  that  if  a
motion without notice is moved other parties  could  also  be  consulted  so
that there would be no repetition or  any  conflict  of  ideas?  Thank  you,
Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, the hon member is talking  to  the
Chairperson and not to individuals. Can we agree that  the  matter  will  be
looked into and that we'll give the hon member a response  to  what  he  has
asked?

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                      REMOVAL OF ORDER FROM ORDER PAPER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu):  Chairperson,  I  move
without notice:


  That Order No 2 be removed from the Order Paper.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

         AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu):  Chairperson,  I  move
without notice:


  That the Council adopts the Rules of the National Council  of  Provinces,
  as amended.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, we oppose the motion to adopt the Rules,  as  they
have just been handed out to us. Many of the members of this House  are  new
members and we certainly have had no time to  look  at  these  Rules,  so  I
don't see how we can adopt them without even having  read  them.  Could  you
assist us, please?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, I think to ensure that we  are  able
to operate as a Council we have to have the Rules to guide us. You've got  a
copy of the  Rules.  We  are  going  to  convene  a  meeting  of  the  Rules
Committee, but for now we actually have  to  adopt  the  existing  Rules  to
ensure that we are able to move and do our work as the National  Council  of
Provinces.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, the document we have is an  amended  document,  so
it's not the existing Rules. It says "as amended in November 2003".  I  have
no problem if they're adopted subject to changes that may  occur  after  the
first meeting, but we certainly cannot give you a carte blanche adoption  of
Rules that we haven't studied and looked at as caucuses.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We actually have given a copy of the  Rules  to
each and every member of each and every political party in this  House.  The
Rules were amended by the previous Parliament.  This  necessitates  that  we
have a copy of the Rules to guide us as this House so that we  are  able  to
do our work. We're still going to meet to look into the Rules. That  is  the
procedure.
Mr V V Z WINDVOÃ«L:  Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to  move  that,  as
the hon member Mr Watson has indicated. Given the background  of  the  other
motion which was agreed to by the House, namely that we  suspend  the  other
Order concerning the establishment of committees, we don't  allow  a  vacuum
to exist in this august House in the meantime,  but  continue  operating  in
the interim using the Rules which  existed  for  the  second  term  of  this
institution until we have a formal establishment of  the  committees,  which
will also include the Rules Committee, in which all parties  will  have  the
right to participate, at which time we will look into those  Rules.  I  move
that we have an interim adoption of those Rules until they're  subjected  to
perusal by that committee, once it has been established.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Mr WindvoÃ«l. I thought it  was  very
clear that a motion had been moved with regard to the removal of Order No  2
until we have adopted the Rules so that we are able to operate as  a  House.
Therefore we are proceeding with our business  of  the  day.  I'm  sure,  Mr
Watson, you are satisfied with the explanation.

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: It has been adopted.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Chairperson,  I  would
like to move the draft resolution on the Order Paper  in  the  name  of  the
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, as follows:


  That the Council -


  (1) recognises that this year  marks  the  tenth  year  of  a  democratic
       parliament in South Africa;


  (2) recalls that on 10 May 1994, Mr Nelson Mandela was inaugurated as the
       first President of the democratic South Africa,  after  he  had  been
       elected unopposed by the National Assembly on 9 May; and


  (3) therefore resolves -


       (a)  to celebrate our 10 years of a democratic parliament; and


       (b)  subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly,  to  invite
           former President Nelson Mandela to address a  Joint  Sitting  of
           the Houses on 10 May, the day of inauguration 10 years  ago,  in
           order  to  launch  the  celebrations  marking   this   momentous
           historical milestone for democracy in our country.

I wish to propose as an amendment:


  That paragraph (3)(b) be substituted with the following:


  (a) subject to the concurrence of the National Assembly, to invite former
       President Nelson Mandela to address a Joint Sitting of the Houses  on
       10 May, the day of  his  inauguration  10  years  ago,  in  order  to
       commemorate 10 years of a democratic parliament.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there  any  objection  with  the  motion  as
amended?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on behalf of  the  official  Opposition,  I  would
like to support the motion as amended, fully.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, I am sure ...

Mr A WATSON: I would like to support the motion as amended.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I can see that the DA is quite  excited  to  be
in the House, and therefore we welcome you to the party. [Applause.]

Amendment agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion, as  amended,  agreed  to  in  accordance  with  section  65  of  the
Constitution, namely:


  That the Council -


  (1) recognises that this year  marks  the  tenth  year  of  a  democratic
       parliament in South Africa;


  (2) recalls that on 10 May 1994, Mr Nelson Mandela was inaugurated as the
       first President of the democratic South Africa,  after  he  had  been
       elected unopposed by the National Assembly on 9 May; and


  (3) therefore resolves


       (a)  to celebrate our 10 years of a democratic parliament; and


       (b)  subject to the concurrence of the National  Assembly  to  invite
           former President Nelson Mandela to address a  Joint  Sitting  of
           the Houses on 10 May, the day of his inauguration 10 years  ago,
           in order to commemorate ten years of a democratic parliament.


     APPOINTMENT OF MR ZINGILE ALFRED DINGANI AS SECRETARY TO PARLIAMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE  NCOP  (Mr  M  J  Mahlangu):  Chairperson,  on
behalf of the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, I  move  the
draft resolution printed in her name on the Order Paper, as follows:


  That the Council,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Chairperson  of  the
  National Council of Provinces and the Speaker of the  National  Assembly,
  appoints Mr Zingile Alfred Dingani as Secretary to Parliament with effect
  from 1 June 2004.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 14:24.


