---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-03
---

WEDNESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of
order. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: If you don’t mind my just indicating what order is before the
House, then we can deal with your point of order.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, are you suggesting that I
should stand up a little later? Will you advise me when you wish to hear
me?

The SPEAKER: Half a minute from now. Hon members, the first item on the
Order Paper are Questions to the Deputy President. Members are reminded
that they may press the “to talk” button at their desks if they wish to ask
a supplementary question. I need to remind hon members that we are allowed
only four supplementary questions and if, within your one minute, you first
want to make a speech, you are likely to forego the opportunity to ask a
further question. I find that sometimes members first make speeches and
then they still wish to ask a question as well. Be very careful of how far
you can stretch your one minute for a supplementary question. I will now
take the point of order from the hon Gibson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point of
order relates to the question paper for today. The Speaker wrote a letter
to the hon Ms Taljaard yesterday, stating that the sub judice rule was
applicable to question 11 on the Order Paper. It was out of order. Before
you rule formally on the matter, I would ask to address you and say that I
would respectfully disagree with the Speaker’s decision, if you were to
rule that Ms Taljaard’s question is out of order on the basis of it
contravening the sub judice rule.

The Deputy President is not an accused and he is not a witness in the trial
of Mr Shaik. In particular, there is no judicial decision pending about the
Deputy President’s reply to question 110 of 13 March 2003. There is also no
judicial decision pending concerning the Parliamentary ethics committee
hearing in 2003. The sub judice rule was introduced to prevent undue
influence of jury members. We do not have jury trials. The Rule as we have
in our guide to procedure quotes the Rule and says: This is a restriction,
which the House imposes on itself in order to avoid debate, which could
involve substantial danger of prejudice to proceedings before a court. The
rule must also now be interpreted as in the light of the protection to
freedom of expression in our Constitution. This was exactly the subject of
a Constitutional Court judgement in the State versus Mamobolo, where
Kriegler, J limited the rule to cases where:

      The offending conduct viewed contextually really was likely to damage
      the administration of justice.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon Gibson, I’d like you just to summarise your point
and rather submit the document that you are reading from. Really, the item
is actually not what we are dealing with at the moment, and I’d like to be
able to proceed. Just wrap up.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, this is a summary of the
points and I am referring to Judge Sachs who preferred a stricter test by
saying that:

       It must be likely to have an impact of a sufficiently serious and
       substantial nature to pose a real and direct threat to the
       administration of justice.

If the highest court in the land applies the rule in that way, there seems
to be no reason why Parliament should go way beyond that and accept a
qualification which, really, is much more restrictive than that of the
Constitutional Court.

From a practical point of view, by ruling the matter to be sub judice, and
the question to be out of order, the Speaker is in fact denying the Deputy
President the opportunity of clearing his name. [Interjections.] There is a
constant complaint…

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, please wrap up.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I am wrapping up, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Order! I have given the hon member an opportunity and I’d just
like him to wrap up.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Today provides the perfect opportunity
for the Deputy President to tell the public the facts, without in any way
affecting the outcome of the Shaikh trial, to which he is not a party. If
the Deputy President told Parliament itself or the ethics committee the
truth, then his answer today to part 1 would be, no. And his answer to part
(b) would also be, no. I therefore ask you on the basis of law and the
basis of practicality to reconsider the point, before you make a ruling.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, the Office of the Speaker very carefully
considered the issue of the question posed by hon Taljaard. Hon members, I
would not like to have an argument with you. That is the last thing I’d
like this House, that is, a debate between you and I. I have given hon
Gibson an opportunity to make his point and I am responding. I’d like you
to give me the respect that I expect from any other member of the House.

Hon Gibson, I have considered this issue very carefully. The basis of my
letter to the hon Taljaard is Rule 67 of the National Assembly, which is a
self-imposed rule by this House, in order for this House to be able to work
with the courts of this land on the basis of mutual respect and thus
allowing the courts the space to do their work. The question actually not
only just generally refers to the trial, in fact, it specifically mentions
a company and evidence that is arising from the trial. Although the Deputy
President is not the person who is on trial, the information dealt with in
the substance of the question, however, is something that is before the
court, pending a decision. On that basis I have ruled that question out of
order. That ruling stands and I would now like us to proceed.
[Applause.][Interjections.]


                                   RULING


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with the business of the
House, I’d like to deal with an outstanding ruling. On 14 September, during
a debate on black economic empowerment, Mr Douglas Gibson raised a point of
order concerning remarks made by the hon Deputy Minister of Minerals and
Energy, hon L M Xingwana, with reference to the hon Dr Nkem-Abonta. In his
intervention Mr Gibson contended that the Deputy Minister’s remarks
amounted to xenophobia. After having had the opportunity to study the
Hansard, I have to rule as follows. The Deputy Minister in responding to Dr
Nkem-Abonta said:

      I do think that the millions of black people who are suffering and who
      are poor where he comes from, need him.

Xenophobia is defined as the hatred or fear of foreigners. The Deputy
Minister’s reference to “where he comes from” does not suggest either. A
mere reference to a member’s country of origin, when it is not South
Africa, in itself is of no consequence, as the hon Gibson himself commented
when he raised his point of order. That being the case, I cannot agree that
the Deputy Minister’s remarks amounted to xenophobia. However, she went on
to say:

And I do think that he should not have run away.
This  is  personally  disparaging  of  the   hon   member,   and   therefore
unparliamentary. I therefore ask the hon Deputy Minister  to  withdraw  that
remark.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mama uSomlomo, bendingamazi umfowethu lo ukuba uvela phi. Bendisoloko
ndicinga ukuba uvela eMqanduli, kwanokuba akasagoduki ngexa abantu phaya
besidinga ngolona hlobo. Kungoko ke ndithe: “Masingabaleki madoda”.

Thina phaya ekhaya sinephulo lokunceda kwiindawo esisuka kuzo, elikhuthaza
ukuba thina balapha eRhawutini masiqokelele iisenti sihambe siye kutyala
phaya.(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Madam Speaker, I didn’t know where my brother came from. I have always
been under the impression that he is from Mqanduli, and that he has not
been back home at a time when the people needed him there the most.
Therefore it was in that context that I said: “Let’s not run away, man.”

Back home we have a plough back campaign, which encourages those of us who
are in Gauteng to send home some money.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order…

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: If that was any problem, I
withdraw it, Madam Speaker.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker that is fine. The Deputy Minister has
withdrawn it, but quite frankly, you asked her simply to withdraw the
remark. You did not give her an opportunity to make a long speech like
that. And that was my point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: She was clarifying the context to the House and that is
why I allowed her. She was just at the point where she wanted to withdraw
the remark, when you stood up. She has now withdrawn it. It is actually
unconditional. Thank you, Deputy Minister. [Applause.] And thank you for
responding at such short notice when we called you to give us an
opportunity to deal with the ruling.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION




Adv Z L MADASA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

 That the House –

    Should hold a debate on whether the size of this National Assembly
    should not in future be reduced from its current membership to ensure
    efficient, quality debates, cost-serving and better working conditions
    for members of Parliament.

Thank you [Interjections.]

Mr K D S DURR: Deputy Speaker, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the House, that I shall move:

    That the House - notes that –

      (1) heritage tourism can be described as the use of the built,
            natural and cultural environment for tourism purposes;

       (2) it may have its roots in prehistory, in legends, in our colonial
       and dominion periods as well as in post-colonial and current history;

(3) collectively, it provides tourist attractions to enrich the    fabric
     of a visit to South Africa, and to provide sustainable methods of
     preserving our culture that visitors can relate to;

(4) the House thus calls upon the government and the Department of
     Environmental Affairs and Tourism in association with Department of
     Arts and Culture to create an umbrella body that will seek to promote
     heritage tourism in its widest sense as a locomotive to tourism growth
     in South Africa in all its richness and complexity.

I thank you.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF PROTOCOL OF THE
                    COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE AFRICAN UNION


        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
    CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – PROTOCOL OF THE COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE
                                AFRICAN UNION


      CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF NOTICE FOR
    DESIGNATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM IN TERMS OF SECTION 2(4) OF CROSS-
                            BORDER INSOLVENCY ACT


  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF TREATY BETWEEN THE
    GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
                      REPUBLIC OF INDIA ON EXTRADITION


  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF TREATY BETWEEN THE
  GOVERNMENT OF REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
           OF INDIA ON MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Chairperson, thank you very much. May I just take the
opportunity of quickly welcoming the new face at the table, Mr Michael
Plaatjies. I trust that his stay here is going to be rather enjoyable. We
have today three protocols, as well as    designation in terms of the Cross-
Border Insolvency Act, which I hope to deal with in five minutes.

In terms of section 5(1)(d) of the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
one of the organs of the AU is the Court of Justice. The Protocol before
the House, by and large, establishes the court and defines its composition,
functions and powers. The court will have jurisdiction over, inter alia
over, all disputes arising from the Constitutive Act, the interpretation,
as well as the application of the Act, as well as all union treaties and
subsidiary instruments adopted by member states, as well as any question of
international law.

In addition section 19(2) allows the Assembly of the African Union to
confer on the courts power to assume jurisdiction over any dispute other
than those already mentioned.

The House will recall the protocol on the establishment of the African
Court on Human and People’s Rights, which was ratified a few months ago and
which has jurisdiction over human rights matters arising from the various
human rights protocols.

In the report of the committee, which is the second matter to be considered
today, the committee makes the point that there is a potential overlap of
areas of jurisdiction of the two courts. We note, however, that neither
court can assume appeal jurisdiction over the court and therefore recommend
that, as these courts both operate in the public international sphere, any
request by parties other than public international law subjects to submit
cases before these courts in question first be approved by Parliament
before they can be granted permission to do so. This is not an unusual
resolution of the House, Chairperson, because we have sanctioned such a
measure before when we ratified the protocol on the establishment of the
African Court on Human People’s Rights.

The next matter is the designation of the UK in terms of the Cross- Border
Insolvency Act. Here section 2(11)(b) of the Cross Border Insolvency Act
provides that the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development may
only designate a foreign state if she is satisfied that the laws of the
foreign state as they relate to proceedings under South African and
insolvency law justifies the application of the Act to foreign proceedings
in such state. In this case the mutuality provided by the British law is
considered sufficiently reciprocal to justify designating the UK as the
first country so designated in terms of this law. No doubt more such
countries will be designated in order to obtain full expression of the
intention of this House at the time when the Cross-Border Insolvency Act
was passed.

Finally there are the mutual legal assistance treaty and the extradition
treaty before the House. South Africa has mutual legal assistance treaties
in criminal matters with the following countries: Canada, the US, Lesotho,
Egypt, Algeria, Nigeria, France and China. Should the House concur with the
committee’s recommendations on the mutual legal assistance treaty and the
extradition treaty before us today, the Republic of India will be added to
this list in a historic event that will consolidate and formalise the
mutual co-operative relationship that has existed between these two
countries for a long time.

Speaker, I move that the House approves the protocols and approves the
report of the committee as they appear on the Order Paper. Thank you.
[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union approved.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development –
Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union adopted.

Notice for Designation of United Kingdom in terms of section 2(4) of Cross-
Border Insolvency Act approved.

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
Government of the Republic of India on Extradition approved.

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the Republic of India on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters approved.

The House adjourned at 17:23.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1) Ms B A Hogan has been elected Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Committee
         on Auditor-General with effect from 3 November 2004.

2.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 2 November 2004
         and transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12B - 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76).
         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly.

         Note: The Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 2
         November 2004 (p 1063) incorrectly stated that this Bill had been
         passed by the "National Assembly" on 2 November 2004.

3.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for consideration and report:


         (a)     World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on
              Tobacco Control, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
              Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the World Health Organisation
              (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert No 1 from ATC1103e


