---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-08
---

MONDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2004

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

               CONGRATULATIONS TO SOUTH AFRICAN SPORTS PEOPLE

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      congratulates -


        (a)      Hendrik Ramaala, whose victory in the New York Marathon
              yesterday put him amongst the foremost distance runners in
              the world;


        (b)      Retief Goosen, who continued the proud traditions of South
              African golfers by winning the Tour Championship in the
              United States yesterday; and


        (c)      the Springbok rugby team, whose victory against Wales on
              Saturday kept them on track to win their Grand Slam tour in
              Great Britain and Ireland; and


     2) acknowledges that their victories brought glory to  themselves  and
        honour to South Africa.


Agreed to.


        WITHDRAWAL OF MEMBER’S STATEMENT ON THE LATE DUMISANI MAKHAYE

                           (Personal Explanation)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with members’
statements, hon Mr Steyn has requested an opportunity to make a personal
explanation in respect of a statement he made in the House on 2 November
2004. I now give him that opportunity.

Mr A C STEYN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of personal
explanation. During the course of a member’s statement delivered by me in
this House, on 2 November 2004, in which I condemned the misuse of money
spent by the Gauteng Department of Housing in publishing an advertisement
in a newspaper, which paid tribute to the late MEC, Dumisani Makhaye, I
used certain words about the deceased, which, on reflection, I regret.

The point about the spending of public money could have been made without
reflecting negatively on the late Mr Makhaye, who was buried only a few
days prior to that day.

I, therefore, withdraw the personal remarks about the late Mr Makhaye and
express my regret at having upset those who loved and supported him.
[Applause.]




                             MEMBERS’STATEMENTS


           UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH HONORARY DOCTORATE AWARDED TO
                            THE LATE BRAM FISCHER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B G MOSALA (ANC): The recent announcement by the University of
Stellenbosch to award the late Bram Fischer with an honorary doctorate, is
commendable as an act of far-sightedness and a great contribution to the
process of national reconciliation.

The ANC welcomes the award as an initiative that will further engrave Bram
Fischer’s name in our national memory. This is an honour that Bram Fischer
greatly deserves. It is an honour that we, who today live in conditions of
democracy and peace, owe to all the heroes and heroines who, because of
their belief in freedom and justice, were forced to endure apartheid
persecution.

If media reports are true that DA’s Delport is among those seeking to urge
the university to revoke its decision, the DA then needs to clarify to the
people of South Africa its position towards racism and those who fought
against it.

To the people of our country, Bram Fischer stands as an icon of peace that
speaks to the shared destiny of our diverse but united people. The ANC
commends the University of Stellenbosch on deciding to award an honorary
doctorate to Bram Fischer. We salute the university for joining the
people’s contract, nurturing and entrenching the spirit of national
reconciliation in our country.




       EASTERN CAPE’S SCHOOL FEEDING SCHEME CURTAILED DUE TO FINANCIAL
                                MISMANAGEMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H ZILLE (DA): Chairperson, the DA deplores the fact that school feeding
has been drastically curtailed in the Eastern Cape, due to financial
mismanagement in that province. This affects 950 000 children who depend on
school feeding for protein supplement and other foods that are no longer
being delivered because suppliers have not been paid for up to nine months.
The Eastern Cape reportedly owes them almost R50 million.

Following a July meeting with the Eastern Cape Premier, Nosimo Balindlela,
the suppliers undertook to continue deliveries at their own cost in return
for the Premier’s commitment that the amount owed would be paid. Nothing
came of this.

Furthermore, in August, Minister Naledi Pandor gave assurances in the NCOP,
that the suppliers’ claims for the second term had been paid and that
claims during the third term would be paid with a 14-day turnaround period.
It is a matter of extreme seriousness that the Minister was clearly
misinformed. By the end of the third term, hardly any claims had been paid
and the suppliers were owed far more than they had been when they met
Premier Balindlela in July. Suppliers cannot afford to subsidise the scheme
any longer and have been forced to cease deliveries.

The DA calls on the Minister of Education to take urgent hands-on steps to
ensure that the Eastern Cape Education Department pays its bills so that
our children can eat. [Applause.]

                  SUCCESSFUL VISIT OF NCOP TO KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, the visit of the NCOP to KwaZulu-Natal
was a success, which is highly appreciated. The NCOP fulfilled a promise
that was made by the government to people prior to the 2004 national
elections.

Irrespective of the opening welcoming remarks, based on what the previous
government of KwaZulu-Natal did, there were things that were mentioned
without verification, which are not a true reflection of the then
government.

Irrespective of that announcement, the whole visit got a positive response
and gave our people a sense of trust in their elected government.

The attendance of all dignitaries, including the President of the country,
seems to have elevated the status of the KwaZulu-Natal government.

We hope that all the promises made will be fulfilled in due course.


                         ARREST OF CORRUPT OFFICIALS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R Z NOGUMLA (ANC): Enkosi, Sekela Somlomo. Umbutho wesizwe, iAfrican
National Congress uyavuyiswa yimpumelelo efunyanwa ngamapolisa eli
loMzantsi Afrika, ngokuthi gqolo ibamba abarhwaphilizi. Kutsha nje kukho
isihlanu sonke sabantu esisandula ukuvalelwa kwezimnyama izisele, esinukwa
ngorhwaphilizo. Kwesisihlanu sibanjwe eMpuma koloni abathathu kubo
ngabaqeshwa bakarhulumente, esinye isibabini ngabahlali. Sithetha nje
amapolisa alele ekhondweni labanye abathathu abanukwa kwangesisifo sinye.
Esi sihlanu sithyolwa ngokubaneminwe emide nentliziyo ezingcolileyo
ngokuphathelelene nezimali zikarhulumente. Umbutho wesizwe iAfrican
National Congress wenza isibhambathiso nabemi beli lizwe sokuba sibambisene
singabantu siyakubulwa ubuqhophololo sibuncothule neengcambu zabo.
Ukubanjwa kwesisihlanu kuyayingqina loo nto. Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R Z NOGUMLA (ANC):  Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. The ANC as a
national organisation commends the SAPS for their success in apprehending
corrupt individuals. Recently five people were arrested following
allegations of their involvement in corrupt activities. Among these five
people that were arrested in the Eastern Cape, three were government
officials and two were community members. Police are following up and
tracing another three. These five individuals are alleged to have been
involved in fraudulent activities, driven by their impure hearts.

The ANC reaffirms its commitment, together with the citizens of this
country, to fight and uproot corruption. The recent arrest of the five
individuals is evidence of that. Thank you.]



                     IN MEMORY OF THE LATE GIBSON KENTE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T MADIKIZA (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM extends its
condolences to the family and friends of Gibson Kente, who passed away
yesterday.

Over the course of several decades, Gibson Kente touched the lives of
countless people with his plays and musicals. Not only is he credited with
the production of 23 plays and three television dramas, but he will also be
remembered as the founding father of township theatre.

Despite his own success and the acclaim he received, he did not hesitate to
assist and promote other artists. It is said that he trained 400 artists
over the years. He was a pioneer who served as an inspiration for the many
artists that came after him. Renowned for his work ethic and the
unflinching realism of his work, he set a standard that raised the quality
of South African theatre.

We salute Gibson Kente, an artist of exceptional talent, and today we also
salute Gibson Kente, the Aids activist. Last year, he announced, publicly,
his HIV status and called for greater awareness and less stigmatisation.
Like many others, he showed remarkable bravery and a sense of social
responsibility by sacrificing his privacy in order to strengthen society’s
response to this pandemic.

Rest in peace, Brother. Our lives are the poorer for your absence but the
richer for the legacy of your work. [Applause.]


           GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO REACH ITS ANTIRETROVIRAL TARGET

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P DE LILLE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, government originally stated
that 53 000 HIV-positive persons would be on antiretrovirals by March 2004.
President Thabo Mbeki then shifted this target to March 2005. This morning,
Dr Rose Malumba from the Department of Health said on SAFM that the target
set by President Mbeki would also not be achieved and it is not even clear
when we would reach this target.

In the latest update report, less than 10 000 people are currently
receiving antiretrovirals in South Africa. At this rate, the plan will fall
short of the target announced by President Thabo Mbeki, of 55 000 people on
antiretrovirals by March 2005; a target that is already more than 100 000
people less than the proposed plan.

Only the Western Cape, the Free State and Gauteng have made their rollout
plans available. The question is: When will the other six provinces be in a
position to make their rollout programmes available? It is clear to the ID
that the government is not performing as a result of bureaucratic and
financial bottlenecks, and the programme will rapidly lose credibility if
these bottlenecks are not addressed.

The ID calls on the government to address these serious problems, so that
the health professionals can perform their duties and South African lives
can be saved.


                CONCERN ABOUT YOUTH’S RAMPANT ABUSE OF DRUGS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP wants to express its concern
in the House today about the rampant abuse of drugs in our nation,
especially the rapid spread of the use of tik-tik in the Western Cape,
especially in our schools.

We are concerned that not enough is being done to save the many young lives
that are being destroyed by drugs. Our youth is the treasure of our nation
and we cannot allow their lives to be destroyed.

The ACDP calls upon the government, the church, organs of civil society and
the many community-based organisations to take a strong collective stand
and root out the scourge of drugs in our nation.


 UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING TO BE HELD IN NAIROBI, IN NOVEMBER
                                    2004
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M P MENTOR (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, this statement is on the United
Nations Security Council meeting that will take place in November 2004, in
Nairobi, focusing on the Great Lakes region.

The ANC takes note of the meeting of the United Nations Security Council
scheduled to take place towards the end of November in Nairobi, this very
year. This will be the first United Nations Security Council meeting to
take place in Africa, and among the important issues on the agenda will be
the question of peace in the Sudan and Somalia.

Whereas the involvement of the United Nations Security Council in pursuance
of lasting peace in the Great Lakes region is commendable, the ANC calls on
the United Nations Security Council to augment its efforts, aimed at
supporting the African Union, to deal with Pan-African challenges.

The ANC further calls on the United Nations to urgently seek permanent
solutions to the human tragedies that continue unabatedly in other conflict-
riddled parts of the globe, especially the Middle East and Western Sahara.

We call on the United Nations to urgently ensure the realisation of the
state of Palestine, which is a legitimate demand and a right to the people
of Palestine. [Applause.]


                      CENTRALISATION OF MUNICIPALITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Geagte Adjunkspeaker, die DA verwelkom premier Rasool
van die Wes-Kaap se standpunt Vrydag in die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies
dat provinsiale regering uitgebou moet word om sy regmatige grondwetlike
rol te vervul, en nie gereduseer moet word om maar net agentskapfunksies
vir armoedeverligting te verrig nie.

Dit is president Mbeki en die regering se plig om betekenis te gee aan die
grondwetlike rol van provinsies en om af te sien van die neiging om alles
te sentraliseer. Die DA stem saam dat provinsies behoorlik gefinansier moet
word om hulle in staat te stel om die rol van katalisator vir ekonomiese
groei en sosiale ontwikkeling te speel.

Provinsiale regerings is in ’n groot land soos Suid-Afrika by uitstek
geskik om streekontwikkeling te bevorder. Die DA wil ook hê dat provinsies
munisipaliteite moet steun en bemagtig, en verwerp die aksie dat die
sentrale departement nou by 12 munisipaliteite direk wil ingryp, in plaas
daarvan om die provinsies te bemagtig om dit te doen.

Die mislukking van sekere provinsiale ANC-regerings moet nie as ’n
verskoning gebruik word om provinsiale magte te sentraliseer nie. Daarom
verwelkom die DA president Mbeki se onderneming in die NRVP om verder
aandag te gee aan premier Rasool se toespraak. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the DA welcomes Premier Rasool of
the Western Cape’s position in the National Council of Provinces on Friday
that provincial government must be extended to fulfil its rightful
constitutional role and not be reduced to merely performing agency
functions for poverty relief.

It is the duty of President Mbeki and the government to give meaning to the
constitutional role of provinces and to relinquish the tendency to
centralise everything. The DA agrees that provinces should be properly
financed to enable them to play a catalytic role for economic growth and
social development.

In a large country like South Africa, provincial governments are notably
suited to promoting regional development. The DA also wants provinces to
support and empower municipalities, and rejects the fact that the central
department now wants to intervene directly in 12 municipalities, instead of
empowering the provinces to do so.

The failure of certain provincial ANC governments should not be used as an
excuse to centralise provincial powers. Therefore the DA welcomes President
Mbeki’s undertaking in the NCOP to pay further attention to Premier
Rasool’s speech. [Applause.]]


       HAVENSIGHT COMMUNITY FORUM FORMED IN CHATSWORTH, KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): A Havensight community forum has been formed in
Chatsworth, KwaZulu-Natal, which was initiated by Dr Naidoo, who has a
practice in the area. This forum works towards curbing crime in the area.

The forum comprises political parties, communities and various
stakeholders. Highjacking, mugging, theft and housebreaking were rated the
highest in this area, and I was also a victim. However, ever since this
forum has been formed, crime in the area has been zero-rated.

The forum will soon be inviting our national and provincial Safety and
Security Ministers to attend one of its meetings. The MF fully supports the
forum and advises all our hon MPs to create similar forums in their
communities, as this will help to curb crime and assist our police
department.



DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM AWARDED A PRIZE
                             (Member’s Statement)

Ms L L MABE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, my statement is about an award
that has been given to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
The ANC commends the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism on
recently being awarded a prize for the best financial management report in
the national departments category by the Southern African Institute of
Government Auditors. The Southern African Institute of Government Auditors’
annual public sector awards recognise the pursuit of excellence in annual
reports published by all national and provincial departments.

The ANC further congratulates other recipients of similar awards in other
categories and encourages all departments, nationally and provincially, to
ensure that high levels of financial practices are adhered to in compliance
with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. These awards are
further proof that the ANC’s commitment to clean, efficient and transparent
financial management is taking root in our public institutions. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]




            EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS ON MEDICINE PRICES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R COETZEE (DA): Madam Speaker, the government’s regulation of medicine
prices has been a disaster for customers and pharmacists alike. Before the
elections, when it was useful to do so, the Minister promised that medicine
prices would drop by between 40% and 70%. In fact, for almost all
customers, medicine prices have gone up.

Pharmacists simply cannot survive on the R26 dispensing fee. As a result,
they have exploited the badly drafted pricing regulations to charge
patients administration fees which medical aids refuse to cover. Patients
are now paying out of their own pockets and indications are that medical
aids will not pass on their savings to their customers. Moreover, almost
all pharmacies have stopped supplying patients of the Compensation
Commissioner for Occupational Injuries and Diseases because he takes too
long to pay. As a result, these patients are no longer being serviced by
the private sector and are now creating an additional burden on the public
sector.

I am sure that the Minister of Finance does not approve and I wonder if he
would care to make a statement on this. The Minister of Health should
accept that the regulations have failed in their objectives. She should
suspend them, and should begin again.





 SPORTING ACHIEVEMENTS BY SOUTH AFRICANS AND NEED FOR EQUITABLE PROVISION OF
                                 FACILITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M V NGEMA (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the IFP is proud to note that our
sportsmen and women have always done well and brought great pride to the
country when representing South Africa on the international stage. They are
great ambassadors and bring recognition to South Africa whenever they
compete.

This past weekend was no exception with South Africans competing and
excelling in various sporting codes in countries around the world. Some of
the achievements included the Springbok rugby team winning their test match
against Wales and Retief Goosen winning a golf tournament in the United
States, as well as Hendrick Ramaala winning the men’s title in the New York
Marathon. Ramaala is only the second South African to win this prestigious
race.

Whilst we applaud these achievements and hope that they will serve as a
source of inspiration to all South Africans, we do, however, believe that
if we are to continue to excel in the sporting arena and produce
sportspeople of the calibre of the above-mentioned, there should be a more
equitable provision of sporting facilities. We are particularly concerned
regarding the provision of sporting facilities in rural areas and hope that
the hon Minister and his department will take measures to rectify this. I
thank you.


                     RENEWED CONFIDENCE IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P BHENGU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, South African people, under the
leadership of the ANC, continue the march to a better life for all. We
continue to reach milestones on both political and economic fronts. With
regard to the fiscal and monetary policy level, the inflation and interest
rates are stable. The budget deficits are well within acceptable limits.
The international rating agency looks set to upgrade South Africa’s status.


As a result of all the above, the confidence of foreign investors has grown
over the past 10 years. Last April’s general elections were marked a
resounding success worldwide. This is a positive sign for our young yet
maturing democracy. In 10 years we have managed to hold three successful
elections with greater efficiency each time. As we have consistently served
our people over 92 years of our existence, the ANC recommits itself to
working with the people through the peoples’ contract to create work and
fight poverty. I thank you.


                             MINISTERS’RESPONSES



OUTSTANDING PAYMENTS FOR NUTRITION SCHEME IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Deputy Speaker, we share the concern
raised by the hon Zille in relation to the amounts outstanding to suppliers
for the nutrition scheme in the Eastern Cape. We wish to share with the
House that, as a result of the intervention by the hon Minister, all
backlogs in the Eastern Cape have been paid for.

The amount that appears to be referred to by the hon Zille is in relation
to the current cycle. The Department has been informed about these arrears
and a member from the national offices will be going down to the Eastern
Cape on Wednesday in order to ensure that this amount is promptly attended
to. We share the same anxiety and concerns.

We would like to share information with the House that, in the previous
cycle, there were difficulties that were experienced as a result of
failures on the part of suppliers to provide the department with account
numbers and the appropriate proof where requested by the department. Thank
you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Phambi kokuba siqalise ngoko, Sekela-
Somlomo, ngingathanda ukukhe ndithethe ngokubhekisele kulo mba sizive
sithukeka kakhulu ngawo singuKhongolo, wokurhuqwa phantsi kwesidima sikaMnu
Dumisani Makhaye, nathe uMhlekazi lo usandula kuhlala phantsi uphakamela
ukurhoxisa iindawo ezithile kwintetha yakhe. Kambe loo nto asikayiqwalaseli
singuKhongolo.

Kodwa endifuna ukuyiqonda kukuba kulaa milomo mininzi yoobawo uGibson,
yokuba masingathethi ngalaa mba kuba useza kugweba kuwo, ngaba emva
kokurhoxa kwelungu siseza na isigwebo sakhe? Ndibuziswa kukuba ndingathanda
ukuba ze sincedakale kwimiba enjengale kwixa elizayo.(Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Before we start with that, Deputy
Speaker, I would like to say something in relation to the matter which made
us, as the ANC, feel badly insulted, because of Mr Dumisani Makhaye’s
dignity which has been assailed. In this regard, the hon member who has
just sat down said he wanted to withdraw some aspects in his speech. In
fact, we have not yet given our attention, as the ANC.

But what I want to know is, based on the noise made by the hon Gibson and
others, whether we should not talk about that issue, because you are still
going to give a ruling on it. After a member has withdrawn, is there still
going to be a ruling? I ask this, because I would like this to help us,
should we have similar problems in future.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kuye kwasithatha isikhathi eside baba ukubhekana nalolu
daba abelusho lapha eNdlini. Kunezigaba ezimbili ezivele esitatimendeni
sakhe. Isitatimende sokuqala besikhuluma ngesikhangiso
ebesisephephandabeni, ebuza ukuthi imali eyenze lesi sikhangiso iphuma
kuphi na, futhi wathi ngabe kuthathwa le mali kwakhiwe ngayo izindlu.

Uma sibheka kule miThetho yenu yale Ndlu, ayikho into eyonakele ngokusho
njalo. Into engasiphathanga kahle eyokuthi akhulume ngoBaba uMakhaye
ngesikhathi iNingizimu Afrika isamkhalela. Ngakho, siye sakhuluma nabasizi
bePhalamende ukuthi basisize ekutholeni ukuthi yini ayishilo engahambelani
nemiThetho yePhalamende.

Kuye kwabonakala ukuthi ngempela uzwise izwe lonke ubuhlungu, hhayi thina
sodwa beqembu le-ANC, kodwa wonke umphakathi uphatheke kabi ngale nto
ayishilo. Njengoba ubonile nawe ukuthi akusibona abantu be-ANC bodwa abaye
basukuma baveza ukungajabuli. Yonke imibutho ekule Ndlu isukumile,
ngaphandle kwemibili nemithathu kuphela engasukumanga. Lokho kubonakalisa
ukuthi le nto izwise wonke umphakathi ubuhlungu.

Kunokuthi asukume ahoxise amazwi akhe, sibona ukuthi kungcono asukume acele
uxolo. Lokhu kuphuma kuKhongolose, angazi noma nifuna ukuthi lolu daba
siluqhube yini. Kodwa siye sabona ukuthi kungcono acele uxolo futhi ahoxise
amagama akhe ukuze idlule le ndaba. Asifuni nathi ukuthi ilokhu ikhulunywa
ngoba ilokhu isizwisa ubuhlungu.

Ngakho-ke besiyibeke ngalolo hlobo-ke, kodwa uma ningavumelani nendlela
esihambise ngayo ngineqiniso lokuthi yinto esingaphinda sibuyele kuyo.
Ngizoke ngibuze kulaba basizi bethu lapha eTafuleni ukuthi uma indaba ime
ngalolu hlobo kufanele ilungiswe kanjani.

Bayavumelana nami ukuthi udaba seludlulile kule Ndlu. Bacela ukuthi sicele
yonke iNdlu yamukele ukuthi ubaba uxolisile, nokuthi nathi singamalungu
aleli Phalamende singakhulumi amagama abuhlungu kubantu besebuhlungwini
obungaka. Ngakho, sizocela ukuthola kini nonke malungu ePhalamende ukuthi
niyakwemukela yini ukuthi ubaba uxolisile futhi wawahoxisa namagama
awashilo? (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[It took us quite a long time to consider the matter that he spoke about in
this House. His statement had two parts, the first one being about an
advertisement published in a newspaper. He asked where the funding for that
advertisement had come from. He further suggested that such funds should
have been used for housing projects.

If we look at the rules of this House, we see that there is nothing wrong
with such an utterance. What we did not like was that he spoke about the
late Mr Makhaye at a time when South Africa was still mourning his death.
Therefore, we have requested the Table Assistants to check for us  what it
was that the member said and whether it was in contravention of the Rules
of Parliament.

It appears that he has caused grief to the entire nation. This is not felt
by the members of the ANC only, but the entire nation felt aggrieved by
what the member said. As you have noted, it was not the ANC members only,
other members also stood up and expressed their sadness. Almost all the
parties present in this House stood up, except two or three parties that
did not stand up.

Instead of  withdrawing his words, we feel that he should rather apologise.
That is a proposal from the ANC, however. I do not know if you want us to
take this matter  further. Our view is that the member should apologise and
withdraw in order to have this matter resolved. We do not want this matter
to be discussed repeatedly because it arouses sorrow among us.

Therefore, we wish to resolve it in that manner. However, if you disagree
with our proposal, I believe we can revisit it at a later stage. I am going
to enquire from the Table Assistants as to the procedure to resolve a
matter of this nature.

They concur with me that this matter  is  already  off  the  table  in  this
House. They request us to plead with the House to  accept  that  the  member
did apologise, and further advise us as members of this  House  not  to  use
words that will cause harm to  other  people  while  they  are  experiencing
grief. Therefore, we want to check your feeling on this, to see if  the  hon
members accept that the hon member did apologise and withdraw.]

UMBHEXESHI WEQELA ELILAWULAYO: Uxolo, Sekela-Somlomo. Besicela ukuba khe
siphiwe ithuba kuba kusekho into erhuqa umrhaji kule nto. Xa yena esithi
yeyani na le nkcitho? – nto leyo eyabuzwa nguJudasi – asilwamkeli olo xolo
lunjalo kuba isesisithuko kuthi.

Ubomi bukaqabane abulingani nayo nayiphi na imali kuthi. Asimboni
enyanisekile kolo xolo lwakhe. Sifuna ukuba ame kwinto ayithethayo okanye
ayirhoxise yonke ngaphandle kwemiqathango. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: My apologies, Deputy Speaker. We
would like to ask that we be given a chance, because there is still
something provocative in this issue. When he says, “What is this expense
for?”  – that is what was said by Judas. We do not accept such an apology,
because it is still an insult to us.

The life of our comrade has no monetary value to us. We do not regard him
as being honest in his apology. We want him to stand by what he says, or
withdraw it totally, with no conditions.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: May I address you on this matter?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just before you address me . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I want to be helpful, I don’t want to be
difficult.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are always helpful, but let me seek the help
when I need it, Mr Gibson. I would like to check with the hon member, just
for his benefit, because the language spoken here was very tough. Even I,
with my limited Zulu, was struggling. But the impression that you gave the
House, or at least that I got – of course I stand to be corrected - was
that you withdrew unconditionally. Mr Steyn, for the record, your
withdrawal was unconditional?

Mr A C STEYN: Yes it was, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The withdrawal was unconditional, hon Chief Whip. I
think it may not have come across that way in the initial statement, but
now the matter is off the table. Does the House agree that this matter is
now completely off the table? [Interjections.] Thank you.




                       NATIONAL ENERGY REGULATOR BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move: That
the Bill, as amended by the Committee, be passed.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.


                    FINANCIAL SERVICES OMBUD SCHEMES BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the Financial
Services Ombud Schemes Bill we are discussing here today has been the
product of much consultation and robust debate. I like that word, “robust”.
Again, I acknowledge the hard work of the Portfolio Committee on Finance
under the chairpersonship of Dr Rob Davies. Both the staff in the National
Treasury and members of the Portfolio Committee on Finance have shared with
me that the Bill was very closely scrutinised.

The FISOS Bill, as it’s called now, aims to protect consumers of financial
services by expanding and strengthening the ombud scheme arrangements
designed to resolve their complaints in a quick and cost-effective manner.
It does so by regulating minimum standards for voluntary ombud scheme
arrangements in the financial services sector, such as the Ombudsman for
Banking Services, Long-Term Insurance Ombud and the Short-Term Insurance
Ombud. It also ensures that each and every consumer is protected by
establishing a statutory ombud to resolve complaints in those cases where a
voluntary scheme does not exist.

The Bill outlines criteria for the recognition of an ombud scheme. Ombud
schemes compliant with those criteria will be assessed by an independent
council established under the Bill. The council will stipulate minimum
criteria with which all ombud arrangements in the financial sector, both
current and in the future, will have to comply. We have incorporated the
transition mechanism to ensure that there is no disruption with regard to
current ombud arrangements. Any schemes currently operating will have a
period of 18 months subsequent to promulgation of the Bill in which to
obtain recognition.

Though the Bill provides for a systematic and regulated approach to the
establishment of an ombud scheme, at the nexus of the Bill - and indeed at
the centre of all ombud arrangements - lies the ideal of consumer
protection. An ombud exists in order to resolve a consumer’s complaint in
an expeditious and cost-efficient way, applying the principles of law.
Granting schemes recognition by the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill
ensures consumers´ peace of mind. Consumers can rest assured that the ombud
dealing with their complaint is independent, appropriately qualified and
empowered to do so.

Let me assure this House that the regulatory architecture of the financial
sector was carefully considered in crafting this Bill. In addition to the
voluntary ombud scheme arrangements, this Bill also dovetails with the
Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, which created the Ombud
for Financial Services Providers, who is fast becoming known in the market
as the “FAIS Ombud”. This Ombud for Financial Services Providers is
established by statute to deal with all advice-related complaints against
financial services providers and intermediaries.

The Bill clarifies that voluntary schemes will deal with all other matters
within their terms of reference for the particular industry sector they
serve. However, it was acknowledged that if a consumer had a complaint that
fell outside of the voluntary arrangement, and also outside the
jurisdiction of the Ombud for Financial Services Providers, a gap would
exist thereby prejudicing the consumer. The Financial Services Ombud
Schemes Bill remedies this deficiency by creating a statutory ombud to deal
with these cases.

For the purposes of cost-efficiency, the statutory ombud will be the Ombud
for Financial Services Providers operating under a different hat.
Therefore, no consumer complaint will slip through the cracks. To avoid
jurisdictional wrangles over which ombud should resolve a complaint, clear
demarcation of jurisdictions is spelt out in clause 13 of the Bill.
Moreover, ombud schemes and the council established under the Bill have a
duty to educate consumers as to the appropriate dispute resolution form
best suited and legally empowered to resolve their complaint.

Hon Chairperson, I hereby present the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill
[B20-2004] for consideration. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, during the era of colonialism and apartheid the
financial sector developed in this country was sophisticated in some
respects, but also largely orientated towards providing services for a
minority of corporate and high-income, mainly white, individuals.

The regulatory framework that emerged in tandem with this process was
essentially prudential in nature and aimed at protecting the integrity of
the financial system by prescribing things like capital adequacy ratios and
reporting requirements to the central bank. It is only in the last 10
years, since the establishment of our democratic government, that we have
seriously started to confront the challenges of laying the basis for more
effective protection of consumer rights and also for the promotion of
greater access to affordable financial services by low-income people.

The Bill before the House today, as the Minister explained just now, seeks
to strengthen the protection of the rights of consumers involved in, what
are very often, inherently unequal transactional arrangements with
financial institutions. The timeousness of such a measure has, I believe,
been underscored by the recent initiation of litigation in the United
States against the world’s largest insurance broking firm March and
McLennan. This firm stands accused of colluding with insurance companies to
inflate premiums instead of helping clients to get the best cover for the
lowest possible premiums. The 23 October edition of The Economist magazine
reports that this case in the United States will be heard in the context of
widespread concern that regulators have simply tolerated such dishonest and
even illegal activities.

The FISOS Bill before us today seeks to build on a number of recent
initiatives involving the establishment of both the voluntary ombud schemes
and ombud schemes established by laws passed through this Parliament. Over
the past few years - in the face of growing public awareness, community
campaigns like the financial sector coalition campaign and a degree of, but
not sufficient, consumer activism - voluntary ombud schemes have been
established in the banking and long-term and short-term insurance
industries.

At the same time the Pension Funds Act and the Financial Advisory and
Intermediary Services Act have established an adjudicator and an ombud
respectively with powers in areas of responsibility prescribed in those
Acts. All of these schemes have in common the provision of the service in
which disputes between customers and financial institutions can be referred
to someone who is supposed to be independent and impartial, who seeks to
resolve them by way of mediation, conciliation, recommendation or finally
by making a determination or a ruling.

Ombud processes cannot address the major structural challenges of
transformation of the financial sector. It is beyond the capacity of ombud
schemes to address issues like the generally high charges imposed by
financial institutions, the exclusion of poor people, the high
concentration in the sector and the lack of representivity in the ownership
patterns. But they do potentially offer customers who feel that they have
been, for example, wrongly charged, given incorrect advise or not paid what
they are due in terms of their contractual agreements, an opportunity to
take up these issues without having to resort to more costly litigation.

Generally, however, a consumer who is dissatisfied with an ombud ruling can
exercise the option of litigation, but the ombud rulings are in most
schemes binding on the industry players that subscribe to the scheme. The
Bill before us establishes the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Council,
which must confer recognition on any voluntary ombud scheme that is
permitted to operate in South Africa.

The Bill lays down a number of criteria for recognition of voluntary
schemes. These include the appointment of an ombud by a body that is not
controlled by the industry concerned, participation by the majority of
financial institutions in the scheme and the provision of effective
enforcement mechanisms for determination of the ombud.

The Council is also required to promote education of clients about the
availability of ombud services and, in terms of an amendment inserted at
the committee stage, recognised voluntary ombud schemes are required also
to contribute to such consumer education efforts.

One of the important principles entrenched in this Bill is that it
establishes a clear demarcation of the areas of responsibility between the
Pension Funds Adjudicator and the FAIS ombud on the one hand, and voluntary
schemes on the other. Voluntary schemes are prohibited from encroaching on
the areas of jurisdiction of ombud schemes established by statute.

In order to cater for cases which may not be covered by either of these
Acts, or by voluntary schemes, the FAIS ombud is given the authority to act
as a statutory ombud in any cases involving a financial institution defined
in other legislation or declared as such by the Minister after consulting
the Council and the Financial Services Board. This could potentially
include microlenders or mashonisas, as they are more properly known. This
is something I believe the Minister, together with his colleague the
Minister of Trade and Industry, need to seriously consider: Would the
inclusion of microlenders in the ambit of the scheme enhance protection of
many of the least protected and poorest in our country?

While the Bill provides for a clear demarcation of jurisdiction between
voluntary and statutory schemes, we have ensured that this will not create
any additional bureaucratic obstacles to consumers who cannot be expected
to know who has jurisdiction over what. The committee accepted proposals to
amend the Bill by including clauses requiring any ombud scheme that
receives a complaint on a matter over which it does not have jurisdiction,
to submit that complaint without undue delay to an ombud that does have the
requisite jurisdiction. In cases where there is uncertainty about
jurisdiction, the ombuds concerned are required to consult with the
statutory ombud who, if there is still disagreement, is given the authority
to make a determination, which decides who will deal with the matter.

The basic architecture then is one in which the consumer can approach any
ombud in the assurance that the complaint will, with his or her permission,
be submitted to the appropriate ombud. In the committee discussions we
heard from the Financial Services Board that there were discussions about
establishing a single call centre which anyone with a complaint could
contact. There is also the joint public education and awareness campaign,
which I mentioned earlier. And these two factors could contribute
significantly to promoting greater access to ombud services.

The Bill, I believe, will be an important step towards enhancing the
protection of the rights of consumers involved in transactions with
financial institutions. It will provide basic norms and standards for
voluntary schemes and enhance the role of the statutory ombud to cover
financial institutions not subject at this point to any other scheme. Ombud
schemes, as I said earlier, will not be able to resolve many of the major
structural challenges of transforming the financial sector, but they can
provide individual customers with a way of resolving their complaints in a
cost-effective and potentially much more beneficial manner.

The biggest challenge, I believe, in enhancing ombud schemes is probably in
promoting greater consumer awareness, particularly among the large numbers
of lower income customers of financial institutions. Those who have used
the services of ombuds to date have been a very small minority of aggrieved
clients. And although I do not have any precise information at hand, I will
venture to suggest that few of them are coming from the predominantly lower
income groups. This has to change, and I believe that this Bill offers us a
way forward in this regard. The ANC therefore will be supporting the
Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Chairperson, Minister, before I highlight some of the
concerns we have with the Bill, I would like to endorse the comments made
by the hon Davies in respect of microlending. This is certainly an area
that requires consistent and considerable policy work.

When we hear that the intention of a Bill is to protect consumer interests
we all agree solemnly that this is a laudable goal of public policy.
However, the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill – the FISOS Bill -
before the House today claims to take great strides in protecting consumer
interests and, at face value, appears to deserve a ringing endorsement. But
public policy can never be interrogated merely at face value. There are
clear conceptual, constitutional and principled concerns with the Bill
before the House today.

When the FAIS legislation – the Financial Advisory and Intermediary
Services Act - came before Parliament to place financial advice-related
complaints squarely in the remit of the FAIS ombud’s jurisdiction, there
was no indication at that stage from either the Treasury or the FSB that
the existing voluntary ombud schemes would therefore relinquish any
jurisdictional authority that they had exercised over financial advice-
related complaints in the past. And, it is quite clear that the concern
would be that the proceeded good faith of the voluntary ombuds, in dealing
with certain advice-related complaints, could be seen as ultra vires in
respect of their exercise and jurisdiction.

While there is a clear jurisdictional dispensation debate here that engaged
considerable time in the Portfolio Committee on Finance, as the hon Davies
has highlighted - and one would wish to discourage forums’ shopping in a
context of preciously few scarce regulatory resources - one can
legitimately ask whether the ultimate jurisdictional balance struck in this
Bill will be in the interests of consumers or not. This is an area of
considerable debate. This legislation arguably takes away choice from
consumers and imposes a rigid and near mechanistic dispute resolution and
remedy route dispensation on consumers.

In respect of the voluntary ombud schemes, the FISOS Bill giveth and taketh
away. It grants voluntary industry ombud schemes statutory recognition on
the one hand, thereby arguably enhancing their legal standing to resolve
consumer complaints, but, at the same time, it takes away clear areas of
their existing jurisdiction by making certain complaints the sole preserve
of the FAIS ombud. And, this is not simply because the FAIS ombud already
had that jurisdiction - Clause 14 of the Bill takes the existing
jurisdiction quite a bit further than only financial advice-related
complaints. One saw this in the debate on amending the long title of the
Bill.

While clear steps were taken by the FSB and the National Treasury to
ameliorate some of the conceptual concerns raised by MPs, we believe that
the National Treasury may have made the FAIS ombud’s new powers, acting
under his second hat, perhaps too wide, and one needs to take cognisance of
this particular fact in setting policy and watching the implementation of
the legislation.

The FISOS Bill seeks to give statutory recognition not only to the three
existing schemes, but also to the scheme that is to be created under the
provisions of the Security Services Bill. While the FISOS therefore aims to
enhance consumer protection, it could in fact achieve the exact opposite by
reducing consumer choice of remedies and ombuds. This is an arena for
debate, Minister.

The Bill not only takes all financial advice-related complaints and places
under them under the sole jurisdiction of the FAIS ombud, but, as I
indicated, it now makes them its sole jurisdiction and indeed widens the
scope of FAIS under hat number 2.

The Bill creates the council, housed in the FSB, a merely nominally
independent board that will set standards for the voluntary ombuds and,
controversially, could also act and be seen as a quasi-regulatory authority
beyond the mere setting of industry standards.

It is in this regard that the independence of the council is required at
all three levels in respect of independence from the FSB itself, in respect
of relative independence from the Minister and in respect of regulatory
capture by the industry. While the Bill passes muster in respect of
regulatory capture by the industry, the remaining areas of independence
remain problematic and potentially constitutionally problematic.

Minister, I can assure you that we will watch closely the implementation of
this legislation to see how this debate will pan out in respect of optimal
arrangements to be made for consumer protection.

It is regrettable that despite some of the areas of constitutionality we
were concerned with being addressed by the National Treasury and the State
Law Adviser – and I would like to thank the department and the State Law
Adviser in respect of the Minister’s delegated legislation – we are
unfortunately unable to support the Bill. Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Chairperson, the Bill achieves the critical objective of
ensuring that organisation and accountability in the ombud schemes industry
is developed as part of the transformation of the financial sector. The
Bill also promotes transparency and access in the industry through
accountable ombud schemes. The challenge will be to ensure that through
continuous education of the public key principles such as equity are
continuously implemented and demonstrated in the interests of the clients.

The complainant’s right of redress is insulated from the prescriptive legal
requirement. The complainant can also seek legal redress through judicial
avenues before and after the ombud or ombud schemes process. The role and
responsibilities of recognised schemes and statutory schemes is clarified.
The historical problem of customer confusion is dealt with in the Bill.
However, the organisation and the form of these arbiters or ombud schemes
have posed several challenges for the industry and clients that they are
meant to represent. One of the challenges has been their source of funding,
which comes mainly from the industry. That raises questions of conflict of
interest as well as the fact that most of these ombuds schemes are simply
voluntary without any statutory obligations. Their relationships with other
statutory ombuds have been unclear, for example on remedies that could be
sought and their status. The IFP, however, supports the Bill. Thank you.

Mr Y WANG: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members, the ID would like to
welcome and support this Bill. However, on that note, we would just like to
address the challenge that comes after we have had the debates, namely the
actual implementation of the Bill. Yesterday, when I talked to my
neighbour, a 65-year old pensioner, about today’s debate, I told him we
were going to talk about the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill. He
said: “The uhm . . .  what?” He doesn’t know what this Bill stands for.

The ID believes what is important is to educate the public. The
accessibility of such an ombud to the poorer community is also important. I
thank you all. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, the Minister has confirmed that this is
consumer protection, but there is a plethora of ombuds, also in the private
sector. People use the word so often, it is beginning to make one’s head
spin. In my view, Minister, there should be one free call number that the
public can dial for consumer protection in each province and which is
listed in the regional phonebooks. I’ve taken the trouble of looking at the
phonebooks and you can’t find them. There is no number in the regional
books. Sometimes one of them appears.

Usually consumer protection lies with the Department of Trade and Industry,
and as a concurrent competence it is often devolved to provinces along with
consumer courts. In the Western Cape, we have an Office of the Consumer
Protector with a free-call 0800 number, and our consumer courts will be up
and running by March next year. We now have about 26 offices in the rural
areas and townships, and there will be 30 by the end of the year.

All these offices have the various ombuds’ numbers and consumer personnel,
as well as information on consumer protection. These people who are known
in the communities are the people that will promote consumer awareness.
Soon they will publish an A-Z comprehensive consumer rights booklet.

Minister, the Micro Financial Regulatory Council is in Gauteng. The Banking
Ombud is also there. The National Credit Regulator is in Johannesburg. If
you’re in Umtata, or in King Williamstown, or on the East Rand, you just
don’t know where to find these people. How does the public access this
confusing maze? Some things are with the Minister of Finance, some are with
Trade and Industry and some are in the provinces.

We need to urgently, in the interests of consumer protection, reassign the
functions of the state departments and make the provinces the port of entry
for complaints. There must be the consumer protectors that exist in each
province. These, in turn, can direct complaints to the relevant ombud, or
department, wherever they find themselves in South Africa.

We should have one service provider in each province as the office
of the Consumer Protector. We support the legislation. [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Malibongwe Igama lamakhosikazi! [Praise the name of women!]
Madam Chair. The MF acknowledges that the interaction with financial
institutions, such as commercial and mutual banks, as well as insurance
companies, is extremely challenging for any client. The Financial Services
Ombud Schemes Bill aims to address and improve the situation.

However, there appears to be a number of glitches to this ombud that does
not really seem to serve the client adequately. Thus, noting the necessity
to ensure that clients’ interests are served and addressed effectively and
efficiently, the departments have introduced this Bill.

From its provisions it is evident that the Bill serves to create an
environment of organisational capacity, development and accountability of
the ombud schemes industry. The MF acknowledges the necessity for these
elements to ensure that the interests of clients are upheld by values that
are in line with our democracy that supports it. It is hoped that this Bill
will address this issue adequately to the benefit of all.

The MF supports the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Madam Chair, thank you for inviting me to participate in
this debate. Since the construction of a democratic society it has been the
centre of the governance and transformation process to aim at overcoming
the political, social and economic problems of the past, but the challenges
confronting us are too numerous to overcome in the short space of 10 years.

However, transformation goes beyond government. The values of
transformation must impact on the links between government, commerce and
industry, thereby deepening the ethos of the culture of the Freedom Charter
in institutions of the public and private sectors. Thus, the process of
transformation demands of us all an attitudinal change in style and mode of
service delivery that will eventually lead to a better life for all.

We know for a fact that the financial sector and its institutions that a
free South Africa inherited, were based on the values of colonialism,
racism and sexism. In the main, it was assumed that only white males were
able to exercise political, economic and social power in a system that
denied black people, in general, access to such power and influence. They
were only fit to serve and abide by the dictates of bureaucracy that served
to perpetuate the dual economy.

In order to transform this abhorrent system, a variety of policies has been
developed. However, at a practical level, we need to focus on inculcating a
culture of socioeconomic education, challenging the nightmare of
bureaucracy that was, and, in a significant number of instances still is,
loyal to the values of the old regime - both in the public and private
sectors.

Thus, interacting and engaging with financial institutions, such as
commercial banks, mutual banks and the insurance industry has always been
and remains a challenge for consumers or clients who historically were kept
ignorant of their basic consumer rights. It is in this context that we
welcome the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill that aims to make the
financial services industry more user friendly, accessible, transparent and
accountable.

In a financial industry there are three voluntary ombuds: the short-term
ombud, the long-term ombud and the banking adjudicator. The Pension Funds
Adjudicator is a statutory ombud and so are the FAIS ombuds. The ombuds in
each of these sectors were created to champion the cause of the consumer.
Yet, the majority of us either had no knowledge of their existence or did
not know how to secure access to their respective services.

In unpacking the role and the Office of the Ombud, we established that an
ombud is a person who is designated to an organisation or a scheme to
investigate individual complaints, problems and conflicts, and to mediate
their resolution or solution. An ombud acts independently, follows informal
fair and cost-effective procedures, and, where appropriate, applies the
principle of equity in resolving a complaint. Determination of decisions
must be enforceable.

It is therefore obvious that the Ombud must be competent and of independent
mind, so as to adjudicate complaints in a lawful and equitable manner.
Therefore, I cannot see how the hon Taljaard argues that this Bill can
backfire. It can only happen if there is a recognition by her that the
existing ombuds are dishonest in the deliberation of their activities. And
I dare say that she’s not saying so.

But why, when the ANC-led government is coming up with a Bill that will
advance the cause of the consumers, is the role of the ombud seen to be a
negative one? Does that mean that she too needs to go through a transition
period as far as the mind is concerned? [Laughter.]

She further argues that there was no knowledge as far as the voluntary
schemes were concerned, but the Chairperson of the Board of Short-Term
Insurance says in his annual report:

  The Board of the Ombud fully supports the basic premise of the FISOS
  Bill, which is to grant statutory recognition to the voluntary ombud
  scheme, which complies with certain minimum requirements.

So, effectively there is a track record of the board supporting it. But hon
Taljaard informs this House that the voluntary scheme did not have any
knowledge until the Bill was put forward to the House. I dare say, the hon
Taljaard is misleading us. [Interjections.]

Some of the challenges, as I’ve indicated, have been their source of
funding. Who have been funding the ombuds hitherto? It was the industry,
and, therefore, if you are questioning the future, question the present,
because it is as the hon chairperson of the portfolio committee had clearly
indicated, the present suggests that human beings are vulnerable and
therefore industry, to enhance its own position, will try to make inroads
to get those ombuds to champion their own cause.

What sort of monitoring mechanism is there? The Bill in front of us
provides checks and balances. It is presiding. Its aim is to do precisely
that, namely to check and balance the way forward in terms of consumer
protection.

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Did I hear the member say
that Ms Taljaard was misleading the House?

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Madam Chair, I simply said that Ms Taljaard indicated to
the House that the voluntary ombuds had no knowledge about it. The board
clearly said that they had knowledge and in-depth contact. Yes, I stand by
my guns.

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, could I address you further?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, you may. Hon member, will you be seated,
please?

Mr T D LEE: Chair, I’m definitely sure that I heard the member saying that
Ms Taljaard was misleading the House. He used those words. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: Hon member, on the point of order, I think if it has
been said that Ms Taljaard deliberately misled the House it would have been
problematic, but unintentionally it would not. [Applause.]

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Thank you, Madam Chair. So, let me continue. [Applause.]
The relationship with other statutory ombuds has been unclear and it has
caused client confusion, for example, on remedies that could be sought and
their status. So, the debate is an ongoing one as far as the status and the
credibility of an ombud is concerned.

The overall idea in the Bill is to create an environment of organisational
capacity, development and accountability in the ombud scheme industry so
that a client’s interests, within the financial sector, would be served
fairly and in an accountable manner. In that context, you need to support
this Bill, because the objective is clear, namely to try to protect the
consumers. And more importantly, you and I, how often have we gone to the
banks or to the insurance companies just to say that we did not read the
small print? Is that not misleading?

When they are signing you on, they will tell you a world of beautiful
things of how your future will be guaranteed. But when you decide to put in
a claim, they will refer you to the small print. So, you and I also need to
become very vigilant of this industry, because it is not in their interest
to ensure that all of us are paid our dues, because in that way, where is
their profit margin? So, I think we need to be very, very vigilant and move
forward.

Therefore, let me clearly say that the person who is sponsoring the ombud
must show where such person is to be found to empower the public on its
existence and how it functions.

Some of us have only come to understand today that there is an ombud in the
banking industry. The Bill makes consumers aware that there is an
independent expert available to investigate and mediate when disputes
occur. We need to be aware of this, and we need to take this message to our
people. But, historically, the apartheid regime has ensured that there is
no knowledge to be passed on to ensure that we can improve the quality of
our lives.

The scheme is more cost-effective than addressing a dispute in a court of
law. Often we go to the courts of law in a hurry, but if we make use of the
ombud, and if the ombud is worth its salt, it will try to ensure that you
do not use money as far as the law is concerned. It will try to intervene
on your behalf. But that does not mean that if you are unhappy with the
ombud you cannot go to a court of law. You can still continue. So, why
don’t we take advantage of that opportunity before the legal fraternity
exploits our back pocket?

Decisions are binding on subscribing members, but not on the consumer. So,
even if decisions are not binding on us effectively, it means that we must
take advantage of the loopholes. But it is not in the interest of the
industry to make the clients aware of them, and that is what this Bill is
all about. We must make sure that we take the message out to our people
that they have certain rights and that those rights are protected.

In short, I simply argue that this is a Bill that a number of role-players
have been fully aware of. There was an opportunity to make an intervention,
and, as far as the documentation in front of us and the annual reports
clearly indicate, all the voluntary groups have knowledge about it.
Secondly, we welcome this Bill, because it clearly indicates that the aim
is to make it easier for consumers to
lodge complaints about the poor or misleading services by banks, insurers
and other financial services providers. The ANC welcomes this Bill. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, let me express appreciation to all
members who have contributed to this debate. It is very clear that the
Bill, which otherwise might get lost in the amount of papers alone, has
evoked a lot of emotion and response. I am glad to see that the arguments
have continued through from the committee, and I think that the richness of
the debate is something that we must respond to going forward.

I would like to agree with the sentiments expressed by both the hon Davies
and the hon Taljaard about the need to try and include the microlenders who
are presently out there. We have now established a statutory ombud and it
is very important that we offer protection to the poorest South Africans
who need the cover. So, clearly it is an issue that we need to take up.

The second point I would like to draw attention to is the context. The hon
Durr has raised concerns about, firstly, the contactability of the various
protectors, but also about where we should vest consumer protection. I
think it is very important to recognise that all financial regulation has
one objective, which is the protection of the consumer.

So, whether we are talking about bank supervision, which presently is
vested in the Reserve Bank, or whether we are talking about financial
regulation of the nonbanking financial services industry, the objective of
both of these functions must be consumer protection.

I would like to believe that, as is the trend around the world, those
bodies would in some way continue to report to the Ministry of Finance. So,
I think the objective of offering protection through sound legislation,
sound regulation and accountable supervision is something by which we must
set greater store than where we locate this in terms of Ministries, and it
is important to see the statutory power against that backdrop.

I disagree with the hon Taljaard, in what is clearly her penultimate speech
in this House. The arguments she has raised here are the same that she made
in the committee. I think it would be a very sophisticated consumer who
could shop as she suggests. What we have here are statutory powers. We have
to ensure that the alignment primarily between the FAIS ombud and the FISOS
ombud is appropriate and that we understand how these things work at all
times.

I think she is also incorrect in asking that the supervision of the
Financial Services Board be separate from the Minister and from  regulatory
capture. The Minister must remain responsible to this House for ensuring
that consumers are protected. So, the extent of independence does not have
to be the same.

Ultimately, I think that the issues raised by the hon Wang and hon Durr
together must remain the objective. There is no point in us in this House
knowing about the legislation. What matters is that consumers know. What
matters even more is that the consumers know that they are protected.

What also matters is that the charlatans out there know that they are not
going to get away with anything. The statutory powers given in the
Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill must have that objective, but I think
the work of communication is what lies ahead. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA: The Bill will be sent to the NCOP for
concurrence. [Applause.]

            STUDY VISIT TO KWAZULU-NATAL, MPUMALANGA AND LIMPOPO

   (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
                                  Affairs)

Mr N H MASITHELA: Chairperson, pushing back the frontiers of poverty and
improving the quality of life for South Africans have been the commitment
and driving force behind the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
Affairs undertaking these visits. We wanted to ascertain whether the people
in those areas benefited from the programmes and policies of government.

The report we are presenting today emanates from the  journey  we  undertook
in August to KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and  Limpopo.  However,  we  hope  to
visit other provinces next year. The main purpose of  these  visits  was  to
monitor projects funded by the Department of Agriculture and  Land  Affairs.
Our focus was on land care and land restitution.

We chose land care projects, because we believe land care is the  centre  of
sustainable land use. It has also been one  of  the  key  rural  development
programmes of government since 1998.  For me, land care is a  vital  element
of an integrated sustainable rural development strategy for South Africa.

With regard to land restitution, we  wanted  to  ascertain  to  what  extent
transfer of land to our people contributes to a sustainable  livelihood  and
poverty reduction. Because the restitution process  is  entering  its  final
stages, we also had to check the progress up to that stage, so  as  to  make
some suggestions to government, as we are doing now.

Let me touch on the socioeconomic contributions  of  land  care  programmes.
Firstly, our  land  care  programme  is  about  encouraging  and  supporting
sustainable land use and practices. It also involves promoting  and  raising
awareness to develop resource conservation  ethics.  More  importantly,  for
me, it is a community-based and  government-supported  programme,  with  its
main  intention  to  improve  the   sustainability   of   the   agricultural
productivity system in South Africa.

Our land care programme addresses environmental issues, and its main aim  is
to  protect  the  future  of  environmental  resources,  with  the  specific
objective of optimising productivity and sustainability  of  resources,  and
thus bringing about greater productivity, food security,  job  creation  and
better quality of life for all.

This has been experienced in most of the projects that we have visited.  For
instance,  regarding  the  increase  and  yield  of  productivity,  Mlondozi
Management Project in Mpumalanga is a good example. There the  use  of  lime
resulted in increases from between 0,5 and 2 tons per hectare to  between  5
and 6 tons per hectare.  This increased productivity meant  a  high  surplus
of the product to  be  sold,  which  meant  money  in  the  pockets  of  the
communities.

Regarding job creation, another good example is the Lewatlatshimu land  care
project in Limpopo where 1 029 were employed, and they were paid  about  R35
a day as an allowance.

Regarding training and capacity building, when  implementing  this  project,
opportunities  arose  to  give   informal   and   accredited   training   to
communities. This training will provide them with skills, which will  be  to
their advantage if they seek permanent employment.  It  should  also  assist
with  job  creation,  as  well  as   entrepreneurial   opportunities,   thus
empowering them to enhance their skills for life.

The project helps to build partnerships among  the  public  sector,  private
sector and communities. In many of  the  projects  we  visited,  communities
were working together with government and commercial farmers.  In  this  way
they are creating opportunities for mentorship of new  farmers.  This  shows
that mentorship is not only about payment; it is also about creating a  good
relationship between commercial and emerging farmers for the  prosperity  of
the agricultural sector and the economic development of this country.

This provides evidence that land care projects have the potential  to  halve
poverty by 2015, thus enabling government or the country to meet the  United
Nations’ food security target. However, for this to be realised, there is  a
need for government to speedily address challenges that land  care  projects
are faced with. I just want to mention a few of these challenges: a lack  of
infrastructure and equipment, a lack of finance and a lack of access to  the
market.

In addition to the comprehensive  agricultural  support,  what  I  think  is
still needed is for the budget of  land  care  to  be  increased,  precisely
because these land care projects should actually reach  their  potential  to
create jobs and reduce poverty. While  we  call  for  the  increase  of  the
budget, we also call on the national and provincial  departments  to  ensure
that all the monies allocated for  these  projects  are  fully  utilised  to
avoid the R1,5 million rollover we experienced in KwaZulu-Natal.

Let  me  now  address  the  issue  of  restitution.  The  beneficiaries   of
restitution we visited were involved in various businesses,  such  as  dairy
farming, livestock, citrus farming, game  farming  and  many  other  farming
activities. It was very impressive to  notice  that  beneficiaries  of  this
restitution have initiated and diversified their  businesses  so  that  they
became sustainable. At the same time, it was heartening  to  recognise  that
some  of  these  projects  are  not  doing  well  because  of  a   lack   of
postsettlement support.

This situation leaves the impression that the land reform programme is  just
about land transfer and not about sustainable  productivity  and  land  use.
Even  though  the  Department  for  Agriculture   and   Land   Affairs   has
acknowledged that there is a need for postsettlement support, they can’t  do
anything, because most of their work is to hand over  land  to  people,  and
the rest of the work has to be done by the Department  for  Agriculture  and
Land Affairs.

For me this begs a question, cognisant  of  the  fact  that  government  has
Cabinet clusters. This situation suggests the following  question:  Wouldn’t
it be appropriate  now  for  government  to  reconsider,  for  the  sake  of
sustainable agrarian reform, amalgamating the two  departments  -  that  is,
the Department of Agriculture and the Department of  Land  Affairs  -  under
one Ministry? Anyway, they are under one Minister.

During our visit we came across a situation where some of the cases had  not
been finalised and had been delayed. A particular case was that of  Sandford
Farm in Mpumalanga, where owners and claimants were  frustrated  about  this
delay.  However,  the  explanation  we  received  from   the   Land   Claims
Commissioner was that the delays  were  caused  by  farmers  who  wanted  to
undermine the land reform process in this country by charging high prices.

Based on all the information we  received  on  this  particular  matter,  we
requested the department, the officials and these farmers  to  meet  and  to
report  to  the  portfolio  committee  as  soon  as  possible.  However,  we
recognised that the problem was not only that. The  other  problem  is  that
there is a lack of communication between the  department,  the  sellers  and
the claimants. In my view, this matter needs speedy attention.

Because of the complexity of  claims  in  rural  areas,  let  me  take  this
opportunity to caution all South  Africans  that  while  the  commission  is
committed to meeting the deadlines of restitution, as dictated  or  directed
by the President, there are, however, some realities that we  have  to  take
cognisance of. For instance, only 6 372 rural claims have  been  claimed  so
far, and 9 000 claims are yet to be finalised. This means that it  may  take
the commission more than a year to settle the  remaining  rural  claims.  In
the light of this and the complexity involved in settling the rural  claims,
it  may  be  advisable  for  government  to  reconsider  the   deadline   of
particularly rural communities.

Having said this, we should applaud the  announcement  by  the  Minister  of
Finance with regard to the budget increase for restitution  two  weeks  ago.
In the same breath, we make an appeal to government to further increase  the
budget for the next financial year so that the  commission  can  settle  the
remaining claims.

While on this issue, let me categorically say that it  is  unacceptable  for
the commission to be extravagant.  For instance, the  issues  that  we  read
about in the newspapers, namely that the government pays exorbitant  amounts
of money, particularly in Mpumalanga, will undermine the  whole  process  of
land reform  in  this  country.  At  the  same  time,  let  me  commend  the
government  for  reacting  swiftly  on  such  allegations   by   immediately
conducting an investigation to check the validity of these claims.  We  hope
to get a response in due course.

With regard to the high prices for land, the committee recommends  that  the
government should ensure that a proper valuation is done to avoid  excessive
amounts of money being paid, particularly to land speculators. Let me  plead
to these people to stop doing what they are doing, because time  is  not  on
our side. We, in the agricultural sector, will  not  allow  such  people  to
drag the process of land reform in this country, because that  might  create
a problem that will be difficult  for  us  to  deal  with.  Co-operation  is
therefore an issue that we all need and that we will all benefit from.

One critical issue we observed during the visit is that claimants opted  for
monetary compensation. For instance, at the  Engadini  project  in  KwaZulu-
Natal 100 people claimed for land, but only  11  of  them  opted  for  land,
whilst the rest opted for money. This is a huge challenge for  the  country.
It does have a negative impact on the ownership patterns  in  this  country.
It leaves an impression that the ANC-led government is not  delivering  land
to the black people in this country.

Therefore, our challenge is to persuade and re-educate our people to  choose
land, as opposed to financial compensation. The  other  challenge  faced  by
the restitution process is that some landowners are  not  prepared  to  have
the land reform process in this country. As a  result,  some  of  the  farms
acquired were in a very bad shape. An example here is the one  in  the  Giba
restitution claim in Mpumalanga, where out  of  15  land  claims  that  were
handed over to people, only two of those pieces of land were in good shape.

The situation requires government to develop some mechanisms  to  prevent  a
recurrence of this problem, because we cannot  allow  the  success  we  have
achieved to date to be reversed in that direction.

From these three provincial visits it is clear that land care  projects  and
restitution projects have the potential  to  alleviate  poverty  and  create
jobs in rural areas. However, it  is  to  be  realised  that  postsettlement
support has to  be  prioritised,  because  it  is  very  important  for  the
projects to be sustainable, otherwise  their  collapse  will  undermine  the
government objective of sustainable land reform.

In conclusion, let me  thank  all  members  of  the  committees,  claimants,
government officials and stakeholders who gave serious inputs regarding  the
progress that we have made, and those who will ensure that all that we  have
talked about will be taken care of.

The ANC  recommends  that  Parliament  recommends,  adopts  or  notes  these
recommendations, because we think they will advance our revolution as  South
Africans. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr A H NEL: Dankie, Voorsitter. Die studiebesoek van die komitee aan
KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga en Limpopo was myns insiens baie waardevol. Ek
wil ook net sê dat ek en die voorsitter oor ‘n klomp goed saamstem, maar ek
stem veral met hom saam oor die voorstel dat die twee departemente
geamalgameer moet word, want ek dink die koördinering tussen dié twee
departemente is definitief nie van ‘n hoë gehalte nie.

Die doel van die besoek was, eerstens, om projekte oor grondbewaring wat
deur die Departement van Landbou gefinansier word, te besoek en te
evalueer. Pragtige projekte wat deur toegewyde persone bestuur en beheer
word, is besoek, en dit was goed om te sien dat mense met soveel passie vir
ons land en sy bewaring werk.

Dit was ook goed om die toewyding en harde werk van die departement se
amptenare te sien. Iemand wat ek wil uitsonder, is dr Dudla - ek weet nie
of ek sy naam reg uitspreek nie, hy moet my maar vergewe - die waarnemende
hoof van die Departement van Landbou in KwaZulu-Natal. ‘n Man wat met
vriendelikheid en entoesiasme sy werk doen, maar wat ook waarsku dat ons
nie almal kan boer nie. Ons moet hierdie waarskuwing ter harte neem.

Boerdery is ‘n riskante besigheid. Dit is inderdaad ‘n besigheid, en die
risiko strek baie wyer as klimaatsomstandighede, toegang tot markte en
skommelende produktepryse. Langtermyntendense vir kommoditeitspryse, wat
landbouprodukte insluit, is afwaarts, terwyl benodigdhede en insette vir
boerdery ‘n opwaartse neiging toon. Hierdie internasionale feite se gevolge
is dat boerderyeenhede groter moet word, óf die eienaar moet sy
lewenstandaard afwaarts aanpas. Inderdaad kan ons nie almal boer nie.

In Mpumalanga in die kommunale gebied van Mala Mala Londolozi, het ‘n man
opgestaan en Swazi gepraat. Ondanks die feit dat ek nie verstaan het wat hy
gesê het nie, kon ek aan sy lyftaal sien hier is ‘n boer. Ek het na die tyd
met hom gaan praat. Hy boer met mielies op 20 hektaar grond. Hy het sy
produksie vanaf onder ‘n ton per hektaar tot ses ton per hektaar opgestoot
met die hulp van voorligters van die Landbounavorsingsraad en die
Departement van Landbou. Hy is ‘n lid van Agri Mpumalanga en wil aansluit
by Graan SA. Sy grootste probleem is dat hy nie kaart en transport vir sy
grond het nie, en daarom kan hy nie finansiering kry nie.

Hierdie man kan boer, en daar is nog baie soos hy. Dit is dié mense wat ons
moet help om hul probleme op te los, want dan sal hulle na hulself kyk en
dan sal hulle saam met ander kommersiële boere sorg dat daar kos op ons
tafels bly.

In die tweede plek was die doel van die besoek om in al drie provinsies die
proses van restitusie te ondersoek, soos toegepas deur die
Grondeisekommissie.

In KwaZulu-Natal was ek beïndruk deur die projekte wat ons besoek het. Daar
was nasorg, daar is toegesien dat mense opgelei word óf dat kundige mense
ingespan word en daar was skakeling met kommersiële boere - óf as vorige
eienaars óf as mentors. Dit is myns insiens hoe die restitusieprojekte
bestuur behoort te word. Ons kan met reg vir mev Shange, die
streekkommissaris van grondeise in KwaZulu-Natal, gelukwens met haar
standpunt dat die volhoubaarheid van produksie die hoogste prioriteit is.

Ongelukkig kan dieselfde nie van die provinsiale kommissie van grondeise in
Mpumalanga gesê word nie. Die frustrasievlak van beide eisers en
grondeienaars is hemelshoog as gevolg van kommunikasieprobleme, soos, onder
meer, briewe wat nie beantwoord word nie, afsprake wat nie nagekom word nie
en amptenare wat nie bereik is nie. Van die kommissie se kant af is dit
altyd iemand anders se skuld as iets verkeerd loop.

Ek kon ongelukkig nie die toer meemaak in Limpopo nie. Maar in Mpumalanga
kry ‘n mens die indruk dat die amptenare die huidige grondeienaars
verantwoordelik hou vir al die foute van die verlede en teenoor hulle
optree asof hulle geen regte het nie. Die Wet op die Herstel van Grondregte
maak dit baie duidelik dat ‘n grondeienaar ingelig moet word as daar ‘n
grondeis teen hom ingestel word. Hierdie verpligting word geensins nagekom
nie. Die optrede van amptenare in Mpumalanga, soos ek hoor en soos ek hoor
ook in Limpopo, is totaal onaanvaarbaar. Al wat daardeur bereik word, is
dat dit skietgoed verskaf vir linkse en regse ekstremiste om emosies op te
jaag en welwillendheid af te breek.

Ek wil afsluit met ‘n paar gedagtes oor die besit en bestuur van
restitusiegrond deur gemeenskappe. Die normale praktyk is dat waar ‘n
gemeenskap grond bekom, dit deur ‘n trust besit word tot voordeel van die
hele gemeenskap. Die grond word bestuur deur ‘n BK of ‘n maatskappy wat ook
deur die trust besit word. Die gelde wat in die trust gestort word, word
dan gebruik tot voordeel van die gemeenskap, soos skole, beurse vir
kinders, klinieke, ensovoorts. Die individu kry dus direk geen vergoeding
nie.

My voorstel is dat die trust die grond verhuur aan die BK of maatskappy en
dat al daardie geld in die gemeenskap as geheel gebruik word, maar dat die
individue in die gemeenskap deur aandeelhouding in die besigheid bevoordeel
word. Dit sal hulle persoonlik laat voel dat hulle iets besit wat die
moeite werd is.

Mevrou die Voorsitter, ek dink die portefeuljekomitee se oorsigbesoeke is
‘n goeie ding en dra by tot beter bestuur van ons land. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[MR A H NEL: Thank you, Chairperson.  I think that the study tour by the
committee to KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and Limpopo was, in my opinion, very
valuable. I would also like to add that the chairperson and I concur on
many things, but I particularly agree with him about the proposal that the
two departments should be amalgamated, because I think that the co-
ordination between these two departments is definitely not of a high
standard.

The purpose of the tour was, firstly, to visit and evaluate projects
concerning land conservation that are financed by the Department of
Agriculture. Beautiful projects managed and controlled by committed people
were visited, and it was good to see that people with so much passion are
working for our land and its conservation.

It was also good to see the commitment and hard work by officials of the
department. Someone whom I wish to single out is Dr Dudla - and I don’t
know if I pronounced his name correctly, he must forgive me - the acting
head of the department of agriculture in KwaZulu-Natal. He is a man who
does his work in a friendly and enthusiastic way, but who also warns that
we cannot all farm. We must take this warning to heart.

Farming is a risky business. It is indeed a business, and the risk extends
much further than climatic conditions, access to markets and fluctuating
produce prices. Long-term trends for commodity prices, which include
agricultural products, are on the decline, while the supplies and inputs
for farming show an upward trend. The consequences of these international
facts are that farming units need to increase in size or the owner has to
adjust his quality of life to a lower level. Indeed, we cannot all farm.

In Mpumalanga, in the communal area of Mala Mala Londolozi, a man stood up
and spoke Swazi. Despite the fact that I could not understand what he said,
I could judge by his body language that he was a farmer. Afterwards I went
and spoke to him. He grows maize on 20 hectares of land. He has increased
his production from under a ton per hectare to six tons per hectare with
the help of advisers from the Agricultural Research Council and the
Department of Agriculture. He is a member of Agri Mpumalanga and he wants
to join Grain SA. His biggest problem is that he does have a title deed for
his land, and therefore he cannot obtain funding.

This man can farm – and there are many like him. It is these people who we
must help to solve their problems because then they will look after
themselves and along with other commercial farmers ensure that food remains
on our tables.

In the second instance, the purpose of the visit was to investigate the
process of restitution as applied by the Land Claims Commission in all
three provinces.

In Kwazulu-Natal I was impressed by the projects that we visited. There was
follow-up action, it was seen to that people were trained or that experts
were used, and there was liaison with commercial farmers - either as
previous owners or as mentors. In my opinion, this is how the restitution
projects should be managed. We can rightly congratulate Mrs Shange, the
regional land claims commissioner in KwaZulu-Natal, on her position that
the sustainability of production is the highest priority.

Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the provincial land claims
commission in Mpumalanga. The levels of frustration of both the claimants
and the land-owners are sky-high because of communication problems, such
as, amongst others, letters that are not answered, appointments that are
not honoured and officials that cannot be reached. From the commission’s
side, there is always someone else to blame when something goes wrong.

Unfortunately, I could not make the tour to Limpopo. But in Mpumalanga one
gets the impression that officials hold present landowners responsible for
all the mistakes of the past and treat them as if they have no rights. The
Restitution of Land Rights Act is clear that a landowner must be informed
if a land claim is instituted against them. This obligation is not
fulfilled in any way. The conduct of the officials in Mpumalanga, as I hear
it and also as I hear  with regard to Limpopo, is totally unacceptable, and
all it achieves is to provide ammunition for leftist and rightist
extremists to incite emotions and break down goodwill.

I want to conclude with a few ideas about the possession and management of
restituted land by communities. The normal practice is that when a
community obtains land, it is owned by a trust to the benefit of the
community. A CC or a company that also belongs to the trust manages the
land. The money that is paid into the trust is then used to the benefit of
the community, for schools, bursaries for children, clinics and so on. The
individual therefore does not receive direct compensation.

My proposal is that the trust rents the land to the CC or company and that
all that money be used in the community as a whole, but that the
individuals in the community benefit from owning shares in the business. It
would make people feel that they own something worthwhile.

Madam Chairperson, I think that the portfolio committee’s oversight visits
is a good thing and that it contributes to better management of our land. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M V NGEMA: Thank you, Chairperson. The central thrust of land
restitution is the empowerment of landless people in order to address the
negative impact of land dispossession. The delegation acknowledges the good
work done by the Ministry and the Land Claims Commission in settling
beneficiaries’ claims in line with the Restitution Act.

The transfer of skills, as part of the exit strategy, by previous owners
remains, however, the biggest challenge to the success of land restitution,
as was noted in the case of KwaXimba project in KwaZulu-Natal. Such lack of
transfer of relevant skills to new owners certainly defeats the purpose of
the Land Restitution Act, as optimal land utilisation cannot be achieved
and sustainable development cannot take place.

Another critical issue noted with regard  to  restitution  is  the  lack  of
streamlining of the land restitution  process.  The  time  lag  between  the
farmer and Land Claims Commissioner agreement  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
eventual land transfer to the landless on the  other,  is  unacceptably  too
long. This impacts negatively on both the farmer,  in  his  negotiation  for
his  next  business,  and  the  landless,  who  wait  too  long  before  any
production can resume on the land. This kills the business lifeline of  both
the previous and new landowners and creates an unacceptable state of limbo.

Streamlining of the land restitution process must be a matter of urgency if
the deadline of December 2005, as imposed by the President, is to be met
without further aggravation of the already desperate situation, bearing in
mind that government has only managed to successfully transfer 3% of 30% of
the land originally planned for transfer within the first five years of
democracy.

In a briefing by the delegation of the Stanford Landowners Association in
Mpumalanga, it was stated that the department’s inability to finalise land
claims is causing massive backlogs. The Land Claims Commission still has to
report to the portfolio committee on its response to the Stanford
Landowners Association, which, in its briefing, complained of the slow pace
of finalisation of land claims.

Regarding land care, we visited the KwaDindi Youth Fishing Project that has
been said to have a few challenges, which include the sustainability of the
project as well as the lack of a market for the fish. These challenges are
serious problems with regard to embarking on projects that do not have a
long lifespan in terms of sustainability and long-term empowerment.

If money is being pumped into short-term, unsustainable projects with
products that have no market, then it ultimately leads to a waste of funds.
It is imperative that the department involves itself with communities by
assisting them to identify and embark on projects that are sustainable
through assisting them to identify niche markets for maximum success of
projects.
The services of other agencies . . . [Time expired.]

Mrs B M NTULI: Madam Chair, hon members, allow me to start by quoting an
article on J Tengo Jabavu, president of the SA Race Congress, which was
published in April 1912 in Imvo Zabantsundu concerning the Squatters’ Bill:

      He condemned the principle underlying it of rooting natives out of
      farms and established locations under the specious title of
      Crownlands, the tendency being to establish whites rather than natives
      on the land. The policy is futile, since the native is naturally a
      peasant, while experience has shown that the poor white cannot compete
      with him – the native – on small allotments. He earnestly begged
      government to desist from such a policy and rather follow General
      Hertzog’s of endeavouring to raise the standard of comfort of the
      natives until they are on competing terms with the poor whites.


Madam Chair, this is how far back the issue of land use was debated.

Ake ngithi ukukhuluma kancane ngalokhu esikubone kulezi zindawo
esizihambele KwaZulu-Natali, eMpumalanga kanye naseLimpopo. Ngizokhuluma
ngalokhu esithi phecelezi ama-LandCare projects. Kuye kwacaca ukuthi, yebo,
abantu banayo le misebenzi kodwa kwabonakala ukuthi badinga ukuqeqeshwa,
ikakhulukazi ekuphathweni kwamabhuku nasekusetshenzisweni kwezimali
abazithola kuhulumeni.[I would like to talk about what we witnessed in the
areas we visited in KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and Limpopo. I will talk
about what we call land care projects. It is clear that people do have
these projects but they need training, especially in bookkeeping and using
the money they received from the government.]

The issue of skills training should be looked at. I think the Minister of
Labour should try and look into the Setas and how they can be used to
assist emerging or subsistence farmers on communal land.

Kubonakele-ke futhi ukuthi izinsiza zincane. Kube nesililo esikhulu
sogandaganda kuzo zonke izifundazwe esizihambele. Isililo besithi,
“ogandaganda, ogandaganda, ogandaganda”! Okunye okuhle ukuthi kuyo yonke
imisebenzi omama babambe iqhaza kanti nabantu abasha abazibekile phansi.
Laphaya kwaDindi abantu abasha baqale umsebenzi wezinhlanzi ngokusizwa u-
Eskom, futhi bazimisele ukwenza isimo sempilo sibe ngcono. (Translation of
Zulu paragraph follows.)

[It was clear that the aid given to people was minimal. There was a great
need for tractors in all of the provinces we visited. They were shouting,
“tractors, tractors, tractors!” It was interesting to note that in all of
the projects the level of women and youth participation has been high. The
youth in the Dindi area have started a fishing project through Eskom
funding and are eager to better their lives.]

The beneficiaries and people who work in the land care projects should be
compensated reasonably for the duration of the project. I think labour laws
should be taken seriously in these projects.

Lokho akwenzeki-ke. Noma kunjalo, kweminye imisebenzi bakhona abaphatha
kahle amabhuku nemibiko yokuthi imali isetshenziswe kanjani. Zikhona nje
izindawo ezinjalo njengalaphaya eHlanzeni LandCare project naseMawewe veld
improvement project, eMpumalanga.

Sihlalo, ngivumele ngibeke isililo samanzi. Kuyacaca ukuthi indaba yamanzi
ilukhuni. Laphaya eMawewe nje abantu baseduze nedamu elikhulu, i-
Driekoppies Dam, kodwa abanawo amanzi ezinkomo zabo. Njengoba befuye
izinkomo nje abanawo amanzi azo. Abanye abalimi behlukaniswe wucingo nje
nomlimi omkhulu kodwa nguye yedwa onelungelo lokuthola amanzi. Abalimi
abancane bahlupheka bewabuka amanzi. Akube nendlela-ke yokukulungisa lokhu.

Okunye, kubonakele ukuthi i-Agricultural Research Council iqalile ukusiza
abalimi njengalaphaya KwaZulu-Natal kanye naseMpumalanga, eMlondolozi.
Abalimi basizwe ngohlelo lokufakwa kwe-lime efanele emasimini abo. Lokhu
kukhuphule isivuno sabo kuyo yonke imisebenzi. Lapho i-ARC isiza khona
siyakhuphuka isivuno njengalaphaya eBergville, eMlondozi, eLwatshatshimu,
eLimpopo; nakweminye imisebenzi i-ARC iyasiza. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[That is not happening. In some areas there are people who are doing well
in bookkeeping and keeping financial statements. These areas are the
Hlanzeni land care project and the Mawewe veld improvement project in
Mpumalanga. ]

Chairman, let me raise my concern about water. The issue regarding water is
difficult. In the Mawewe area people are close to a big
dam, namely Driekoppies, but they do not have water for their cattle. They
own livestock but no water for it. Some farmers are separated by a fence
from an established farmer, but he is the only person with a right to
water. The emerging farmers needed water, which they could not get.  There
must be a mechanism to correct this issue.

The Agricultural Research Council has started to assist farmers in areas
like KwaZulu-Natal and Mlondolozi in Mpumalanga. The farmers were assisted
by the application of the correct lime in their fields. That has increased
their harvest in all spheres. Wherever the ARC is involved, the harvest
increases, like in Bergville, Mlondolozi, and Lwatshatshimu in Limpopo. The
ARC is also helpful in other spheres.]

The ARC is also helping incoming farmers with regard to the new ways of non-
tillage technology and crop cultivation. The training of leader farmers
that can train other farmers is also a good programme, but the land care
projects can only contribute towards food security.

The lime that is suitable for Mlondozi farmers is only obtainable in
Limpopo, and this causes a financial problem. Therefore, the formation of
co-operatives can enable people to have buying power. They can buy in bulk
and reduce transport costs. It is clear that in all the projects the level
of women and youth participation has been high.

Yingakho ngizothi nje aboMsobomvu abasondele nabo ukuze babambe iqhaza,
futhi baqeqeshe abantu abasha abangene kwezolimo, bese kwakhiwa amathuba
emisebenzi.

Sibonile-ke izindlela eziningi ezisetshenziswayo ukuvimbela ukuguguleka
komhlabathi njengokusebenzisa utshani okuthiwa i-vativa, okuwuhlobo
oluthile nje lotshani - eLimpompo nje kukhona umama ongumpetha wokutshala
lolu hlobo lotshani; nokusetshenziswa kwamatshe kwakhiwe ama-gabions
njengalaphaya e-Koringkoppies LandCare project. Imithombo yamanzi ikhona,
futhi bayakwazi nokuzakhela imisele yamanzi namadamu okugcina amanzi.
Ngalokho-ke uMnyango wezaManzi namaHlathi awusize kakhulu nawo ungenele
emisebenzini yemiphakathi ngoba lolu hlobo olusetshenziswayo lokuvimbela
ukuguguleka komhlabathi nemililo luzosiza abalimi kanye nabahlali,
nohulumeni imbala. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[I therefore call upon the uMsobomvu Youth Fund to participate and to
encourage youth to take part in agricultural projects for the creation of
job opportunities.

We have seen many methods being used to prevent soil erosion by using grass
called vativa, which is a special type of grass. There is a woman in
Limpopo who is an expert in planting this type of grass. Then we have the
usage of stones in making gabions, as has happened in the Koringkoppies
land care project. There are water springs and people are able to create
water furrows and dams to preserve water.

Therefore Water Affairs and Forestry should also assist in community
projects, because these methods of preventing soil erosion and veld fires
will benefit the farmers and communities as well as government.]

Land care projects will also improve the sustainability of agricultural
production systems and protect the natural agricultural resources.

Ubesephawulile-ke usihlalo wekomidi ngalokhu.

Angigcine ngokuthi noma bengabalimi abancane nje, uma bethole usizo
olufanele bayawandisa umkhiqizo bese-ke beswela ukuthi bawudayisa kuphi,
lokhu esithi phecelezi i-marketing, ngoba phela abathengi bombila bawehlisa
kakhulu amanani ombila ngalesi sikhathi abalimi abancane bethengisa, bese-
ke abalimi abancane bengayenzi inzuzo. Ngalokho-ke uMnyango wezoHwebo
neziMboni, i-DTI, mayingene khona kuzoba namathuba okwenza ama co-
operatives nama-agroindustries njengokuthi abantu bazigayele bona ngokwabo
impuphu nesitambu nokunye. Lokhu kuzovula namathuba emisebenzi nempilo ibe
ngcono, umoya kaVukuzenzele uphile. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee has remarked to that effect.

In conclusion, though they are emerging farmers, if they receive the
required assistance their production increases, but they would not know
where to sell their produce, which we term marketing. Those who trade in
grain would normally reduce the grain price during this period and the
emerging farmers would not make a profit. Therefore the Department of Trade
and Industry must assist in the creation of co-operatives and agro-
industries so that people can build mills for producing samp, mealie-meal
and other products. That will create job opportunities and a better life.
The spirit of Vukuzenzele is alive.]

Let me end by saying: Let us promote the spirit of Vukuzenzele and the
involvement of all communities. Let us develop partnerships with
municipalities and commercial farmers to ensure ownership of the projects
by all the communities, and further develop capacity within the provinces
and municipalities to enable funding for land care programmes. [Time
expired.]

Ngiyabonga kakhulu, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you very much,
Chairperson.[Applause.]]

Mr J BICI: Madam Chairperson, hon members, during the portfolio committee’s
visit to the provinces of KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo and Mpumalanga, it was
apparent that some very exciting work is happening in terms of new
beneficiaries of land reform programmes. In part, these positive
developments can be ascribed to the work of the Departments of Agriculture
and Land Affairs, but in some other instances it is the sheer determination
and enthusiasm of the people themselves who are the driving force behind
these success stories.

It was also a common trend throughout this visit to hear requests for
further and or more support for new beneficiaries. It will certainly be a
mockery for the department to provide access to land and yet not provide
the necessary support to the beneficiaries. Even those beneficiaries who
have had great success speak of the need for further assistance on a wide
range of matters – from infrastructure to training in specialised skills.

In the end, the success of land reform will not be measured simply by the
number of beneficiaries or the amount spent within a certain timeframe, but
the long-term viability of these ventures. Greater co-ordination and better
monitoring of implementation among the various government actors in this
sector is crucial. This will go a long way towards resolving many of the
concerns that were raised during the visit.

Finally, may we implore the Minister to make sure that there are sufficient
capacities and finances to carry on the projects. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Madam Chair, the most important part of this report is
the conclusion. The conclusion states the following, and I quote:

      The pattern that emerges is that projects that the department supports
      and funds need an exit strategy to ensure that the business or project
      does not falter when it withdraws. The risks of collapse are very
      clear in the land restitution projects. Their collapse would severely
      undermine the government programme of land restitution and
      redistributing land to meet the 30% target to transfer land to black
      people.

Dít, Voorsitter, is die kern van hierdie verslag. As ŉ mens kyk na hierdie
verslag, dan sal jy ook sien dat die probleme eintlik daaroor gaan dat baie
van hierdie projekte juis in duie stort sodra kundigheid onttrek word en
finansiële probleme ontstaan. Ons moet vir mekaar in hierdie Raadsaal sê,
boerdery vandag vereis kundigheid en vereis ook finansiële kundigheid. Dit
is nie ŉ geval van dat jy net vir iemand ŉ stukkie grond gee en dan sê hy
gaan ŉ suksesvolle boer wees nie.

En dan wil ek ook sê as ŉ mens na hierdie verslag kyk, moet daarvan kennis
geneem word dat dit nie die blanke boere se skuld is dat daar nie grond
beskikbaar is nie, of dat daar alewig daaragter geskuil word deur te sê dat
dit die boere se skuld is dat grondhervorming in Suid-Afrika misluk nie.
Dit is nie korrek nie. Hierdie verslag sê vir ons baie duidelik dit is
projekte wat deur die departement gelei word, maar aan die einde van die
dag wanneer die departement onttrek, dan stort daardie projekte in duie.

Ons voer hier ŉ baie belangrike debat oor ŉ baie belangrike verslag. Ek
sien nie die agb Minister hier nie; ek sien ook nie die agb Adjunkminister
hier nie. Ek wil eintlik ŉ beroep op die ANC en Swepe doen dat wanneer
sulke verslae hier bespreek word, ten minste die Adjunkminister hier
teenwoordig moet wees.

Dan wil ek ook net sê dat ek voorstel dat hierdie verslag ook aan die SAKP
gegee word, dat hulle kan sien wat in hierdie land aangaan wat
grondhervorming betref. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[That, Chairperson, is the crux of this report. If one looks at this
report, one will also see that the problems are actually caused by the fact
that many of these projects collapse as soon as expertise is withdrawn and
financial problems arise. We must say to one another in this Chamber that
farming today requires expertise and also requires financial expertise. It
is not a case of simply giving someone a piece of land and then saying that
one is going to be a successful farmer.

And then I also want to say that when one looks at this report, one should
take note that it is not the fault of the white farmers that land is not
available and that people constantly hide behind this by saying that
farmers are to be blamed for the fact that land restitution is not
succeeding in South Africa. That is not correct. This report tells us very
clearly that these projects are led by the department, but at the end of
the day, when the department withdraws, then those projects collapse.

We are conducting a very important debate here about a very important
report. I do not see the hon Minister here; nor do I see the hon Deputy
Minister here. I actually want to call upon the ANC and Whips that when
such reports are discussed here, at least the Deputy Minister should be
present.

Then I also just want to say that I suggest that this report also be given
to the SACP, so that they can see what is happening in this country as far
as land restitution is concerned. I thank you.]

Mr T D H RAMPHELE: Ke a leboga Modulasetulo, maloko a khuduthamaga ya Puso
e e fano, maloko a Palamente ya Aforika Borwa, motsing wa gompieno ke tlile
go baya Puso ya African National Congress mainamafatshwa. Ke lebile
manontlhotlho a ditiro tsa yone ka fa tlase ga kgatelelo e kgolo ya kgang
ya lefatshe. Dipalopalo di bontsha gore komisi ya lefatshe e gatile
kgatokgolo.

Ka ngwaga wa 1997 tekanyetsokabo ya yone e ne e le dimilione di le 43,
tsamaiso e le bonya. Tekanyetsokabo ya 2005 e bontsha gore komisi e batla
diranta di le bilione. Ke kgato e tona e e diragetseng.

Komisi e atlegile go busa dihektara di le dikete di le 590 mo ngwageng wa
2003-04 mme e buseditse malapa a le dikete di le 61 277 mafatshe a ba a
lopileng. Go buseditswe mafatshe a Temothuo, a Dikgwa, a Merafo, a Bojanala
le a Ditulo. Ke fela Puso e e eteletsweng pele ke African National Congress
le Motlotlegi Mopresidente Thabo Mbeki e e fang Maaforika Borwa phitlhelelo
eno.

Komiti e etetse KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga le Limpopo.  Mo  diporojekeng  tse
re di etetseng, go bonagetse gore komisi e itemogetse mathatha mo  nakong  e
e fetileng mme e dira ka thata go tokafatsa matshelo a batho . . . there  is
a  lot   of   people   develoment   that   is   happening   in   restitution
projects...Batho ba Enkadini kwa KwaZulu-Natal ba dira  mmogo  le  moagisani
wa bone e leng lekgoa …(Translation of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T D H RAMPHELE: Thank you, Chairperson,  members  of  the  executive  of
this government, members of the Parliament  of  South  Africa.  Today  I  am
going to praise the government  of  the  African  National  Congress.  I  am
looking at the great job they  did  under  pressure  in  respect  of  issues
concerning land. Statistics show that the Land commission has done  a  great
job.

During 1997 a budget of R43 million was  allocated.  The  process  was  very
slow. The proposed budget for 2005 shows that R1 billion is to be  allocated
to the Commission. This is a great success.


The commission successfully managed to give back 590 000ha in the year 2003-
04, and then gave back land to 61 277 families who had applied. Land,  which
was  given  back,  is  for  agriculture,  forestry,  mining,   tourism   and
settlements. It is only the government, under  the  leadership  of  the  hon
President Thabo Mbeki, that has given South Africans this achievement.

The committee visited KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, and Limpopo. In all of  the
projects we visited, we noticed that the Commission encountered problems  in
the past but that it was doing its best to better the lives of  the  people.
There is a lot of people development happening in the restitution  projects.
The Enkandini community in KwaZulu-Natal is working hand in  hand  with  its
white neighbour
…an established farmer who is mentoring them. The morale is very high. The
mentorship involves both technical and material resources.

This is clearly a good indication that well-meaning South Africans can work
together and succeed. We thank those who, like the Engadini mentors, work
to make South Africa work. This assistance encourages the community to
explore new possibilities and in this instance, they are exploring bakery,
confectionery, tourism and vegetable production. There is assistance but
also a strong development of self-reliance in this community.

Two other projects of KwaXimba and KwaMangethe are highly commercial, and
the commission is entering into negotiations with experts and financial
institutions, as well as municipalities, to join forces and develop, work
and be productive in this land claim project. This shows how the government
policy of public-private partnership is succeeding, and it is going to work
for the benefit of South Africans.

In Mpumalanga we visited two projects, namely the Mashego-Mdluli
restitution project and the Giba project. The Mashego project is a going
concern that shows success. The communities have a lot of determination.
They are involved in the forestry project and they are looking at piggery
and other cash-producing projects.

The Mdluli project or community has received land almost in the CBD of
Nelspruit, high-value land from HL Hall and Sons. For both projects, the
department has spent more than R63 million in acquiring land. The
Department of Agriculture is providing support and it is important that
relevant departments such as Trade and Industry play a prominent role in
ensuring the success of these projects.

Limpopo also has some of the projects that we visited. In Limpopo, two main
projects that we visited are the Zebediela citrus project at Bjayatladi ba
Moletlane and the game tourism project of Manavhela, in Makhado. The two
projects clearly show the success of government in the restitution project.
Partnerships in these projects are being negotiated and the communities are
upbeat and working hard to ensure that they succeed.

The summation in respect of all the projects is that these projects are
clearly on course to succeed. The government of the ANC, at both national
and provincial levels, as well as municipalities, are determined to make
sure that our people succeed in having a better life through land
restitution. The commitment of the staff of the commission and politicians
to find answers to difficult situations is an indication of the true path
to development.

Land, as the hon Groenewald has just mentioned, is part of our history and
it’s a challenge to a part of our history. During different times in
history, assertions have been made on land. These assertions indicate both
disputes and debates around uses, ownership and issues of distribution of
land.

As far back as 1849, the Grey Land Commission had been established. One of
the statements that were made in that commission, in reference to blacks,
was: “These people should be placed in circumstances in which they should
find regular industry necessary for their subsistence.”

Land was used as a tool to deprive people of free subsistence and to ensure
that they remained subservient - actually servants, if not slaves of white
landowners. In fact, one of the senators of the Cape, Stanford, even went
on to say that if a person did not have land and technical expertise, then
the only way in which you would be able to fight him was that he should
come and work and be a servant on your farm. So, land has always been a
political issue, and today it is not any different.

Actually, let me quote a statement that was made by King Moshoeshoe in 1856
when he wrote to Boshoff, regarding the issue of land. He said:

      When we saw that the whites crossed the Orange River in 1836, we
      wondered at it. They crossed by lots. They begged from the blacks for
      pasturage everywhere - one by one, in very good soft manner. We did
      not imagine that they would appropriate land to themselves and when
      they were purchasing farms from each other, I hastened to issue a
      proclamation: Do not batter land for it is not a custom of the
      Basothos to do so. According to our custom, land belongs to all the
      people. It is bequeathed to our posterity but it is not to be disposed
      of by bargain.

[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
Affairs for undertaking this venture and bringing this matter of concern to
debate. In view of the report, we compliment the committee on its
compilation. Land care and land claims are both matters of great concern
and it is hoped that we will be able to reach the deadline of 2005 in this
regard.

The KwaZulu-Natal situation appears to have its loopholes but it has the
potential to empower regarding proper facilitation of land restitution and
so forth. We view the provinces of Mpumalanga and Limpopo in a similar
light and we would like to focus more attention on the committee’s
recommendation to say that we really can do something to better the
situation in these areas. The MF supports the recommendation made regarding
the Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs.

It is found to be of crucial importance that beneficiaries and people
employed in land care projects should be compensated adequately to ensure a
strong, constant workforce. Further curtailing of land speculation and
proper management of valuation are supported. The continued affiliation of
the Department of Agriculture with the World Trade Organisation is also
deemed beneficial, and we support it.

There are a number of factors to be dealt with by the department and the
committee. Those factors need to be addressed to ensure proper facilitation
in the sector. It is also very important that relations between sellers,
claimants and the commission be adequately addressed to ensure efficient
and effective delivery of land restitution.

It is hoped that the sector shall develop an efficient exit strategy so as
to avoid failure. The MF supports land restitution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D M DLALI: Madam Chairperson, before I start, I need to raise two
issues. I want you to listen, Comrade Ngema, as you raised one of the two
issues. Firstly, in relation to the Stanford matter, you said that the
commissioner still have to report to the portfolio committee. Maybe you
forgot that that report was tabled before the portfolio committee and that
you were one of those who endorsed the very report that you are suggesting
that it has not been submitted to the portfolio committee.

Let me draw your attention to the fact that when dealing with land
restitution, the land reform programme has three elements. In general
terms, what we call the three major elements are: land redistribution, land
restitution and land tenure reform. This, according to the land policy, is
to improve the tenure security of all South Africans and to accommodate
different forms of land tenure, including types of communal tenure.

On the basis of the above it is therefore more critical for those who
possesses land, or landowners who got land by force or benefited from the
then apartheid regime, or got land for free if they co-operated both by
offering the land to government to purchase at a reasonable price and by
not inflating the prices for the land they did not pay for, as well as for
the improvements with the assistance of the Land Bank at very low interest
rates. One should also not forget that these very improvements were made
possible by the very same exploited farm workers; those workers whom
government is now trying to protect through the Land Tenure Act against the
very employers who exploited them.

They had to build the wealth of these white commercial farmers who now want
to get rid of them, even force them off their farms. Some of these white
commercial farmers are doing it in a very nice way, namely by suggesting
that they, the farmworkers, are going to be given assistance to build their
homes in the black township.

The Land Tenure Act is endeavouring to protect those exploited farmworkers,
but the Land Tenure Act needs to be panel beaten as a matter of extreme
urgency to close all the loopholes, because some of these commercial
farmers have exploited or are successfully exploiting these loopholes to
their advantage, to the extent that these farmworkers are very frustrated
and disillusioned by these actions.

One of the problems that were mentioned by the beneficiaries, those who
received their land back from the previous unlawful owners, is that they
get this land that was productive, managed by the skilled white commercial
farmers, with a specific market being supplied by these farmers. Then when
the new owners took over, some of the previous unlawful owners refused to
introduce them to the market or to the people that they were supplying, or
they stopped that network. Then the new owners have to struggle for years
to re-establish the same market of people to receive their produce.

The classical example here is the Mashego clan in Mpumalanga. They got
their land from the previous owner with no assistance or mentorship, no
marketing strategy, no farming expertise and no managerial skills, although
they were in a joint venture with both the previous owners and another
clan.

The other difficult market, which these new owners are struggling in, is
the Forest Plantation and Supply Market. The mines, that used to order from
the previous owners, after handover to the new owners stopped their orders
from these new owners, and the previous owner, who is in a joint venture
with them, is just not helping at all.

These people have to renegotiate with these mines, or look for a new
market. It will take them a few years to be trusted by the market. But if
they had been introduced by the previous owners, it would have been much
easier and better for them.

Hon members like hon Nel, hon Van Niekerk and, I suppose, hon Groenewald,
who is not here now, will complain that there is no production taking place
on the farms taken over by these new owners, and say that these farms that
were productive before are no longer productive. They forget, of course,
that the unlawful previous owners are strategically and purposefully
undermining the lawful new owners. Others also cut the network between the
farm and the well-establish market that they were using or supplying. These
matters need to be dealt with effectively, one way or another.

One is also aware that the government also has a role to play to make sure
that the land that has been handed over through restitution is productive
and sustainable to better the lives of those who own it and that of others
who can benefit from the proceeds of those farms. The farms should be
economically exploited to enable the second economy to also grow to the
level of the first economy.

The condition of underdevelopment is understood to be the result of
exploitation by the developed sector. Logically, therefore, the solution
for underdevelopment lies within the developed sector, the first economy,
rather than the underdeveloped sector, the second economy.

Only determined government interventions can assist the underdeveloped
sector and create an environment where private enterprise will seek
economic opportunities, which will increase employment and income for the
poor people of South Africa.

The preferred option, even in the short term, is to introduce support and
incentives to enable people to apply their existing capacities, human and
physical, to unlock their potential for being economically productive. This
requires a major effort by all spheres of government, the private sector
and civil society to harness people in a coherent manner that will improve
their lives.

We discovered another problem in the Community Partnership Agreements, what
we call CPAs, in Limpopo, in an area called the Zebediela Citrus Farm. This
place was officially owned by government.  Then the community, because
their forefathers had been removed from there, put in a claim. There was an
agreement that was proposed by the commissioner, acting on behalf on the
land claim, under the Department of Agriculture and Land Affairs. He
negotiated the CPA with the previous owners as follows: The strategic
partner 53%, the Batladi CPA 30%, a workers trust 15%  and the tribal
authority 2%.

The government allocated to the community a settlement grant of R16
million. The strategic partner is supposed to contribute R30 million for
the running capital of the company.

We then learned that the strategic partner has loaned the R30 million from
the bank, and that it was loaned and paid back with interest by the
company. That means it is the company’s debt and not the strategic
partner’s debt. When we were there on 12 August 2004, we requested a copy
of an agreement from the commissioner. To date, as we are debating here, we
have not received the said copy. We are still waiting for the said
agreement to get to the committee.

As the portfolio committee we felt that this was not a well-negotiated
agreement with the strategic partners. Until we get the said agreement we
will feel such.

The strategic partnership is meant to run for 15 years. The company is
expected to pay back the R30 million within this 15-year period. This is
very wrong.

These are merely one or two examples. There may be other land care projects
where there are problems with water and other problems. For example, when
we were in Mpumalanga at a place called the Ehlangeni land care project, we
saw about 155 farmers who were farming an area of 3 000 hectares of land
with 2 500 Nguni cattle. They had no water, but there was a dam next to
them. They were not allowed to use that water. Instead, the dam was
supplying water to the white commercial farmers and to other countries like
Mozambique, instead of to black South Africans. These farmers’ livestock
was dying and there was no South African water for them. They then built a
windmill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

The House adjourned at 16:12.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 161, classified the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 22 -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 77) as follows:


         (a)     In terms of Rule 162(1) of the Joint Rules, the JTM
              classifies the Bill as constitutionally out of order and thus
              the Bill may not be proceeded with.


         (b)     That the Bill be referred back to the Minister of Finance
              to excise all non-money Bill provisions and that the excised
              provisions be contained in a separate section 75 Bill.

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 8 November 2004:


         (i)     National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9D - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


National Assembly


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 161, classified the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 22 -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 77) as follows:


         (a)     In terms of Rule 162(1) of the Joint Rules, the JTM
              classifies the Bill as constitutionally out of order and thus
              the Bill may not be proceeded with.


         (b)     That the Bill be referred back to the Minister of Finance
              to excise all non-money Bill provisions and that the excised
              provisions be contained in a separate section 75 Bill.

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 8 November 2004:


         (i)     National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9D - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

National Assembly
1.
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 8 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 161, classified the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 22 -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 77) as follows:


         (a)     In terms of Rule 162(1) of the Joint Rules, the JTM
              classifies the Bill as constitutionally out of order and thus
              the Bill may not be proceeded with.


         (b)     That the Bill be referred back to the Minister of Finance
              to excise all non-money Bill provisions and that the excised
              provisions be contained in a separate section 75 Bill.

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 8 November 2004:


         (i)     National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9D - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


