---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 October 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-10-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                      LOSS OF LIFE IN TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS


                             (Draft Resolution)

UMBHEXESHI OYINTLOKO WEQELA ELIKWISININZI: Mam’u Somlomo, ndiphakamisa
ngaphandle kokwazisa:

   Ukuba le Ndlu –

     1) iqaphela -


     a) ngomothuko nobuhlungu obukhulu ukusweleka kwabafundi abasixhenxe
        kwakunye netitshala yesikolo iMthukukazi Junior Secondary School
        ngomhla we-11 kuOktobha ka-2004 kwingozi yebhasi kuNtabankulu;


     b) kwakhona ukusweleka kwabantu abali-14 ngaseBoabab Tollgate eMusina
        kwingozi yokungqubana kweteksi nosilenge;



 2) iqwalasela ngeliso elibukhali ukuba ezi ngozi zibonisa ngokumandla
    umngeni esisoloko sijongene nawo wokuqinisekisa ukhuseleko ezindleleni;


 3) yenza isimemelelo kubo bonke abasebenzisi bendlela ukuba bathobele
    imigaqo yendlela ukuze luqine ukhuseleko ezindleleni;

 4) vakalisa uvelwano olunzulu kuzo zonke izihlobo nezalamane zabo
    basishiyileyo; yaye

     5) inqwenelela bonke abo benzakeleyo ukuba bachache
        ngokukhawulezileyo. (Translation of Xhosa draft resolution
        follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
   notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes -


          (a)    with shock and profound sadness the untimely death of
                seven learners and one educator from Mthukukazi Junior
                Secondary School who passed away on 11 October 2004,
                following a bus accident at Ntabankulu Local Municipality;
                and


          (b)    the death of 14 people near the Baobab Tollgate at Musina
                who lost their lives after an accident involving a taxi and
                a tow truck;

   (2)      believes that these tragic accidents highlight the challenge we
          continue to face in our efforts to ensure the safety of our road
          transportation services;


   (3)      calls upon all road users to observe road safety regulations and
          to be patient on the road in order to put an end to these events;


   (4)      expresses its deep-felt condolences to the families of the
          deceased, their relatives and friends; and


   (5)      wishes all those injured in these accidents a speedy recovery.]

Agreed to.




                     CONGRATULATIONS TO WANGARI MAATHAI


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that –


           a) on 8 October 2004 Wangari Maathai became the first African
              woman in history to win the Nobel Peace Prize; and


           b) this prize celebrates her work in leading the campaign to
              plant tens of millions of trees not only in her home country
              of Kenya, but throughout Africa;

     2) acknowledges that Wangari Maathai’s Nobel achievement is not only a
        victory for herself and her home country, but also a recognition of
        African women who continue to struggle for peace, environmentally
        sensitive development and democracy on the continent; and


     3) congratulates Wangari Maathai on winning the 2004 Nobel Peace
        Prize.

Agreed to.


              BEST WISHES TO MUSLIMS OVER THE MONTH OF RAMADAN


                             (Draft Resolution)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that with the advent of the Islamic lunar month Ramadan,
        Muslims worldwide and in South Africa will abstain daily from
        partaking of food and drink from dawn to dusk;


     2) recognises that such voluntary abstinence enhances both their
        spirituality and their empathy with the poor, the hungry and the
        destitute in society; and

     3) conveys its best wishes to all Muslims over this fasting period,
        and expresses the hope that it will encourage all Muslims in South
        Africa to redouble their efforts to alleviate the plight of the
        poor and the weak.

Agreed to.


    REFERRAL OF THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE OFFICE OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL IN
 RESPECT OF THE 2003-04 FINANCIAL YEAR TO AD HOC COMMITTEE FOR CONSIDERATION


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the
Order Paper, as follows:

     That the House, upon tabling, refers the Annual Report on the Office of
     the Auditor-General in respect of the 2003-04 financial year to  an  ad
     hoc committee of the  House  for  consideration  and  report  and  also
     mandates the ad hoc committee to engage with the Office of the Auditor-
     General on the Auditor-General's  budget  in  due  course  pending  the
     establishment of the parliamentary committee to be established in terms
     of the Public Audit Bill, and for that purpose establishes  an  ad  hoc
     committee in terms of Rule 214, the committee -
     (1)    to consist of 17 members of the National Assembly,  as  follows:
         African National Congress:  10;  Democratic  Alliance:  2;  Inkatha
         Freedom Party: 1; other parties: 4;


     (2)    to report to the House on conclusion of its business  before  19
         November 2004; and


     (3)    may exercise those powers in Rule 138  that  may  assist  it  in
         carrying out its task.

Agreed to.


                          SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT MONTH



                            (Members’s Statement)


Mufumakadzi T J TSHIVHASE (ANC): Mulangadzulo, mirado i thonifheaho,
Tshimedzi ndi nwedzi wa mveledziso ya matshilisano, nahone ri tea u
pembelela mvelaphanda yashu. Sa muvhuso wa ANC, ro no ita zwinzhi u
khwinisa matshilo a vhathu shangoni. Ri nea vhashai magavhelo, vhudzulo na
thuso ya shishi, kha avho vha kwameaho nga zwiwo kana dzinwe khombo.

U bva nga 1994, vhathu vhe vha vha vha tshi wana magavhelo vho vha vhe 2.7
milioni, fhedzi zwino ri vho kona u netshedza vhane vha fhira milioni dza
malo nwedzi munwe na munwe. Magavhelo a ndondolo ya vhana o engedzedzea u
bva nga 1997 he ha vha hu tshi vhuelwa vhana vha 50 000, ngeno u swika
zwino vho no vha milioni thanu.

Kha minwaha mitanu yo fhiraho muhasho wo tikedza thandela dza 3 500 nga
masheleni a linganaho milioni dza R521. Fhedzi-ha, rothe ri a zwi divha
zwauri hu kha di vha na vhathu vhane vha kha di shengela Afurika Tshipembe.
Ri tea u khwinisa tshumelo dzashu, ngamaanda kha avho vha vhuponi ha
mahayani vhukuma, nahone ri tavhanyise maitele a u disa tsireledzo ya
matshilisano.

Naho hu na mvelaphanda ye ra i ita, ri kha di vha na khaedu ya u khwinisa
matshilo a vhathu vha dzimilioni vhane vha kha di tshila vhushaini. Kha uno
nwedzi na minwe yothe i tevhelaho, kha ri shumisane kha u disa mveledziso
yo fhelelaho shangoni lashu na u khwathisedza muano une wa ri, nwana wau
ndi nwana wanga. (Translation of Tshivenda member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Madam Speaker, hon members, October is Social
Development Month, and we must celebrate our achievements. As the ANC
government, we have done a lot to improve the lives of people in the
country. We give social grants to the poorest of the poor, and provide
shelter and emergency relief to those affected by natural and other
disasters.

A mere 2,7 million people used to receive monthly social grant benefits
prior to 1994.  We have managed to widen access to social assistance to
cover more than 8 million people every month. Since 1994, the child support
grant, which used to benefit just over 50 000 children, has grown to cover
more than 5 million currently.

Over the past five years the department has supported over 3 500 projects
to the tune of R521 million. However, it is known to all of us that there
are still many people who are suffering in South Africa. We need to improve
our services, especially those in rural areas and accelerate our efforts to
put in place a comprehensive system of social protection.

Despite the progress we have made, we still have the challenge of improving
the lives of millions of our people who are still living in desperate
poverty. This month and all other months, let us work together for the
overall development of our country, and especially to give effect to the
slogan that says: “Your child is my child”.]


                 CRISIS IN ZIMBABWE FAR FROM BEING RESOLVED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W J SEREMANE (DA): Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the DA believes that
the optimism that has greeted the verdict clearing Morgan Tsvangirai of
treason charges is hopelessly misplaced. While we are relieved about the
decision, this does not change the fact that the crisis in Zimbabwe runs
much deeper than any one decision of this sort can rectify. Tsvangirai is
yet to face a second set of treason charges, and even if he is cleared of
these, his embroilment in legal complications has effectively neutralised
his role as leader of the MDC and damaged the party’s political role in
Zimbabwe. This can only further erode democracy in Zimbabwe.

Until such time as Tsvangirai is cleared of the second set of treason
charges, the MDC will remain severely compromised. Yesterday’s mixed signal
announcement by Zanu-PF that there is no need for talks with the MDC is a
further indication that the crisis in Zimbabwe is far from being resolved.
It is about time that the South African government acted decisively to end
the harassment of the opposition and to ensure that Zanu-PF enter into
talks with all other role-players in good faith.


                           BRETT KEBBLE ART AWARDS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Madam Speaker, works of art are as old as the coming
of mankind to this, our planet earth. The Nguni tongues will say “umsebenzi
wobugcisa” [works of art] takes different shapes with different talented
individuals in the form of music, visuals, woodwork, poetry, etc. Today we
are proud to congratulate Philip Rikhotso and Tanya Poole who jointly won
the Brett Kebble Art Award for this year this past Saturday.

Surprisingly, Rikhotso’s level of poverty did not enable him to pay the
travel fare to the venue of the ceremony in Cape Town, and he had to borrow
R20 from a well-wisher in order to make the trip possible so that he could
fetch his joint prize of R260 000.

Talent is a precious gift hidden under one’s personality, and without
concentration, hard work and talent research, one may not know that so much
treasure is hidden under one’s hair. With this search for talent and
determination to win, at the end of the day, Rikhotso is now able to buy a
bakkie to advance his artwork, and he can send one of his children to
college to take up a technology course.

Judges commended Rikhotso’s work as outstanding and as of the highest
international standard. He has certainly made his Tsonga people proud, and
all of us as South Africans are made to walk tall in splendour because of
this humble and artistic man of God.

Praise to our democracy that recognises works of even the poorest of the
poor. Praise to Rikhotso and Poole. Thank you, Madam. [Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: While one really
appreciates the statement by the member - it was quite a wonderful
statement - I think what is important is that the surname is not Rikotso,
it is Rikhotso.

The SPEAKER: Thank you hon member, but I also hope, hon Chauke, that you
will be tolerant of many of us who might not be able to pronounce various
languages the proper way.


                                MATRIC EXAMS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SIKAKANE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC congratulates the Minister of
Education and the department for the problem-free start of this year’s
matric exams. The planning and organisation of the exams continue to
indicate the high level of professionalism and organisation within the
Ministry and the department. The creation of a conducive learning
environment and access to better educational facilities remain a priority
to our government.

The ANC wishes our Grade 12 learners the best of luck in their exams. They
should engage these exams conscious of the fact that sustainable
development and social progress in our country is directly linked to their
success. I thank you. [Applause.]



                NIGERIAN WOMEN SENTENCED TO DEATH BY STONING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J BICI (UDM): Madam Speaker, the UDM notes with shock and dismay that
two more women in Nigeria have been sentenced to death by stoning for the
crime of having sex outside of marriage. As in the case of Amina Lawal, we
are concerned about the moral, ethical and human rights issues associated
with these death sentences.

Firstly, there is once again no mention of similar punishment being meted
out to the men involved. It must be noted that it takes two to tango and it
takes two to perform a sexual act. Secondly, stoning to death is a cruel
and dehumanising act. It is an act too horrible to contemplate. Whilst we
appreciate the sovereignty of Nigeria, we cannot, as democrats and fellow
Africans, turn a blind eye.

We have taken the lead in the African Renaissance. We have played a
critical role in turning it from a concept into a plan of action through
Nepad, the revitalised African Union and the creation of the Pan-African
Parliament. Throughout these processes we have acknowledged that Africans
share a common destiny and are equally entitled to economic, social and
political development. Importantly, we have a duty to ensure that African
women share equally in these freedoms and rights that we aspire to.

Within this context we urge government at bilateral and new multi-lateral
levels, as well as our Pan-African Parliament representatives, to intervene
in this matter. Thank you.


                        MARINE ANTIPOACHING OPERATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C B JOHNSON (NNP): Madam Speaker, this week is National Marine Week, and
a lot has been written over the past weekend about Operation Neptune. But
what is important to note is that this week we are seeing the launching of
an even bigger and even better antipoaching initiative on the part of
government, and this is welcomed.

The new initiative is a joint operation between the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism, the SA Police Service and the Overstrand
Municipality. It will effectively replace Operation Neptune. The new drive
is aimed at tackling and rooting out the causes of abalone poaching, and
government has pledged a further R8 million to bring the total government
expenditure on antipoaching to in excess of R15 million per annum. The new
initiative will include an operations room, a 24-hour response line, a
dedicated  investigation team, and a dedicated enforcement team working
closely with the Scorpions and the Asset Forfeiture Unit, as well as the
new departmental office situated at Pearly Beach. The marine antipoaching
operation will play a fundamental role in deterring abalone poachers and in
protecting our marine resources.
We therefore call on all members of the relevant communities, members of
the public and all relevant role-players to give their full support to the
initiative and to join forces with government to protect and preserve our
marine heritage. Thank you. [Applause.]


                   SRC ELECTION AT UNIVERSITY OF PRETORIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus wil die studente
van die Universiteit van Pretoria, in die besonder die VF Plus-studente op
die kampus, gelukwens met hul rekordoorwinning tydens die pasafgelope
studenteraadsverkiesing op die kampus.

Aangesien die VF Plus, die ANC, die PAC, die OD en die DA aan die
verkiesing deelgeneem het, is dit ’n besondere prestasie dat die VF Plus en
sy alliansievennoot die vereniging Tuks Afrikaanse Studente  die verkiesing
met ’n rekordaantal stemme kon wen. Die VF Plus het vanjaar 6% meer steun
as met die vorige jaar se verkiesing gekry. Die VF Plus het die ANC met
meer as ’n duisend stemme geklop, en byna twee maal soveel stemme as die DA
gekry. Die DA, wat in verlede jaar se verkiesing net-net tweede was, kon
vanjaar slegs vierde eindig.

Die VF Plus wil egter sy ongelukkigheid uitspreek oor die deurlopende,
regstreekse inmenging van die universiteitsowerhede en spesifieke persone
uit die rektoraat van die universiteit in die verkiesing. Dit is die rede
waarom die verkiesing gekenmerk is deur vertragings en ’n byna eindelose
proses van klagtes en besware deur die owerheid en die onsuksesvolle DA –
alles pogings om die VF Plus op ’n tegniese punt van sy oorwinning te
ontneem. Dit bly ’n vraag dat sou die ANC of die DA wen, of die owerheid
soortgelyk sou optree.

’n Rekordgetal van meer as 10 000 studente het vanjaar aan die verkiesing
deelgeneem. Dit is die agtste agtereenvolgende jaar waarin die VF Plus as
wenner uit die stryd getree het. Hierdie uitslag en stempatroon illustreer
iets van die Afrikaanse jeug se huidige standpunte oor die politiek, en
maak ’n voorspelling oor toekomstige politieke strominge in Suid-Afrika. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus would like to
congratulate the students of the University of Pretoria, in particular the
FF Plus students on the campus, on their record victory during the recent
student representative council elections at the campus.

Since the FF Plus, the ANC, the PAC, the ID and the DA participated in the
election, it is a special accomplishment that the FF Plus and its alliance
partner, the Tuks Afrikaanse Studente association, could win the election
with a record number of votes. The FF Plus obtained 6% more support this
year than in last year’s election. The FF Plus beat the ANC by more than a
thousand votes, and received nearly twice as many votes as the DA received.
The DA, who in the past managed second place by a whisker, could only
manage fourth place this year.

The FF Plus, however, wants to express its dissatisfaction about the
continuous, direct interference of the university authorities and
particular persons from the rectorate of the university in the election.
That is the reason why the election was characterised by delays and an
almost endless process of complaints and objections by the authorities and
the unsuccessful DA – all attempts to take away the FF Plus’s victory on a
technical point. It remains to be seen whether the authorities would have
acted in a similar manner if the ANC or the DA had won.

A record number of more than 10 000 students took part in this year’s
election. This is the eighth year in a row that the FF Plus was the victor.
This result and the voting pattern illustrate something about the Afrikaner
youth’s present standpoints on politics, and make a prediction about future
political tendencies in South Africa. I thank you.]




                    WORK AND CONTRIBUTION OF RURAL WOMEN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI(ANC): Madam Speaker, 15 October is recognised worldwide as
a day to appreciate the work and contribution that rural women make in our
civil society. In South Africa today more than 70% of rural households are
headed by females. These women continue to be trapped in the second
economy. On average women produce more than half of the food we consume in
the world today. Despite this fact, only 5% of all agricultural resources
are directed towards the assistance of women.

In our country, the ANC is working tirelessly to drastically change the
conditions of rural women. Over the last decade we have laid the
foundation. A World Bank study has confirmed the ANC’s long held belief
that if we invest in women we will reap the highest return, and ensure food
security, slower population growth, reduction of child mortality and better
awareness of environmental protection measures. I thank you. [Applause.]


                       EFFECT OF FIREARMS CONTROL ACT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R JANKIELSOHN (DA): Madam Speaker, while an average of 13 154
applications for firearm licences were processed per month over the past
six years, only 12 applications for firearm licences were received by the
firearms registry in the first two months after the launch of the Firearms
Control Act. This is proof of the crisis in which the 554 firearms dealers,
160 gunsmiths and 19 firearm manufactures find themselves. The chaos
surrounding the implementation of the Act has also had negative
implications for the professional hunting, film and private security
industries in South Africa.

It is clear that the Act is bad business for South Africa. The Firearms
Control Act is directing resources to the value of R63 million to target
legal firearm owners while illegal firearms continue to plague our society.
I intend to move a motion requesting that Parliament debate issues
surrounding the disastrous implementation of the Firearms Control Act which
the Minister himself has admitted to. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]


               ALLEGATIONS BY INTERIM PRIME MINISTER OF HAITI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (PAC): Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the PAC of Azania
expresses its shock and utter revulsion at - and dismisses as utterly
baseless, misguided and bordering on contempt and mischief - allegations
and pronouncements, as shown on the SABC3 news bulletin last night, made by
interim Prime Minister of Haiti, Gerard Latortue, against South Africa and
its President, Comrade Thabo Mbeki, in particular.

The PAC wishes to reiterate its view that South Africa has conducted its
foreign policy with integrity and a progressive paradigm. Like President
Toure before him in relation to Dr Kwame Nkrumah, President Mbeki has come
to the assistance of an illegally removed head of state, President Jean-
Bertrand Aristide, this time at the behest of the African Union and the
Caribbean states.

The PAC believes that the onus is in the likes of Mr Latortue to prove
correct the assertion made to justify the coup against President Aristide,
namely that his removal would bring peace and stability to Haiti.

The PAC of Azania is of the view that it is the forces that have installed
Mr Latortue in power that have trampled on international law. The PAC,
therefore, calls on this House and Africans - black, coloured, Indian,
white, or whatever they prefer to call themselves - to rally behind our
government and to reject with contempt the attempt to assail its integrity
with regard to Haiti. The PAC also makes a call that President Aristide
must be reinstated to continue with his transformation agenda for Haiti.
[Applause.]


                         POVERTY ERADICATION EFFORTS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M JOHNSON (ANC): Madam Speaker, Deputy President, the ANC supports the
United Nations’ effort to eradicate poverty. On 22 October 2004 the United
Nations Development Programme will hold its 8th annual poverty eradication
award ceremony. This effort is part of mobilising public awareness
regarding the Millennium Development Goals.

More than half of the world’s population lives on less than US$1 a day.
More and more children suffer from malnutrition while the world has more
than enough resources to feed every soul on this planet.

Poverty and alienation from society are the breeding ground for internecine
conflict over limited resources and for terrorist movements around the
world. It is for this reason and these reasons that poverty eradication
remains central in the ANC’s efforts to bring about a safer and a better
world. Thank you. [Applause.]


                          SCHABIR SHAIK COURT CASE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Madam Speaker, the Cabinet has been critical of media
sensationalism around the Schabir Shaik court case, and has alleged that it
impugns Deputy President Zuma’s integrity on the basis of allegations not
yet proven in a court of law.

While the DA agrees with Judge Hillary Squires that the media should
respect the sub judice rule, nevertheless it will be almost impossible for
the media not to report and comment on allegations about the Deputy
President as they emerge during the presentation of evidence in the Shaik
case.

To quote Hamlet, the Deputy President is clearly “the ghost at this
particular feast”. His name appears all over the charge sheet and not an
hour of court proceedings goes by without his name being mentioned in
evidence about Mr Shaik’s dealings, either in allegations that he was
bribed or that he peddled influence. [Interjections.]

The Deputy President, who is represented in the Durban court by a battery
of lawyers, claims he has never been given a chance to clear his name. This
is disingenuous for he must be aware that had he been charged with fraud,
corruption or bribery, he would have had to resign his position.

The DA believes that he should have been charged. [Interjections.] The fact
that he was not charged, in spite of the prima facie case against him which
seems to grow with each day of evidence, will surely go down as one of the
great puzzles in the annals of our prosecution service.

The Deputy President has remedies. If he is innocent of any wrongdoing, he
should sue the National Prosecuting Authority and relevant media for
defamation. [Interjections.] There are other steps he could have taken to
clear his name, such as giving evidence before the Hefer Commission, but he
did not.

For the Cabinet to take a legalistic approach to the Deputy President’s
guilt or otherwise is not helpful. They should be more concerned with the
damage to the government’s integrity, with applying a code of conduct to
members of government, and with a commitment to transparency and
accountability. [Time expired.] [Interjections.] [Applause.]


                      VIOLENCE AND ABUSE AGAINST WOMEN



                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Madam Speaker, on Sunday, 17th October, a 26-year-old
man was arrested near Camperdown in KwaZulu-Natal after allegedly killing
his girlfriend during an argument at their home. This is just one of the
many tragic examples of violence and abuse committed against women.

Although we have achieved much over the past 10 years, especially with
regard to women’s rights, there are still too many reports and even more
unreported cases of women being abused and victimised. There is simply no
place in our society for this type of behaviour. It has to be stamped out.

The people who commit these senseless acts should be brought to book and
dealt with accordingly. Constant efforts are needed to highlight this
cause, as well as to educate and inform women about their rights. I thank
you.


                             BREAST CANCER MONTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Madam Speaker, the international community observes
October as Breast Cancer Month. Notwithstanding that, African women and the
poor in general continue to die unnecessarily from breast cancer.
Therefore, the ANC urges all South Africans to recognise the importance of
regular checkups.

Early detection of cancer results in a 90% chance of being fully cured. The
ANC supports this campaign because it promotes early detection of cancer
and therefore higher prospects for successful treatment of the disease.

Our celebrations of the first decade of freedom should be characterised by
our greater commitment to the goal of achieving a better national health
profile for all, especially women. The ANC pledges its support for the
campaign in order to increase awareness about breast cancer. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                       EFFECT OF FIREARMS CONTROL ACT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Speaker, an opposition member has raised an
issue that there is chaotic application of legislation governing arms or
weapons in our society. It is important for me to place on record something
that is already before this House. Since we came into government, we have
introduced legislation and procedures for management of the flow, sale and
purchase of equipment under the National Conventional Arms Control
Committee. This government is particularly responsible with regard to this
matter.

At the present moment, we are dealing with very difficult and complex
problems arising out of practices of the old order. The amount of weaponry
that we collect whilst combating crime - weapons that were distributed
according to information from the records of the past - by far surpasses
the weaponry that emerges from purchases and sales of the present time.
This is very important. We have told parties across the board that it is
critical that, in securing the population of this country, we must
sometimes forget party-political loyalty. South Africans across the board
must at least collaborate on this particular issue.

The number of arms caches which remain recorded but unaccounted for, and
with regard to which we are not assisted by those who know exactly where
these arms are, is a major problem. We have now offered amnesties for
people to come forward and say, “Here are armaments, take them and deal
with them”. That alone will go a long way. Most of the weapons we find at
crime scenes with their numbers filed off, at the very least, when one
tracks them, go back to caches that have not been accounted for.

I don’t think that the governing party should use its position in power to
score points. It is critical that we should be able to share the problem as
a collective problem. I am quite happy to accept that in certain areas the
state machinery is not perfect and mistakes happen and so on. But, it is
this foundation of a collective effort that is lacking; and this is holding
our country back.

We must deal with that issue because, as will be seen when we table
reports, the serious situations that arise in our country as a result of
this failure to collaborate and work together have serious implications for
the country if we don’t deal with those issues as we should. I thank you.


                          SCHABIR SHAIK COURT CASE



                            (Minister’s Response)




The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr A G H Pahad): Madam Speaker, I
find it quite amazing and surprising that after 11 years the members of the
opposition continue to be as irresponsible as they are. It is quite
surprising that my friend from the opposition has once again exploited the
sanctity of this House in order to carry out what has been going on for
some time, namely trial by media, which I think they perpetuated and
initiated themselves.

It’s inexplicable that they are at such a weak and low level that they get
reduced to exploiting personal things that are not proven. They talk about
free trial and that people have to be proven guilty before they are found
guilty.

They come here and use every opportunity to insinuate that a trial that’s
taking place on these very charges of corruption definitely has something
to do with the Deputy President. They don’t purport to give us any facts
and information. I think it’s a dangerous load of rubbish that they
continue to carry out and we must stop that. [Applause.] [Interjections.]


                      PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, the Petroleum
Products Act, Act 120 of 1977, is outdated and is no longer in line with
the sociopolitical and economic dynamics of the South African liquid fuel
industry. It does not meet the present-day governance needs of the sector.
It is for this reason that, last year, this House adopted an amendment to
this Act, which proposed a number of changes to the regulatory framework.
Most of these changes are aimed at facilitating the liberalisation of this
sector.

The Petroleum Products Amendment Bill is aimed at ensuring and improving
the governance of the liquid fuel sector, and also ensuring that it is in
line with the government’s policy objectives and developments in this
sector.

One of the main objects of the Bill is to give effect to the Renewable
Energy White Paper and in that process provide for a licensing dispensation
that includes licensing of refineries, wholesalers and retailers that
conduct business with respect to petroleum products.

Unfortunately, immediately after the finalisation of the amending Act, the
Department of Minerals and Energy was alerted to the unintended
consequences that would result from the finalisation of the Act as it
stood. A few sections in the Act that were intended to facilitate market
solutions seemed to have achieved the opposite effect.

The inclusion of these sections was not intended for the Minister to pre-
empt negotiation on the supply agreement between Sasol and the industry,
but to facilitate such negotiations. It was not the intention of the
regulator to get involved in the determination of volumes or prices at
which the products would be bought or sold, nor to pre-empt the sale of
service stations. Section 2B(6) for instance draws the regulator into the
setting of prices at which designated products are sold between wholesalers
- an issue that should preferentially be left to the industry participants.

In drafting the system of licences, the aim is to achieve equilibrium in
the next 10 years. But, it is clear that the current provisions in the
amending Act will not achieve this. It will merely postpone the inevitable
structural changes to the time when the industry is liberalised, rather
than achieving the smooth transition that is the object of amending the
Act.

An industry as complex as the liquid fuel industry, which will have ever-
changing contentious issues which therefore necessitate flexible
interventions from time to time, would not be properly served by a rigid
provision such as section 2B(6).

In view of the above-mentioned consequences, it is therefore proposed that
the prescriptive sections be deleted and be replaced with enabling
regulations. This amendment before the House today can therefore be reduced
to simply asking the House to change some “musts” in the Act into “may”.

I commend this amending Bill to the House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Speaker, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, in
paraphrasing from the memorandum of the objects of the Petroleum Products
Amendment Bill of 2004, I would like to say that the Petroleum Products
Amendment Bill sets out to regulate the conditions under which the purchase
and sale of petroleum products manufactured from coal, natural gas or
vegetable matter occur. It authorises the Minister of Minerals and Energy
to make regulations in this regard, as the Deputy Minister pointed our
earlier.

It also makes amendments to the licensing system for such points of
presence in the petroleum value chain as envisaged in the principal Act.
The principal Act, the Petroleum Products Amendment Act, Act 58 of 2003 was
approved by Parliament in September 2003 after exhaustive consultation with
relevant stakeholders. The principal Act had amended the original Act, the
outdated Petroleum Products Act, Act 120 of 1977.

The principal Act was intended to give expression to the policy goal of
achieving an equilibrium in the number of service stations within a period
of 10 years. However, as the Deputy Minister pointed out, the unintended
consequence of that Act was to postpone rather than phase in the reduction
and thus reach the equilibrium when the industry would eventually be
deregulated.

For us, the principal Act and this amending Bill mark an important moment
in the legislative and economic history of South Africa, as they mark a
significant departure from a purely ideological approach to that of being
pragmatic, which recognises that overregulation as a means to promote
redistribution and growth can have unintended consequences.

To some, this piece of legislation may indicate that government has
accepted that a market-oriented approach will determine equilibrium and
greater economic efficiencies. Such judgment would, however, be premature
as this piece of legislation will ultimately determine the degree of
flexibility or inflexibility of the Minister in ring-fencing certain areas
after applying certain criteria, as spelt out in the principal Act. These
criteria are intended to assess the potential for success or failure of the
industry, especially in certain locales.

Obviously, the Deputy Minister referred to the criteria earlier. But, I
think the most important of these is the creation of employment
opportunities and the development of small businesses in the petroleum
sector. Ask any estate agent, especially in the present property market
context, and they will still tell you, “It’s all about location, location,
location.” Those in the property market will also tell you that the
phenomenal growth in their market will plateau and the bubble will burst
before a natural and longer-term equilibrium settles in.

An artificially induced equilibrium would be as much of a recipe for
disaster as the unintended consequences that this Bill now intends to
avoid. This piece of legislation basically gives the Minister the right to
assess whether the demand for petroleum products could be satisfied by what
the industry could supply through the most efficient distribution channels.
A licence would then only be issued after the procedures, criteria and
economic viability study are applied.

The regulations, as the Deputy Minister pointed out, would hopefully
further clarify what exactly this economic viability test would entail. If
that is accepted, then we would commend this legislation; and this refers
not only the DA, but to every petroleum entrepreneur who believes that she
or he can promote local economic development, jobs and growth. However,
there are also those who say that they cannot switch off their phones
because of this piece of legislation and the Minister having a say. Some
say on golf courses and in coffee shops that they cannot switch off their
phones because they expect an important call from someone they refer to as
Phumzile. I don’t know who they are referring to.

They ring-fence opportunities by claiming that they have the ear of the
Minister and that should people want to do business in the sector, then
they would be the BEE partners with the right political connectivity
because service stations require permits and the Minister plays an
important role in that. I doubt very much that the Minister would allow her
name to be abused in this manner. But, what could be done to stop these
impostors from using this legislation to get their grubby hands on BEE
shares in service stations that could be better invested in forecourt staff
through employee share schemes?

We anticipate that this piece of legislation may very well lay the
foundation for further unintended consequences such as greater elasticity
in the pump price of fuel. But that is still a far way off.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr C M MORKEL: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr A C NEL: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: In his speech, the hon
member made a very thinly veiled reference to the hon Minister of Minerals
and Energy. He suggested that the Minister is acting improperly through the
awarding of business on the basis of criteria not provided for in the law.
I would request that you please examine Hansard and make a ruling. Thank
you.

The SPEAKER: I will examine Hansard. I did hear the hon member making
reference to people who sometimes make reference, obviously, to the
Minister. However, I will examine the context in which this was said.

Mr E J LUCAS: Madam Speaker, at the meeting of the Portfolio Committee on
Minerals and Energy, on 16 September 2004, I did believe that we were
unanimously in agreement. The IFP fully supports the Petroleum Products
Amendment Bill. We do agree that the Minister of Minerals and Energy will
have a flexible approach to the liquid fuel sales.

Our concern has been that new entrants, especially historically
disadvantaged South Africans, must not be sidelined. We do know and draw
from the fact that the Minister has demonstrated her concern regarding new
entrants to the industry.

The price of crude oil which has increased so drastically in recent times
is a cause for great concern. We do know that these are internationally
controlled prices and that because we have other minerals and not crude
oil, this makes us dependent on the world prices. Let us hope that we will
not have the fuel price passing the R5,00 per litre mark by Christmas. I
thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Speaker, this Bill is much needed to bring legislation
in line with the dynamics of the petroleum industry. There have been a
number of changes to the sector at retail level where we have seen an
overabundance of service stations of almost 30%, which resulted in numerous
closures, given the small profit margins.

This Bill will promote an efficient manufacturing and retail industry. The
Bill will also ensure productive use of retail facilities. At the same
time, the ID wants to warn against overregulation and appeals for the
orderly entrance of synthetic fuel producers into the retail sector.

We also want to petition for the accommodation of BEE partners in upstream
activities because this is where substantial returns are made, and that
must be an area where real technical skills can be developed by BEE
partners. I thank you.

Mr W D SPIES: The regulation of the fuel industry has long been a
contentious issue in South Africa. Rising oil prices and the ever-present
volatility of our currency on the one hand, and environmental requirements
on the other, make any legislation with regard to the petroleum industry a
potential source of conflict.

The FF Plus is in favour of the limitation of regulation in the fuel
industry to the bare minimum required to protect consumers, communities and
the environment. Since the proposed amendments to the existing Act were
apparently driven by market forces, and given the fact that the amendments
are made with due consideration to the eventual deregulation of the
industry, the proposed amendments are acceptable. The FF Plus therefore
supports the Second Reading of the Bill.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, time brings a lot of change and we constantly
need to ensure that we are moving forward with such change. We must
develop, but under the conditions of democracy and the needs of our people,
strictly adhering to stimulating change that is in compliance with our
national Constitution.

The liquid fuel sector is one that requires such updating through policy
and management. The MF supports the authority awarded to the Minister of
Minerals and Energy regarding the purchase and sale of petroleum products,
as well as the licensing system. The drafting of such regulations and
amendments, we trust, shall be established efficiently and effectively to
the benefit of both the sector and the public.

Last year we dealt with the Petroleum Products Amendment Act of 2003. It
has been established that an unintended consequence has occurred regarding
the need to attain equilibrium with regards to the number of service
stations required. The MF supports the amendments made to the Act to allow
the Minister to correct this process through a more market-orientated
approach and regulations.

The MF supports the Petroleum Products Amendment Bill. Thank you.

Mr S K LOUW: In September last year, the Petroleum Products Amendment Bill
was approved by Parliament after an intense debate and discussions with the
stakeholders in the industry. One of the main aims of the Act was to
promote transformation of the petroleum and liquid fuels industry, as well
as to authorise the Minister of Minerals and Energy to make specific
regulations. It also promotes the advancement of historically disadvantaged
South Africans and gives effect to the liquid fuels charter.

Therefore, it is necessary in the Petroleum Products Amendment Bill for
those amendments to authorise the Minister of Minerals and Energy to make
regulations in this regard, and to make amendments to the envisaged
licensing systems. The Deputy Minister has elaborated a lot during her
input on these amendments.

The creation of employment opportunities and the development of small
business in the petroleum sector would make the availability of petroleum
products at competitive prices possible. What is key in this Bill is to
promote access to affordable petroleum products by low-income consumers for
household use.

We also need to guard against unintended consequences of the Petroleum
Products Amendment Act that will result in postponement, rather than the
phasing in of the reduction of the number of service stations when the
industry is eventually regulated. This amendment dealt primarily with the
power of the Minister to make regulations to curb the excesses of the
market, should it be necessary. This is done in this Bill by amending
section 2B, section 2E(3) and section 12C.

By deleting section 2B(6), the Bill allows the market to regulate itself.
It is replaced by the empowering regulation under section 12C(1). These
amendments in this Bill are indeed a milestone towards breaking down
dictatorial barriers, and thereby businesses in the oil industry are
encouraged to stand on their own feet and to function in a competitive
environment.

The prices of petroleum products will be enhanced through a proper price
control structure, which will allow price transparency at all levels. The
amendment in section 2E is mainly to give flexibility to the Minister in
making regulations by changing “must” to “may”.

We have to commend the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the department for
submitting this amendment so quickly, because the outcry in the industry
was huge. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, let me thank all
the parties for supporting this Bill. I also want to commend the DA for
agreeing with us for the first time, but of course they came up with rumour
mongering. Now I know where our press gets its unknown sources. I am
actually surprised that Mr Morkel agrees to be used in this way when his
name is being thrown around in the press at the moment. [Interjections.]

I would like to make it quite clear that the criteria for allocation of
licences will be spelt out in detail in our regulations, which will be put
to the public for comment. The Controller of Petroleum Products will have
very limited discretion and will not be influenced by anybody.

I also want to emphasise that the Ministers of this government must have
power, because the ANC is the ruling party. When the white government was
in power, nobody questioned the discretion of Ministers. Nobody questioned
the power of Ministers, and Ministers had extraordinary powers. Ministers
had powers to instruct the army to go and shoot dead our children in 1976,
and some of the members of the DA were silent. [Interjections.] I also want
to say to Mr Harding that this Bill will only regulate the down stream
petroleum industry. Exploration and production is regulated by the Mineral
and Petroleum Resources Development Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

  THE INTRODUCTION OF A SINGLE NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE WITHOUT COMPROMISING
    THE ADVANTAGES OF PROXIMITY TO THE COMMUNITY AND FLEXIBILITY OF LOCAL
                       GOVERNMENT IN SERVICE DELIVERY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr M R BALOYI: Madam Speaker, I rise to introduce the debate as initiated
by the hon Gomomo, who unfortunately cannot be with us due to unforeseen
circumstances. As I introduce this debate, I want to remind this House of
the provisions of the White Paper on the transformation of the Public
Service, which puts emphasis on the key role that the Public Service has to
play as the executing arm of the government.

In this document it is stated, amongst other things, that:

  To fulfil this role effectively, the service will need to be transformed
  into a coherent, representative, competent and democratic instrument for
  implementing government policies and meeting the needs of all South
  Africans.


According to the White Paper and other policy positions of the current
political dispensation under the ANC-led government, the Public Service
should be responsive to the needs of the people. It should be accountable.
It should be service-oriented and transparent. It should put people first
and be co-ordinated.

The topic that we are debating today finds relevance in the broader debate
about Public Service transformation in that, as one unitary country with
one supreme Constitution, we should create and steer all state machinery
towards the realisation of nationally acclaimed policies and objectives.

We are introducing this debate with the understanding that transformation
is so dynamic a process that you can never say that you are done with it.

Whereas the question of the introduction of a single Public Service has
been with us since the beginning of the democratic dispensation, the first
10 years of our democracy saw us building the foundation by creating such
structures as we needed to take the process of governance forward, and we
built on that foundation by introducing policies that are meant to assist
us to move from one point to another in the service of the nation. Step by
step, we have begun to answer this question, and the following bears
testimony to this.

Having inherited a Public Service divided along racial and ethnic lines,
the first logical step to create a single Public Service has been that of
the restoration of the national identity of all line functions and all the
people of the country in as far as Public Service delivery is concerned,
and we achieved this through the rationalisation of the previously divided
Public Service institutions into one. We now talk of a single national
department for each particular line function.

In order to guide the activities of the rationalisation of the Public
Service, we introduced national policies for service delivery for further
transformation of the Public Service and for other critical areas of
training and development of our Public Service personnel. All this was to
ensure that we all read from the same national source materials and expose
all our personnel to the same standards of consciousness for better service
delivery for the one nation, South Africa. We created three spheres of
government.

Laha hi nga tumbuluxa mfumo wa masipala, wa swifundhankulu na wa tiko
hinkwaro. Hi thlela hi tinyungubyisa ku vula leswaku loko endla tano hi swi
vekile swi va erivaleni leswaku hinkwaswo swiyimo leswi swa mfumo swi ta
tirhisana hi ndlela leyi faneleke. Swi nge phikizani naswona swi ta
seketelana ku yisa emahlweni pfhumba ro korokela vaaka-tiko hi ndlela leyi
faneleke.

Mbulavulo lowu nga kona eka nkarhi wa sweswi, lowu hi tirhanaka na wona
kwala Palamende ni le handle, hileswaku wu fanele wu twisisiwa ku vula
ntsena leswaku vukorhokeli bya mfumo byi fanele byi fana hambi hi le ka
masipala, eka swifundhankulu hambi hi le ka mfumo wa le xikarhi wa tiko
hinkwaro, hi fanele hi kuma nkorokelo lowu fanaka. Hi lava ku vona
vukorhokeli bya vanhu byi va fikela hinkwavo handle ko va va byeriwa
leswaku hina hi le ka masipala ntsena a hi hina hi phakelaka vanhu mati na
leswaku vanhu va ta rhumeriwa eka tindhawu to hambana-hambana. (Translation
of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[We created three spheres of governance: the local, provincial and national
spheres. We are proud to state that these spheres complement each other
without competing. They support each other in providing service to our
people.

Current debates in Parliament and outside revolve around the question of a
single Public Service, and service delivery to our people should be the
same in all spheres of governance. We need to reach a stage where people
receive service irrespective of where they are, without been told that, for
example, local authorities have no capacity to handle their queries, so
that people end up being sent from pillar to post.]

We want to make sure that people have a one-stop point for service delivery
without further references, and the realisation of this depends on what we
make of debates like the one we are participating in today.

Minhlangano yo hambana-hambana ya karhi ya kanela hi mhaka leyi ya ku va hi
va na vukorhokeli byin’we bya mfumo eka tiko hinkwaro. Xivutiso lexikulu
eka mhaka yo fana na leyi hileswaku loko hi ri karhi hi kanele ha yona i ku
va hi twisisa leswaku xana swi vula yini na leswaku hi ta swi endlisa ku
yini ku ri hi va na vukorhokeli byin’we lebyi fanaka eka swiyenge hinkwaswo
swa mfumo.

Yin’wana ya minhlangano leyi nga eku kaneleni hi mhaka yo fana ni leyi i
nhlangano wa Salga lowu thlelaka wu twisisa leswaku na wona wu yima na rona
pfhumba leri ra ku hi kanele timhaka ta leswaku hi va na pfhumba rin’we ra
ku korhokela tiko rin’we ra hina. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[Various stakeholders are busy debating the issues around the possibility
of a single Public Service, but the most important question about the whole
exercise is how to go about having a single Public Service for all spheres
of governance.

One of the stakeholders dealing with this question is Salga, which also
supports the idea that we need to have a single Public Service for service
delivery in our country.]

Salga, at the moment, is actually sharing with us as they debate this issue
about the question of a single Public Service. When it comes to the
conceptualisation of the objectives of this debate, they deal primarily
with addressing service delivery problems and the mobility of skills
between spheres of government.

Hi endlelo rolero swa olova leswaku mutirhela-mfumo loyi a nga kotaka ku
korhokela tiko a nga suka eka masipala hi ku tlakusiwa a kota ku tirhela
tiko kahle loko a ri eka mfumo wa xifundhankulu kumbe eka mfumo wa tiko
hinkwaro. (Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[In this manner, it is possible for a public servant who is attached to the
local sphere of governance who is promoted to the provincial sphere or the
national sphere to continue serving the country with distinction.]

As parliamentarians we need to learn lessons from our constituency work to
enrich debates like these and to take all necessary stakeholders on board,
because it is through the introduction of a single Public Service that the
realisation of the objectives we set ourselves may be possible.

Lexi nga kona eka maendlelo lama ya ku va ni vukorhokeli byin’we hileswaku
vanhu va kuma vukorhokeli lebyi nga fanela handle ka swisolo hikuva i mfumo
lowu wa hina wa ANC wu nga te ri hi ta endla leswaku vukorhokeli bya vanhu
byi va emahlweni. Hi ta veka vanhu emahlweni eka migingiriko ya hina
hinkwayo ya ku korhokela tiko.

Hikwalaho loko hi swi endla eka swiyimo swo hambana-hambana, swi languteka
onge kun’wana a swi hlangani kahle. Kambe loko hi swi endla hi ku va hi ri
na vukorhokeli byin’we hi kota ku fikelela hinkwaswo leswi fanelaka.
(Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[With a single Public Service, service delivery is easily accessible for
our people, for it is the ANC-led government that stated that people should
come first in service delivery. We will always consider people first in our
service delivery programmes.

When they are delivered in different spheres they are not well co-
ordinated. However, if we have a single Public Service, service delivery
will become easier.]

As we introduce this debate, we are saying that it is a contribution to the
ongoing debate, which will continue until this engagement produces the
final entity, in terms of which we shall be proud to say: Yes, a single
Public Service is the answer. Let the debate continue! Inkomu. [Thank you.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Chairperson and
hon members of this House, when we adopted our Constitution we imposed
certain obligations upon ourselves and this was particularly in respect of
building the nature of the state that we are currently building. And that
was to ensure that we would indeed build the developmental state; one that
would be interventionist, one that would be redistributive, and one that
would indeed reflect that the capability of the state should be such that
it can and should intervene in community and society where the market and
other forces break down.

One of the fundamental goals for our country, as stated in the preamble to
the Constitution, is to:

      Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of
      each person.


Our first task in building a single Public Service post-1994 was to
dismantle the myriad apartheid regime services and to forge a single Public
Service throughout the country with uniform conditions of service at
national as well as provincial government level. But forging this Public
Service was not and is not merely a technical exercise. It requires and
involves the forging of a common ethos of service dedicated to the values
of our Constitution and the values of a progressive and developmental
state. To build this kind of ethos and to build the developmental state is
not an automatic process. And it is something that we clearly identified in
the 1997 White Paper on transforming service delivery, Batho Pele, when it
was launched. Today the values of Batho Pele remain the fundamental values
on which we are building our Public Service.

Now, as stated by the hon member who opened this debate, a single Public
Service and integrated service delivery is about ensuring that South
Africans receive services at their convenience, at times they desire and
not according to government structures or government design. Hence we say
that we need to look at how we use or ensure the modernisation of the state
in order to ensure that the Public Service is responsive to the needs of
the people.

Let me give you some examples of that this afternoon. In any rural part of
this country where there is no tertiary hospital but there is a clinic,
there are children and adults who are in need of medical services. It is
necessary for us, through the use of ICT and satellite technology, to use
telemedicine where a specialist in a hospital such as Groote Schuur can be
linked up with a clinic in Bochum in the Limpopo province. That is about
ensuring integrated and seamless public services.

It is also about ensuring that, in schools where there may be an absence of
maths and science teachers, we use satellite technology or other forms of
multimedia such as televisions. A teacher in one of the best public schools
in an urban centre teaching maths or science can, in this way, reach those
children in the rural communities. A country like South Africa that has two
economies, that is divided at this particular point still in terms of
developed and underdeveloped, should ensure that we use the resources
available to us to overcome that divide and that is about integrated
service delivery.

So what are we doing to make this happen? How are we going to ensure that
we actually build a single Public Service? And when we talk about a single
Public Service we talk about how we bring the services at local government
level together with those at provincial and national government levels. How
do we make this happen? Because in essence our communities are not
interested in whether services are being delivered at local government
level or at national government level. What they want is an effective
service.

We have put together task teams that are currently working on conditions of
service and they are dealing with four issues. They are dealing with
remuneration and grading with regard to the salaries of public servants.
And I will, at this point, liberally use that term to cover local
government as well, where we are trying to look at the alignment of the
salaries of those officials working at local government level with those at
national government level. And why do we want to do this? We want to this
in order to ensure that there is greater mobility of officials. We also
want to ensure this in order that those who join the Public Service should
understand that they are not employed in a post, but that they are employed
in a service. So if someone is employed as the Director-General of the
Department of Public Service and Administration or the Director-General of
Foreign Affairs today, tomorrow that employee can be the CEO of the
Kgalagadi municipality, because he or she has been employed to serve in the
Public Service. Hence we need to look at the overall wage package for
public servants.

We are also looking at pensions and medical aid, because currently the
pension and medical aid dispensation at national and provincial government
levels differs from that at local government level. We have already seen a
great movement in terms of an alignment to the existing structure in the
Public Service but more still needs to be done.

We also want to review other conditions of service, including a range of
issues from leave dispensation to everything else because we need to have a
common framework that governs the entire Public Service and all officials
who work in it. And then we also want to review collective bargaining,
which is something that is seen as a very sensitive but very necessary
area. Currently we have different unions operating at different levels, but
we need to ensure that we work towards a common bargaining chamber.

Now, whilst today I am talking about national, provincial and local
government we also, as we deal with the single Public Service, want to look
at the public sector as a whole. Are public entities so poised that they do
respond to the developmental needs of the people of South Africa? When we
have integrated programmes, is there input from the public entities where
they reflect that they are part of this integrated Public Service, because
after all these are all organs of the state, and are we utilising those
organs of the state appropriately?

So in essence, to revert to the issue of Batho Pele, I think we need to
restate that it remains a fundamental value upon which we are building our
Public Service. It is about ensuring that people come first and hence our
services must be so structured that they serve people, and it is about
building such values that would ensure that a service-oriented Public
Service remains central and the challenging task that we must confront.
This is done despite claims that, when we look at integrated service
delivery, we may want to control. That is not so.

What we actually want to do is ensure that the developmental state is
geared towards addressing the socioeconomic needs of all people, especially
the poor, the marginalised and the historically disadvantaged. Because we
need to intervene actively, as I stated earlier, in both the first and the
second economy in order to maintain the resilience of the first economy and
to make progress towards integrating the second economy into the first. And
as a result, our interventions into the second economy should be such that
they actually release the potential of communities in the townships, in the
informal settlements, and in the rural areas. And we should always consider
whether the kinds of interventions of the state - whether it is public
entities, local, national or provincial government - ensure that the people
receive the services they require, like water, electrification, housing,
quality education for our children, health services, cultural activities,
sports facilities and so forth. And that requires all the spheres of
government to work in an integrated and interrelated way. And that is why
it makes sound economic and social sense as we move forward to ensure that
this second decade of our democracy is about implementation.

We also need to look closely at what Chapter 10 of the Constitution tells
us. It says public administration must adhere to certain basic values and
principles. A high standard of professional ethics must be promoted and
maintained. Efficient, economic and effective use of resources must be
promoted and hence it makes sense to talk about integrated service
delivery. Public administration must be development-oriented and services
must be provided impartially, fairly, equitably and without bias. People’s
needs must be responded to and the public must be encouraged to participate
in
policy-making. Public administration must be accountable. Transparency must
be fostered by providing the public with timely, accessible and accurate
information. Good human resource management and career development
practices, to maximise human potential, must be cultivated. And finally,
public administration must be broadly representative of the South African
people.

Now these principles present us with a range of challenges that we must
overcome and this requires that there must be active engagement between the
people of South Africa and the government of this country. And as a result
all spheres of government and all public entities must ensure that they are
part of this engagement. Institutions of the state must act in co-operation
through their actions and we should see integrated and co-ordinated service
delivery.

When members of Parliament go back to their constituencies and there is a
particular need they should not, when they come to a particular government
department, be told that that department is not involved in the delivery of
water and that they should rather go to the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry. They should not be told when they need electrification that in
this instance they can’t come to local government, but should go to Eskom.

We need to ensure that the basket of services is there and that it can be
accessed in a way that reflects that we act in concert, that we are
integrated and that government does not act in silos, but works across
government departments. Services must be accessed in a way that reflects
that services are provided in order to respond to the needs of the
population and not to the convenience of a particular manager or a
particular government department or even a particular politician who thinks
very expediently about how they should protect narrow spheres without
looking at the interconnectedness of the spheres of government; who also
does not see the harmonising of public services and local government
conditions of service, but rather wants to see a separation, and who does
not accept that the state in actual fact is a single employer, and that we
should ensure that it acts as such. We should not have fragmentation at
local government level where each municipality is seen as a separate
employer. We need to ensure that we address these issues and this clearly
means that we need to address the question of the macro organisation of the
state, because, as I stated previously, we are building and will build a
developmental state.

I think we also need to ensure that public entities, as state institutions,
assist in the delivery of the development goals of the developmental state
and if the state does not have the ability or the statutory or managerial
tools to provide oversight and guidance …  Thank you very much. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mnr K J MINNIE: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb lede, ek is baie dankbaar
dat die Minister gehoor gegee het aan my oproep van ’n paar maande gelede
om haar planne met die Staatsdiens op die tafel te plaas sodat die debat op
alle vlakke van die samelewing gevoer kan word.

Die ANC beplan om met ’n verenigde Staatsdiens die probleme met
dienslewering wat hulle tans aan ’n gefragmenteerde regeringstelsel koppel,
aan te spreek, asook verder om die mobiliteit van vaardighede tussen die
verskillende sfere van regering te fasiliteer. Dit is ’n rookskerm, want
die ANC is sedert hy die regering in 1994 oorgeneem het, besig met ’n
sentraliseringsoefening.

Tydens die plaaslike owerheidsverkiesing van 1995 het hulle begin om
plaaslike owerheid te sentraliseer deur die mag van onafhanklike en sterk
plaaslike owerhede weg te neem en die mag in ’n metropolitaanse stelsel te
vestig. Tydens die plaaslike owerheidsverkiesing in 2000 is finale beslag
gegee aan metropolitaanse rade, en het baie selfstandige stadsrade hul
status dan ook verloor.

Onlangs het die ANC aangekondig dat hy oorweging daaraan skenk om die
metropolitaanse rade in Gauteng saam te voeg in ’n super-metropolitaanse
raad. Tesame met die Minister vir die Staatsdiens en Administrasie se
doelwit om ’n enkele Staatsdiens te vestig, is dit baie duidelik dat die
ANC op alle vlakke besig is om hul mag te sentraliseer.

Die Grondwet bepaal duidelik dat ’n munisipaliteit die reg het om op sy eie
inisiatief die plaaslike bestuursaangeleenthede van sy gemeenskap te
regeer. Enige verandering hieraan sal ’n grondwetwysiging tot gevolg hê, en
ek dink die Minister moet vir ons uitspel of sy so ’n grondwetwysiging
beoog.

In beginsel bestaan elke sfeer van regering uit ’n wetgewende gesag, dit is
die politici wat die burgers verteenwoordig, en ’n uitvoerende gesag – die
administrasie. Indien jy die administrasie wegneem, is daar geen rede meer
waarom daar ’n wetgewende gesag moet wees nie. Dus word ’n de facto
sentrale regeringstelsel ingestel.

Die regering het egter nie rekening gehou met Salga se reaksie op die
integrering van die Staatsdiens nie, want luister wat het Salga te sê oor
die Minister se planne:

  It is important that this review results in the strengthening and
  consolidation of the local government sphere and not its emasculation.

Salga sê verder:

  Municipalities must be given an opportunity to stabilise and consolidate
  after years of restructuring and change. The integration process should
  seek a greater alignment of the three spheres, rather than amalgamation.

Terwyl ek oor Salga praat, dit was ontstellend om tydens die bespreking van
hierdie item by die kongres te moes sien dat die Direkteur-Generaal van die
Departement van Staatsdiens en Administrasie se naam pertinent op die
agenda verskyn om insette te lewer en om vrae te beantwoord wat moontlik
uit die bespreking sou voortspruit, maar dat nóg die Minister, nóg die
direkteur-generaal of enige verteenwoordiger by hierdie bespreking
teenwoordig was om met die afgevaardigdes van Salga oor hierdie belangrike
saak te praat nie. Gaan dit maar net weer afgedwing word? Dis die vraag.

Luister wat het President Mbeki, onder andere, tydens sy toespraak by die
Salga-kongres gesê: Munisipaliteite moet luister as hul gemeenskappe praat.
Hulle moet die regering se hulpbronne gebruik    om ongelykhede van die
verlede reg te stel en die greep van armoede te verbreek. Munisipaliteite
moet fokus op basiese dienslewering. Kommunikasie met gemeenskappe moet nie
deur rade gesien word as lastige prosesse nie, maar as ’n noodsaaklike
vereiste vir volhoubare dienslewering.

Die President het dit gesê. Dit lyk vir my of die Minister nie net met
Salga moet rekening hou nie, maar ook in die proses die President dalk moet
fyn dophou.

Op plaaslike owerheidswesevlak is wanadministrasie, korrupsie en swak
dienslewering besig om krisisafmetings aan te neem. Gebrekkige
dienslewering en minder politieke deelname is die grootste probleem met
sentralisasie. Dienslewering het reeds verswak waar kleiner rade geskrap is
om plek te maak vir metropolitaanse gebiede. Plaaslike owerhede is op die
voorpunt van die ontwikkeling van ons demokrasie, en dit vereis genoeg van
ons bekwaamste personeel om dit in stand te hou. Daar is reeds ’n groot
tekort aan bekwame en opgeleide personeel en herontplooiing sal hierdie
krisis verder vergroot.

Sentrale regering word volgens funksionele, gespesialiseerde,
departementele lyne georganiseer. In teenstelling hiermee is plaaslike
owerheid horisontaal georganiseer en gegrond op dienslewering en die
behoeftes van die gemeenskap. Plaaslike regering lewer diens direk aan die
man op die straat – die naaste van alle vlakke van regering. Daar is dus
direkte verantwoording deur die stadsraad aan die burgery. Hierdie
werkskultuur verskil hemelsbreed van die werkskultuur op sentrale vlak.

Die DA is van mening dat onnodige tyd en energie bestee gaan word aan die
implementering van ’n nuwe Staatsdiens, terwyl tyd en energie eerder oor
die volgende vyf jaar bestee moet word aan die intensiewe ontwikkeling en
opleiding van arbeid. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr K J MINNIE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, I am very
grateful that the Minister has heeded to my call of a few months ago to
place her plans for the Public Service on the table so that the debate can
be held at all levels of society.

The ANC plans to address the problems with service delivery that they
currently link to a fragmented government system, with a united Public
Service, as well as facilitating the mobility of skills between the
different spheres of government. This is a smoke screen, because the ANC
has been busy with a centralisation exercise since it took over government
in 1994.

During the local government election of 1995 they started to centralise
local government by removing powers from independent and strong local
authorities and vesting such power in a metropolitan system. During the
local government election in 2000 final shape was given to metropolitan
councils, and many independent city councils accordingly lost their status.

Recently the ANC announced that it was considering amalgamating the
metropolitan councils in Gauteng into a supermetropolitan council. Along
with the Minister for the Public Service and Administration’s  objective of
establishing a single Public Service, it is very clear that the ANC is
centralising its power at all levels.

The Constitution clearly provides that a municipality has the right to
govern its community’s local management matters on its own initiative. Any
change to this will lead to an amendment of the Constitution, and I think
the Minister should spell out to us if she envisages such an amendment to
the Constitution.

In principle every sphere of government comprises a legislative authority,
that is the politicians who represent the citizens, and an executive
authority - the administration. If one takes away the administration, there
is no longer any reason for a legislative authority. Thus a de facto
central government system is introduced.

The government did not, however, count on Salga’s reaction to the
integration of the Public Service, because listen to what Salga had to say
about the Minister’s plans:

      It is important that this review results in the strengthening and
      consolidation of the local government sphere and not its
      emasculation.


Salga further states:

      Municipalities must be given an opportunity to stabilise and
      consolidate after years of restructuring and change. The integration
      process should seek a greater alignment of the three spheres, rather
      than amalgamation.


While I’m making reference to Salga, it was disconcerting to see, during
the discussion of this item at the congress, that the name of the Director-
General of the Department of Public Service and Administration emphatically
appeared on the agenda to give inputs and to answer questions that might
flow from the discussion, but that neither the Minister nor the director-
general nor any representative was present at this discussion to speak to
the delegates of Salga about this important matter. Will this simply be
enforced again? That is the question.

Listen to what President Mbeki, amongst others, said during his speech at
the Salga congress: Municipalities should listen when their communities
speak. They must use the government’s resources to correct the inequalities
of the past and to break the grip of poverty. Municipalities should focus
on basic service delivery. Communication with communities should not be
seen by councils as a bothersome process, but as a necessary requirement
for sustainable service delivery.

That is what the President said. It would appear to me that the Minister
not only has to reckon with Salga, but should also watch the President
closely in the process.

At local authority level maladministration, corruption and poor service
delivery are reaching crisis proportions. Deficient service delivery and
less political involvement are the biggest problem with centralisation.
Service delivery has already deteriorated where smaller councils were
scrapped to make way for metropolitan areas. Local authorities are the
vanguard of the development of our democracy, and they require enough of
our most skilled employees to maintain them. There is already a significant
shortage of skilled and trained staff and redeployment will further
aggravate this crisis.

Central government is organised along functional, specialised, departmental
lines. Local government, in contrast, is organised horizontally and is
based on service delivery and the needs of the community. Local government
delivers services directly to the man in the street - the closest of all
levels of government. There is therefore direct accountability of the city
council to the citizenry. This working culture differs tremendously from
the working culture at central level.

The DA is of the opinion that unnecessary time and energy will be expended
on the implementation of a new Public Service, while time and energy should
rather be expended on the intensive development and training of labour in
the next five years.]

The creation of a single Public Service, couched in the language of
capacity-building, is a smoke screen for the further centralisation of the
ruling party’s power, and will take government further away from the
people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE:  Chairperson, hon members, the political arena is made up
of a multiplicity of social priorities, which continue to change and evolve
over time. Some are more urgent than others, such as delivery of services
to many of our people who are still living in abject poverty today. Sadly,
many municipalities have been found wanting in this area, which is why I
understand government’s point of departure in its call for a single Public
Service.

But let us not forget how government, a few weeks ago, dared public
servants to go on strike. We know that the Public Service is the single
largest employer that emerged from a fragmented bureaucratic system, but
one needs to face the hard facts. Government has to be interactive.
Departments need to co-ordinate their responses, share their expertise,
pool their resources, and thus prevent duplication of activities.

The IFP believes in a federalist form of government where power is devolved
to the citizenry. Therefore, the IFP cannot support a distant, remote-
controlled government that ignores the dynamics and dilemmas in each
province and municipality. Ideas have to be percolated from people and not
in a top-down approach that continuously limits decision-making to the
President and his Cabinet, while ignoring the needs of the people on the
ground.

Government of the people should be done in direct consultation with the
people in order to make decisions that reflect the will of the people. We
need to stop this centralism, which is concerned with stopping all decision-
making power right here and now in its tracks. By centralising the Public
Service we will only be eroding the core values and principles of a true
democracy, which is centred on the will and voice of the people, and not on
the elitist decision-making structures.

The IFP therefore believes that a single Public Service will not in any way
benefit democracy in South Africa, but will rather adversely contribute to
breaking down our ailing democracy.

Teachers, nurses and policemen are still poorly paid today, while they are
the very machinery that drives the rotation and the delivery of this
country’s most critical services. Public servants are already migrating in
their numbers to greener pastures in Britain, Saudi Arabia, and so on. Our
workers, whom we have trained, are being cherry-picked. The end result is
that a brain drain is occurring, which is stripping our country of valuable
skills and expertise, hence making our country poorer due to the loss of
such skills.

In order to maximise service delivery from public servants, we need to be
realistic and carefully consider their grievances. Public servants need to
be motivated in order to avoid strife, the syndrome of absenteeism and low
productivity. Most importantly, the loss of valuable skills and expertise
through our public servants migrating to other countries needs to be
avoided at all costs.

Yielding more power and control will not improve the current conditions
with regard to public servants. Government needs to realise that the
process of governing is a two-way street in a democracy. The government
also needs to listen and respond rationally and reasonably. It should not
be a process of a disciplinarian versus the disobedient. It is time to
grasp the nettle and put our people’s needs, like service delivery, before
party politics.

Also, a new breed of supermanagers is being compensated at the expense of
poor people in poor communities. There are also some of those public
servants who are feathering their own nests …  Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Chairperson and my Minister, I had guessed that some
people would come here and start making the wrong assumptions with regard
to what we are talking about. They are now talking about top-down, three
spheres of government, and yet we are talking about a simple national
Public Service which is meant to serve the people. So, I had imagined that
we would be derailed by people not understanding what the issue is.

I wish we had the Minister of Sport and Recreation here. Let me remind you,
members: Do you remember when one day we woke up in the morning and read in
the newspaper that the then Premier of the Eastern Cape was furious, saying
that those three spheres of government must go because the road from East
London to King William’s Town was nearly finished, yet each and every
sphere was saying it should be done by the municipality of East London?
Others were saying it should be done by the provinciate, whereas others
were saying that it should be done by the local government of King
William’s Town. He was furious.

I wish he were here so that he could understand what the Minister is
saying when we talk here about one single national Public Service. So, I
would like to start my speech by saying:  At long last, the debate that has
been conducted behind the scenes has now been brought before you to examine
so as to eliminate knots in the Public Service.

Our approach is informed by the evaluation that was carried out in 2001.
That evaluation had its own objective, namely the need to take the
functioning of the state machinery to a higher level. Therefore, the
central thrust of co-ordination, co-operation and complementary public
service means that we have to move towards a single national Public Service
whose character and content will ensure integration of functions that will
result in the better functioning of the Public Service. It has nothing to
do with whatever political ideology we hold. We are talking here about a
public service that will render a better service to the people. People
should note and understand that. This is not done or was not designed for
fun but to give, render and implement one equal service to the people of
South Africa.

Indeed, because of tradition we have clung to these dead-weight laws.
Externalities are categorised according to two outputs, namely positive
externality and negative externality. So we as legislators ought to be
alert to distortions so as to remove determinants of dead-weight laws as
early as possible.

Chairperson, I am saying that the Public Service, as it stands now, is
distorted. It has negative externalities that have determinants of dead-
weight laws. It is a distortion to apply different standards, rules and
delivery patterns to the citizens of the land, yet all they want is better
service. All they want is responsive service delivery, a user-friendly
Public Service and an efficient Public Service. It is not about how many
spheres of government there are, but about people-centred government.

The negative externality of not having a single national Public Service is
what you see and experience. When you go to KZN, what you see is different
to what you see in Limpopo, the Eastern Cape, the Western Cape and Gauteng.
Are we living in so many countries or are we living in one South Africa?
Why should we let this go on the way it is now, because we can see that it
has distortions? So, let us correct this.

The Minister highlighted issues such as mobility. You know, today you moan
in this House and say people are being retrenched. In Cape Town, in Durban,
municipalities retrench people, yet in the Public Service there are
vacancies, because we do not have a single Public Service.  Common sense
should dictate these issues, therefore if you have listened, it is very
important to open up and have mobility of public servants so that, as the
Minister indicated, we could take a director-general from the national
Public Service and put him in a Cape municipality or in Durban or
Ethekwini, or in Gauteng.

We see that they all do it differently. The question is: Are we in
different countries administered by different laws, brought up by different
political parties? [Time expired.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Chair and hon members, I must point out to the previous
speaker who asked the question whether we are living in one country or many
countries, that of course we are living in one country, but we have to do
with many cultural groupings of people who all should share in the power -
especially the power closest to them in local communities.

It is something that, in this motion, the hon member and members supporting
the unification tend to forget. We are a multicultural country, and it is
something that the President again underlined in his speech earlier this
year when he said that we recognise groups, as opposed to the DA, which
only recognises individuals. We recognise that there are groups with their
own interests and with their own identities. I think it is time that we
started keeping that in mind and in practice.

Much has been said today about the many laudable objectives of creating a
single national Public Service. We support, for example, equality in
employment conditions of all public servants, and it is a matter that
should be actively pursued. However, there are serious negative
implications also.

We need to caution against creeping centralisation of power. We are
concerned that the pursuit of a single national Public Service could easily
become a back door or covert means of diluting the power and functions of
local government, which will lose the ability to appoint, manage and
control their own workforces. If you can’t do that, how can you govern?
What is the sense of political power?

The essence of local government, which is entrenched in the Constitution,
is the democratic participation of people in the way they are governed
through their elected councillors and their ward committees. We must guard
against any measure, however well intentioned it may be, that may detract
from this process of democratic participation.

The costs and disruptions that the creation of such a single Public Service
will cause are not even considered. Municipal employees earn more than some
of their peers in the Public Service, and that is a matter that cannot
easily be ignored. Thus, whilst there are possible benefits for a national
Public Service, they are not guaranteed.

In the meanwhile the problems and challenges of local government run far
deeper than this single issue. In fact, it is our contention that the
immediate and full implementation of the Municipal Financial Management Act
is a far greater priority, and will have far greater benefits for improved
service delivery.

Experimenting with new policies while existing critical legislation is not
being implemented is not good governance. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Mr Chair, the introduction of a national Public Service is a
noble idea, but it is one with major challenges for all public servants.
One of the major challenges would be for all public servants to accept
government’s aims and objectives. For government to achieve this objective
will require a major training and reorientation programme for all its
public servants.

We feel one of the major reasons for government not attaining its
objectives is that some of these civil servants are being downright
obstructionist. The Public Service is also not currently geared towards
offering such a developmental function. Transferability between the
different divisions will be the major challenge, because they are function-
specific. Transfers across government spheres are thus difficult.

Such a move would also have serious implications for government’s training
and development strategy. The Minister refers to a basket of services, but
that is not available in all our communities at present. The mechanisms to
achieve crosscutting governance are also not fully operational.
Compatibility of ICT is required for the various spheres of government to
converge. The Public Service policy framework must be adopted to achieve
this integrated service delivery.

In conclusion, however, in the founding documents of the ID we have
correctly identified the need for the developmental state to breach the
divide that still exists in our communities. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, this is a far-reaching proposal, and while
integrated services must be a reality, and there are always advantages to
standardisation, this does not require sameness or centralisation. The
South African Constitution provides for three distinct and separate spheres
of government. We must be careful not to violate this solid principle.

We surely cannot expect local governments throughout South Africa to be
identical. Where are we heading with this? The ACDP stands for the
principle of federalism, based on the grounds that it promotes the
following principles: It is the only system capable of being closely
associated with the country’s citizens, and which can adequately address
the diverse needs of the local regions; it promotes a better degree of
governmental and administrative efficiency and responsibility; and it is a
system that recognises open democracy, power-sharing and diversity and
builds co-operative partnerships.

The ACDP feels that there should be greater co-operation between the
various components of the Public Service, and that co-operation between
local, provincial and national structures is paramount in ensuring service
delivery to the public. It is questionable, however, as to whether there
should be a complete amalgamation and integration of all structures at
every level. It is never a good idea to put too much power in the hands of
a few, as this promotes corruption, and creates a different kind of red
tape and bureaucracy to that which we now have.

The general consensus amongst experts is that the Public Service needs to
be streamlined and trimmed to make it more efficient and cost-effective,
but these changes should not be brought about without going into an
extensive skills analysis process.

It is well known that successful states tend to be decentralised, and there
are long lists of failed states that generally have high levels of
centralisation. A move towards centralisation implies that Big Brother
knows better. We don’t want government by remote control in Pretoria. We
want to take government to the people. Service delivery is the bottom line,
and this debate is therefore important. But I thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. As a democracy governed by the
supremacy of our national Constitution, we are required to adhere to this
supremacy. As a democracy we operate in terms of the separation of powers
through our three spheres of government, namely national, provincial and
local. Though this separation of governance allows for co-operative
governance between these spheres, each maintains its individual authorised
capacity.

We have had occasions when local government complained that they were not
able to exercise the authority awarded to them by the national
Constitution. The Minority Front strongly feels that local government is
our greatest contributor in defining what is required from all these
spheres due to its grass-roots level work, and access to the community.

We feel that a single national Public Service will compromise this. It is
already an issue in areas of South African local government. We sense that
a single institution will have even greater problems. Local government is
our eyes and ears on the ground, and people have a greater chance of being
heard, and governance is far more personalised.

The Minority Front feels that it would be flexible to look at the benefits
of a single national Public Service, but prefers the personalised public
service offered through local government. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr M R BALOYI: Chairperson, thank you very much. In closing this debate I
want to state to the hon Minister that we support the task teams that she
referred to, knowing very well that in their endeavours there will
obviously be challenges that will confront them. We are available as public
representatives, and as such we should assist in as far as we possibly can.

Let me indicate that the assumption that the debate on a single Public
Service is actually a debate on centralising, is unfortunate. It is
unfortunate simply because it is not true. [Interjections.] It is also
unfortunate, hon Waters, because it is actually a display of innocence, to
be polite. It is a display of innocence by people who claim to be
representing the public, as they participate here. For them to just miss
what it means when we talk of a single service cannot be explained. That
assumption is unfortunate.

Maybe, Chairperson, what you might want to do in a debate like this, is to
offer free lessons to such members as the hon Minnie and hon Waters, as to
exactly what it means when we talk about a single Public Service and
exactly what it means when we talk of a one-stop service. [Interjections.]

We are saying that we need to provide service without referral. When we say
we need to provide service without referral, it means that when people go
to their nearest office they should be in a position to receive a co-
ordinated service.

When we talk of co-ordination we are not talking of centralisation. For
example, when you go to our multipurpose centres, in one office you find
the services of various departments provided in that office. So, a member
of the public will definitely be able to get all services available and
they will be accessible. This is definitely not centralisation.

Maybe when we talk of a single service, the only problem that some people
actually have, like those on my left, is that they talk of a single service
as suggesting that we are talking of a single sphere. We are not intending,
in this debate, to do away with the three spheres that we have. What we are
saying is that we need to have services co-ordinated. For example, if a
child is born at a hospital, which is a government institution, why can’t
we provide systems whereby at that point that child can be registered? You
can do that without necessarily having to do away with the Department of
Home Affairs.

If there are people who claim that when we talk in terms of
co-ordination, we mean what they narrowly indicated, that is quite
unfortunate. When we talk of a single service, maybe it is like the hon
member said, namely that we do not know where some of you are actually
coming from. Just go to Galeshewe township in the Northern Cape; you have
to see it to believe it. When we say you are able to access services under
one roof, we mean it.

Just go to Makgoba in Limpopo, to the multipurpose centre. You will realise
that when we talk of a one-stop centre for all services, we mean exactly
that. It can actually happen. We do not want to talk in terms only of areas
where we have the multipurpose centres. But we want to then say that you
should be able to talk about a co-ordinated service, and co-ordination does
not mean centralisation, as we have indicated.

We are not debating this because of any problems. We are debating this
issue with the desire to ensure that what we said as the ANC government
would be readily available to the people and we mean exactly that. That has
to happen. That is exactly what we are saying. In fact, we are talking
about strengthening the service delivery machinery to ensure effective
service delivery. In doing this - contrary to what others will say, such as
that we will be frustrating local government - in the end we will
strengthen local government.

Maybe you need to do a bit of constituency work.

Hi nga nyika xikombiso xa vanhu va ka Dzumeri eLipompo lava va nga na
masipala wa vona kun’wana ni kun’wana laha va fambaka kona. Xa vona
hileswaku loko va fika lahaya va kombisa xiphiqo xa mati, a swi laveki
leswaku masipala a ku a ti tirhani na yena, a va ye eka Ndzawulo ya Mati.

Masipala u fanele a swi kota ku hlamusela loko vukorhokeri lebyi byi ri
kona laha va nga kona. Masipala, tani hi mfumo, u fanele a vona leswaku u
ta endla yini, a nga fanelangi ku rhumela vanhu kun’wana. U fanele ku va
pfuna. Hina hi fanele hi vona leswaku vukorhokeli lebyi byi le ndhawini
yin’we.

Ndza tshemba leswaku mi le ku ndzi yingiseleni. Naswona loko hi endla hi
ndlela yaleyo ivi vanhu va ku hi swi tisa ndhawu yin’we, a hi swona.
(Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[I can cite an example of the community at Dzumeri in Limpopo who also have
their own local authority. If this community has water shortages, the local
authority should not send them to the Department of Water Affairs.

The local sphere should have the capacity to explain if they are able to
provide the required services. This level of authority should not send
people away to get assistance somewhere else. It is our duty to see to it
that services are provided where they are needed.

I hope you are listening. If we decided to do that and people say we are
trying to centralise everything, it is unfortunate.]

Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 15:57.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          FRIDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 September 2004:


         (i)     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10D - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

     The following changes have been made to the membership of the Joint
     Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests:

         Appointed: Gumede, Mr D M (ANC)
         Discharged: Cronin, Mr J P (ANC)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Infrastructure
     Investment Unit 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 178-2004].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert No 1 from "ATC0917e"


                          MONDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Keuse oor die Beëindiging van
              Swangerskap [W 72 - 2003] (Nasionale Vergadering - art 76)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Choice on
         Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72 - 2003] (National
         Assembly - sec 76).



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) for 2003-
     2004.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert ATC0920e

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Proprietary) Limited
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral
         Technology (MINTEK) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 31-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 68-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
         Regulator for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 122-2004].

5.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 - Department of Safety and
     Security for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2003-2004 [RP 184-2004].

6.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Electoral Commission
     regarding the Management and Administration of the Represented
     Political Parties' Fund for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 116-
     2004].


                         TUESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2004


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Works

     Guidelines for the Implementation of Labour-Intensive Infrastructure
     Projects under the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Playhouse Company for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Zoological
         Gardens of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Engelenburg House Art
         Collection for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
         the Blind for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
         Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 150-2004].

3.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 - Independent Complaints
     Directorate (ICD) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 for 2003-2004 [RP 121-
     2004].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 - Public Service
       Commission (PSC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements of Vote 11 for 2003-2004 [RP 120-
       2004].


    b) Report of the Public Service Commission on Implementing Financial
       Disclosure Requirements – a comparative desk study on best practice
       concerning the implementation of financial disclosure frameworks.


                        WEDNESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of South African Revenue Service (SARS)
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 175-2004].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 140-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission of
         South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 107-2004].
     (c)    Annual Review of the Competition Commission of South Africa for
         2003-2004 [RP 107-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Manufacturing
         Advisory Centres Trust (NAMAC) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
         Standards (SABS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South Africa
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         Note: On the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports dated
         21 September 2004 there was an incorrect indication that this
         document had been tabled by the Minister of Arts and Culture.

4.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
     Development Board (CIDB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 138-
     2004].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    First Report of the Joint Rules Committee, dated 21 September 2004,
     as follows:

     At a special meeting of the Joint Rules Committee on Tuesday, 14
     September 2004, two matters were under consideration by the Committee,
     namely a proposed vision for Parliament and the new governance model.


Consideration of proposed vision for Parliament


     The following options for a proposed vision statement for Parliament
     were presented:

         OPTION 1
         To build an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs
         of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising an
         improved quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

         OPTION 2
         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
         Africa.

     Mr D H M Gibson, on behalf of the DA, expressed support for Option 2,
     subject to the following amendment: To substitute "Parliament" for
     "people's Parliament". The vision statement would, therefore, read as
     follows:

         To build an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs
         of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
         better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

     Mrs S A Seaton, on behalf of the IFP, initially proposed the omission
     of the first and third reference to "people", but subsequently withdrew
     the proposal and seconded the proposal by the DA.

     Mr A C Nel, on behalf of the ANC, also supported Option 2, subject to
     the following amendment: To substitute "their needs" for "the needs of
     the people". The vision statement would, therefore, read as follows:

         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         their needs and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better
         quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

     Mrs P de Lille, on behalf of the ID, seconded the proposal by the ANC.

     Mr N T Godi, on behalf of the PAC, also expressed support for the ANC
     proposal.

     Mr D H M Gibson proposed as an alternative that "people's Parliament"
     be replaced by "democratic Parliament". The vision statement would,
     therefore, read as follows:

         To build an effective democratic Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
         Africa.

     After discussion, the Chairperson of the NCOP suggested that the
     proposed vision could be tabled in both Houses for debate and decision.

     The Chief Whip of the Majority Party said that if that were the case,
     the ANC would reserve the right to return to its original proposal
     presented to the Joint Rules Committee at its meeting on 4 August 2004,
     namely:

         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better life for all the people of South Africa.

     The Speaker, noting that apart from some matters of detailed wording
     there was broad agreement on the basic approach, appealed to all
     parties to continue talking to one another in order to reach consensus
     before the matter was put to the Houses for decision.

     The Committee resolved that the proposed Vision for Parliament would be
     presented to both Houses for debate and decision, while parties would,
     in the meantime, continue their discussions in an attempt to reach
     consensus.


Consideration of new governance model


     After a discussion, the Committee resolved that the Presiding Officers
     and the Secretariat would reconsider and refine the proposals before
     the Committee, with particular attention to the following: -
     · the processing of policy and the role of the Chief Whips' Forum, the
         Quarterly Consultative Forum and the Joint Ad Hoc Committee on
         Parliamentary Budget;
     · the relationship between the directing authority and the Joint Rules
         Committee;
     · representivity on the directing authority; and
     · the participation of the Secretary to Parliament in the directing
         authority.

     An adjusted document would then be presented to the next meeting of the
     Committee, which would sit before the directing authority met for the
     first time. In principle the directing authority was agreed upon and
     work had to proceed for it to be formed.


                          MONDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 - Department of
         Public Service and Administration for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         10 for 2003-2004 [RP 170-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
         Technology Agency (SITA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         75-2004].

2.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 - Department of Public Works
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2003-2004 [RP 185-2004].

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) Group of
     Companies for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.


                         TUESDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 - National Treasury
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2003-2004 [RP 141-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 for 2003-2004 [RP 163-
         2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
         Bank for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2004.

     (e)    Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
         2004.

     (f)    The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank on
         24 August 2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report received from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
     Development on 23 September 2004 regarding the provisional suspension
     of Magistrate S E Tebe without remuneration pending an investigation
     into his fitness to hold office.

         Note: This report replaces and supersedes the report tabled on 12
         August 2004.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of Electricity Distribution Industry
     Holdings (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of
     the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                        WEDNESDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-General
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 177-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence Centre
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 189-2004].

3.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical Schemes for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 135-2004].

4.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
         Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 165-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
         Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
         Linguistic Communities for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 167-
         2004].

5.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust
     (IDT) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 86-2004].

6.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 143-2004].


                         THURSDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

     Report and Financial Statements of The Presidency for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004 [RP 180-2004].

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 - Department of
         Provincial and Local Government for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         5 for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
         Government Association (SALGA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
         Traditional Leaders for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Department of
         Agriculture for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2003-2004 [RP
         186-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 - Department of Land
         Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2003-2004 [RP 168-
         2004].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
         Institute for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Annual Review of the Community Public Private Partnership
         Programme for 2003-2004.

5.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Management
     Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
     the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 127-
     2004].

6.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 - Department of Public
     Enterprises for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2003-2004 [RP 143-2004].

7.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 157-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
         (UTF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 191-2004].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
         Transport Agency for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 27-
         2004].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa and Air Navigation Services Company Ltd for 2003-2004.

8.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 - Department of
         Minerals and Energy for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 85-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF)
         Group of Companies for 2003-2004, including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 132-2004].

9.    The Minister of Correctional Services

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of Correctional
     Services for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2003-2004 [RP 192-2004].

10.   The Minister of Housing


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Department of
         Housing for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2003-2004 [RP 125-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
         (RHLF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
         (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
         Corporation Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


    (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban and
         Reconstruction Agency for 2003-2004.


11.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 - Department of Sport and
     Recreation for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
         Unit (SIU) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 128-2004].


     (b)    Letter from the Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Department of Foreign Affairs for 2003-2004:

         LATE TABLING OF 2003/4 ANNUAL REPORT IN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


         1. Section 40(1)(d) of the Public Finance Management Act No 1 of
              1999, as amended, requires the Accounting Officer of the
              Department to forward to National Treasury within five months
              of the end of the financial year:


              i)  an annual report of the activities of that department,
                  trading entity or constitutional institution during that
                  financial year;
              ii) the financial statements for that financial year after
                  those statements have been audited; and
              iii)     the Auditor-General's report on those statements.


         2. Section 65(1)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act requires
              me to table the said annual report and audited financial
              statements in the National Assembly within one month after the
              accounting officer for the department received the audit
              report.

         3. In effect, the annual report and audited financial statements
              must be forwarded to National Treasury on or before 31 August
              and tabled in the National Assembly on or before 30 September.

         4. The Department of Foreign Affairs did not comply with the
              requirements of sections 40(1)(d) and 65(1)(a) of the Public
              Finance Management Act in respect of the annual report and
              audited financial statements for the 2003/4 financial year
              because of the following:


              4.1 The initial set of annual financial statements for 2003/4
                  were submitted to the Office of the Auditor-General on 31
                  May 2004, in accordance with section 40(1)(c) of the
                  Public Finance Management Act.
              4.2 However, during the conducting of the audit work,
                  especially towards the end of the prescribed two months
                  period allowed to the Auditor-General in which to conduct
                  audit work, the Office of the Auditor-General brought to
                  the attention of the department that significant changes
                  are necessary to the department's annual financial
                  statements in order to present a true account of the
                  financial affairs of the department.
              4.3 The effecting of these changes to the annual financial
                  statements constituted material changes to these
                  statements and resulted in the re-submission of the
                  statements.
              4.4 In order to improve the preparation and presentation of
                  the information contained in the department's annual
                  financial statement so that the statements reflect the
                  true position of the financial affairs of the department
                  and to furthermore ensure the standard of accountability
                  and quality of information expected by the South African
                  public, the department re-submitted its financial
                  statements on 30 July 2004.
              4.5 In accordance with section 40(2) of the Public Finance
                  Management Act, the Auditor-General is required to submit
                  an audit report on these statements within two months of
                  receipt of these statements. As a result of the re-
                  submission of the statements on 30 July 2004, the Auditor-
                  General is by law allowed a further period of 2 months
                  from the date of receiving the re-submitted statements in
                  which to complete audit work and issue an audit report.
                  The audit report is therefore expected on 30 September
                  2004.


         5. In view thereof, it was not possible for me to table the
              department's annual report and audited financial statements in
              the National Assembly, as prescribed.

         6. The annual report and audited financial statements will be
              tabled in the National Assembly during mid October 2004.

         7. I trust that you will find this in order.

         Yours faithfully

B S MABANDLA MP

ACTING MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS


                           MONDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 - Department of Arts and
     Culture for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 14 for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 28
     September 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
     Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force:
     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN BURUNDI IN
     FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
     AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS

     This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
     employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
     personnel to the Democratic Republic of Burundi as part of the United
     Nations Operation in accordance with the United Nations Security
     Council Resolution 1545 of 2004.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of 1099 personnel will be employed until the end of the
     transition period in September 2004. The contingent will be reduced to
     1078 personnel after September 2004 and 1007 personnel after December
     2004 until the end of March 2005. The SANDF personnel are already in
     Burundi and will only changeover to the United Nations mandate.

     The cost of the deployment will be funded from the Department of
     Defence's current allocation for peace Support Operations and will be
     reimbursed by the United Nations.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Council
     of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
     Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
     notice of the National Assembly.

     Regards

     SIGNED
     T M MBEKI


                           TUESDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Department of Justice and
     Constitutional Development for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2003-2004
     [RP 182-2004].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
     (SADB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 194-2004].

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 - Department of Home Affairs
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements of Vote 4 for 2003-2004 [RP 175-2004].

4.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Sports Commission
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                          WEDNESDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Department of Health for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements of Vote 16 for 2003-2004 [RP 179-2000].


                           FRIDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly
1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Mr N M Nene has been elected Co-Chairperson of the Joint Budget
         Committee with effect from 8 October 2004.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Government Notice No R.889 published in Government Gazette No 26603
     dated 10 July 2004: Designation of a body for the purpose of section
     212(4)(a) and (8) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
     1977).

2.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of National Economic Development and
     Labour Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
     Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Letter from the Minister of Public Enterprises dated 1 October 2004 to
     the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
     the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1959), explaining
     the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of Arivia.kom for 2003-
     2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         Tabling of Annual Report: Arivia.kom

         In terms of section 65(1)(a) and (2) of the Public Finance
         Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of 1999), as amended, the Minister
         must table in Parliament Annual Report and Financial Statements
         within six months after the end of the financial year to which
         those statements relate. As the financial year of Arivia.kom ended
         31 March 2004, the Annual Report and Financial Statements must be
         tabled in Parliament not later than 30 September 2004.

         Unfortunately Arivia.kom is unable to table their report on the
         said date, due to unforeseen governance approval, printing and
         logistical problems.

         This written explanaition is submitted in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act 1 of
         1999) setting out reasons for the delay.

         Please accept my sincere apology.

         Yours sincerely

         Alec Erwin, MP
         Minister of Public Enterprises


                          TUESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2004




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Annual Review of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of
     Public Office-Bearers, 2004.

2.    The Minister of Education


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
         Education for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Government Notice No 983 published in Government Gazette No
         26692 dated 18 August 2004: Appointment of a replacement to serve
         as a member of the South African Qualifications Authority (SAQA)
         in terms of section 4(4) of the South African Qualifications
         Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).

     (c)    Government Notice No 285 published in Government Gazette No
         26119 dated 3 March 2004: Appointment of members to serve on the
         proposed management structures with the aim of developing
         additional subjects to be included in the National Curriculum
         Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South
         African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (d)    Government Notice No 995 published in Government Gazette No
         26711 dated 23 August 2004: Amendment to the names of members to
         serve on the Ministerial Project Committee and Associated Subject
         Working Groups for the development of subject statements to be
         included in the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12
         (General) in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act
         No 27 of 1996).

     (e)    Government Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette No
         26767 dated 8 September 2004: Appointment of members to serve on
         the proposed subject working groups in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South
         African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1080 published in Government Gazette No
         26788 dated 15 September 2004: The development of a National
         Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) -  Second phase: Call
         for written submissions from the Stakeholder bodies and members of
         the public in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996
         (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (g)    Government Notice No 981 published in Government Gazette No
         26690 dated 18 August 2004: Extension of the term of office of the
         current members serving on the Second South African Qualifications
         Authority for the period 26 April 2004 until 26 October 2004 in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).

     (h)    Government Notice No 982 published in Government Gazette No
         26691 dated 18 August 2004: Calling for nomination of persons to
         serve as members on the Third South African Qualifications
         Authority for the period 27 October 2004 until 26 October 2007 in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).

     (i)    Government Notice No 820 published in Government Gazette No
         26560 dated 8 July 2004: National Policy regarding further
         Education and Training programmes: Approval of Additional
         Languages as National Education Policy to be listed in the
         National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of
         the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and
         the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (j)    Government Notice No 1081 published in Government Gazette No
         26789 dated 17 September 2004: National Policy regarding further
         Education and Training programmes: Approval of the draft policy
         document, National Policy on the Conduct, Administration and
         Management of the Assessment of the Senior Certificate as National
         Education Policy in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
         1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South African Schools Act, 1996
         (Act No 84 of 1996).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry on
     the Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 6 October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry, having
         considered the subject of the Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17
         - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and
         classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
         reports the Bill without amendment.


                         WEDNESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

     Report and Financial Statements for Vote 27 - Department of
     Communications for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister for Africulture and Land Affairs dated
         23 September 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in
         terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1959), explaining the delay in the tabling of
         the Annual Report of Inala Frams for the year ended February 2004:

           Dear Madam Speaker

           TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT FOR INALA FARMS IN TERMS OF SECTION
           55(1)(d) OF THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT (PFMA)

           The Land Bank has decided to foreclose on the bonds registered
           against the property of Inala Farms (Pty) Ltd., which is listed
           as a Schedule 3B company in terms of the PFMA, due to the fact
           that the proceeds from the farming activities on the property
           were not utilised to service the Land Bank loans.

           Although there are ongoing discussions between the Department of
           Land Affairs and the Land Bank to find a solution to somehow
           salvage the property for the benefit of the land reform
           beneficiaries involved in the farming activities on the
           property, it is however, anticipated that the outcome will
           result in Inala Farms (Pty) Ltd. being delisted as a public
           entity.

           Under the circumstances, Inala Farms (Pty) Ltd. will not be in a
           position to table an annual report for the financial year ending
           28 February 2004, in terms of section 55(1)(d) of the PFMA.

           In terms of section 65(2)(a) of the PFMA, I am therefore
           tendering this written explanation on why Inala Farms annual
           report was not tabled by August 2004 in terms of section
           65(1)(a) of the PFMA and regret not having submitted a written
           explanation earlier.

           Kind regards

           A T DIDIZA
           MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS


     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Health dated 10 September 2004 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1959),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         National Health Laboratory Services for 2002-2003 and 2003-2004:

           Dear Madam Speaker


           LATE SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL REPORTS: NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY
           SERVICES

           The National Health Laboratory Services was formed when the old
           SAIMR and ninety-seven (97) state controlled diagnostic
           laboratories merged in 2002 to form the National Health
           Laboratory Services.

           The first Annual Report for 2002/03 is due to be released and
           will be tabled shortly.

           The second Annual Report for the period 2003/04 is due for
           submission to you before the end of August 2004. As a result of
           problems experienced during the previous year, the auditors
           extended their testing and review on the 2004 accounts for the
           period ending March 2004.

           The Annual Report will now be submitted to you before the end of
           October 2004.

           A similar letter has been sent to National Treasury.

           Kindly acknowledge receipt of this communication.

           Kind regards

           DR M E TSHABALALA-MSIMANG
           MINISTER OF HEALTH


     (c)    Letter from the Minister of Health dated 5 October 2004 to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1959),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Department of Health for 2003-2004:

           Dear Madam Speaker

           TABLING OF THE 2003/04 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE NATIONAL DEPARTMENT
           OF HEALTH

           I write to you to submit my Department's Annual Report for the
           Financial Year 2003/04, in terms of Section 65(2)(a) of the
           Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999). I want
           to express my sincere apology for the late tabling of this
           Report.

           As you might be aware, the building where my Ministry and the
           Department are housed, has been experiencing physical structural
           problems over the last five months. The problems ranged from
           constant waterpipe-bursting, fire threats, telecommunications
           and internet breakdowns and other interruptions. As a result of
           these problems, our staff had to be constantly evacuated from
           this building whilst the problems were being addressed.

           As I indicated, we experienced this situation over a period of
           about five months. This consequently impacted very negatively on
           our functioning as the National Ministry and Department of
           Health. As I write to you now, my officials have been scattered
           and are housed in three different buildings which are not even
           located within the same vicinity. This again continues to impact
           very negatively on our functioning.

           It is in this background that our timely processing of our
           2003/04 Annual Report was severely affected, and hence the
           delay. I am glad however, to mention that despite the problems
           and hurdles mentioned above, we were able to produce the Report
           which is now ready as I am accordingly submitting as enclosed.

           I trust that you and Parliament will accept my apology.

           Kind regards

           DR MANTO TSHABALALA-MSIMANG MP
           MINISTER OF HEALTH


     (d)    Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 28 September 2004 to
         the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a)
         of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1959),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Government Employees Pension Fund for 2002-2003 and 2003-2004:

           Dear Madam Speaker

           SUBMISSION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT
           EMPLOYEES PENSION FUND (GEPF) FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDING 31
           MARCH 2003

           In terms of the provisions of section 6A of the Government
           Employees Pension Law, 1996 (Proclamation No 21 of 1996), the
           Minister of Finance has been appointed as the interim trustee of
           the Board of Trustees for the GEPF until such time as a duly
           elected Board of Trustees (Board) has been appointed.

           Section 9(1) of the Law provides that the Board shall in respect
           of each financial year draw up annual financial statements for
           the Fund and shall submit copies of such statements, duly
           audited in terms of section 13 of the Law, to the Minister of
           Finance.

           The statements mentioned in terms of section 9(2) shall consist
           of -


              *   a statement of funds and net assets;
              *   a revenue account;
              *   a cash flow statement;
              *   notes to explain such statements;
              *   a report by the Board as referred to in section 10 of the
                  Law; and
              *   any such other statement that may be prescribed.

           The statements are to be compiled in conformity with Generally
           Accepted Accounting Practice (GAAP) and be accompanied by a
           report of the auditors of the Fund as prescribed in section 13
           of the Law.

           Section 9(6) further provides that the Minister of Finance shall
           within 30 days of receipt of such financial statements, submit
           the financial statements, report of the auditors and information
           referred to, to Parliament together with such comments as the
           Minister may wish to make.

           The financial statements and reports required by Law for the
           financial year ending 31 March 2003 have been compiled and
           audited by the external auditors of the Fund, Deloitte and
           Touché, Pricewaterhouse Coopers Inc. and Faizel Sondiyazi Inc.

           The financial statements are presented are unqualified, in all
           material respects, and fairly represent the net assets of the
           Fund as at 31 March 2003 and the results of its activities and
           cash flows for the year ended, in accordance with GAAP as
           applicable to retirement funds, and the Rules of the GEPF.

           You will note that on page 42 of the Annual Report te reasons
           for the late submission of the Annual Report are explained.

           They relate to problems experienced in relation to an accounting
           policy change, the implementation of a new investment accounting
           system as well as changes to the annual report to improve
           disclosure and to reflect a more precise position of the Fund.

           Due to the above-mentioned matters that annual report and
           financial statements could not be submitted in the time period
           required by section 13 of the Government Employees Pension Law.
           Steps have been taken to ensure that the 2003/04 annual report
           is published within the required legislative framework.

           Apart from the above, no significant matters occured after the
           financial year had ended, up to the date of approval of the
           financial statements, which could have a significant impact on
           the financial statements of the Fund.

           Kind regards


           TREVOR A MANUEL, MP
           MINISTER OF FINANCE AND INTERIM TRUSTEE OF THE GEPF


                          THURSDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] - Act No 19 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 October 2004).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 12 October 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Securities Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
         Administration Commission of South Africa for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 188-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance Regulatory
         Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December 2003.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Securities
     Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 5
     October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Securities Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments
         [B 19A - 2004].

         The Committee further recommends that the Minister of Finance be
         requested to consult with the Minister of Trade and Industry on
         the feasibility of including the names of persons disqualified in
         terms of Clause 96 of this Bill in the national register of
         disqualified directors and officers contemplated in the Companies
         Amendment Bill of 2004.

     Report to be considered.


                           FRIDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 15 October 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister
         for Justice and Constitutional Development on 6 October 2004.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

3.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Nasionale Betalingstelsel [W
              14 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the National
         Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 174-2004].

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     Report of the Public Service Commission on the Investigation into the
     Appointment of Professional Cubans in the South African Public Service.


                          TUESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 October
         2004:


         (i)     Public Audit Bill [B 1 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec
              75)


         (ii)    Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


         (iii)   Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Wetsontwerp op die Openbare Beleggingskorporasie [W 6 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Public
              Investment Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National Assembly -
              sec 75).


         (ii)    Wysigingswetsontwerp op die “Government Employees Pension
              Law” [W 15 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75).

National Assembly

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:

         Bill, subject to proposed amendments, passed by Council on 19
         October 2004 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
         proposed amendments:


         (i)     National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)    (for proposed amendments, see
              Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 6 October 2004,
              p 852).

              The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
              Finance of the National Assembly for a report on the
              amendments proposed by the Council.

2.    The Speaker

     I have, in terms of section 10 of the Powers, Privileges and Immunities
     of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures Act, 2004, on 14 October 2004
     granted permission to Dr G Woods and Ms P de Lille, at their request,
     to give evidence on the records of the proceedings or evidence given
     before, or any document submitted to, Parliament or a House or
     committee in the trial of the State versus Schabir Shaik.

3.    Membership of the Assembly

     The following member will be vacating his seat in the National Assembly
     with effect from 1 November 2004:

     Kannemeyer, B W.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investments Commissioners
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 99-2004].

2.    The Minister of Social Development

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 - Department of Social
     Development for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2003-2004 [RP 198-2004].

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 1012 published in Government Gazette No
         26731 dated 27 August 2004: Notice of list of protected tree
         species under the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No 1031 published in Government Gazette No
         26749 dated 3 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of water for
         agricultural use and for domestic and industrial use from the
         Gamtoos River Government Water Scheme (The Kouga Dam and the
         Gamtoos Canal) in the Fish-to-Tsitsikamma Water Management Area
         (WMA 15) in the Eastern Cape Province, in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1042 published in Government Gazette No
         26752 dated 10 September 2004: Correction notice in respect of
         lists of protected tree species in terms of the National Forests
         Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette No
         26807 dated 17 September 2004: Notice to protect a tree in terms
         of section 12 of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of
         1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 1098 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Water Research Fund: Rates and
         Charges in terms of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No 34 of
         1971).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of surface
         water for agricultural purposes and urban and industrial purposes
         from any resource in the catchment of the Loskop Dam (Secondary
         Catchment B1 and B2) in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 1104 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Upper Komati
         River Water User Association, Magisterial District of Belfast and
         Carolina, Mpumalanga Province, Water Management Area Number 5 in
         terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (h)    Government Notice No 1105 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Lower Modder
         River/Krugersdrift Water User Association, Districts of Boshof,
         Bloemfontein, Petrusberg and Jacobsdal, Province of the Free
         State, Water Management Area Number 13 in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Report on an Investigation into Allegations of Undue Delay,
         Unlawful and Improper Conduct and Prejudice in the rendering of
         services at Braamfontein Refugee Reception Office (Now
         Rosettenville Premises).

     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Social Development dated 19 October
         2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
         Social Development for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         EXPLANATION ON THE LATE SUBMISSION AND TABLING OF THE ANNUAL
         REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL
         DEVELOPMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2004

         In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the PFMA, I am required to table
         in the National Assembly the annual report and financial
         statements of my department and public entities reporting to me
         within one month after the accounting officer for the department
         received the audit report from the Auditor-General. Sub-section
         (2)(a) further requires me to table a written explanation in
         Parliament in circumstances where I am unable to table such
         reports within six months of the end of the financial year (i.e.
         30 September 2004), setting out the reasons why they were not
         tabled.

         In this regard I would like to report that I was unable to table
         the annual report and audited financial statements of the
         Department for the year ended 31 March 2004 within the prescribed
         period for the following reasons:


         1. Firstly, a number of senior management positions in my
              department became vacant following the departure of the
              previous incumbents of those posts. These include the post of
              Deputy Director-General: Integrated Development, the post of
              Chief Director: Development Implementation Support, the post
              of Chief Director: Corporate Services and the post of the
              Chief of Staff in the Ministry. Due to unforeseen
              circumstances, all these posts remained vacant for a period
              exceeding 6 months. The remaining senior managers had to share
              the responsibilities previously assigned to these positions.

         2. Secondly, the management crisis that hit the National
              Development Agency, which is a schedule 3A public entity
              reporting to me necessitated that I deploy, since October
              2003, two of the other remaining senior managers, i.e. the
              Chief Financial Officer and the Director: Stakeholder
              Management as part of the envoy that took over responsibility
              for the day-to-day management of the NDA following the
              suspension of its Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and its Chief
              Operations Officer (COO). Due to unforeseen delays in
              finalising the cases against these two NDA officials, my
              officials find themselves still responsible for assisting the
              NDA almost a year after their deployment to that organisation.

         3. Thirdly, the process of establishing the new South African
              Social Security Agency has put an enormous pressure on the
              senior managers who have to cope with the huge task and
              responsibility of meeting the deadlines announced by the
              President for the operationalisation of the Agency while they
              still have to carry on with their day to day running of their
              programmes.

         The department is busy addressing its capacity challenges. Three
         of the four vacant senior management posts have been filled over
         the last two months and only the post of Chief Director: Corporate
         Services is still being filled. Following the resignation of the
         CEO of the NDA and the ensuing process of filling that position,
         the Department officials (Envoy) will be released from these other
         duties and resume their normal responsibilities in the department.

         The Department has, however, managed to table its annual report
         and financial statements during October 2004.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         Dr Z S T Skweyiya, MP
         MINISTER


     (c)    Letter from the Minister of Finance dated 13 October 2004 to the
         Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of
         the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999),
         explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the
         Public Investment Commissioners for 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         PUBLIC INVESTMENT COMMISSIONERS: TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORT

         In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act,
         1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), the Executive Authority responsible for a
         public entity must table the relevant public entity's annual
         report within one month after the public entity has received its
         audit report. The Public Investment Commissioners' (PIC) annual
         report needs to be tabled by 30 September 2004. In terms of
         section 65(2)(a), the Executive Authority should inform the
         Parliament of the reasons for a delay in the tabling of an annual
         report, should a public entity fails to meet the deadline
         determined by section 65(1)(a). I unfortunately have to inform
         Parliament that I will be unable to table the PIC's annual report
         for the financial year ended 31 March 2004 by 30 September 2004.

         Although the audit fieldwork for the PIC was timeously completed,
         differences in opinion regarding matters raised in the report of
         the Auditor-General resulted in delays.

         The process in finalising the annual report of the PIC was as
         follows:


            •     25 August 2004: The special subcommittee, delegated by the
            Board, approved the
                  annual financial statements
            •     30 August 2004: The PIC received a draft copy of the
            Auditor-General’s report
            •     6 September 2004: The Deputy Minister of Finance, the PIC
            and the Auditor-
                  General met to discuss the draft report
            •     7 September 2004: The PIC, the Auditor-General and KPNG
            met to discuss the
                  draft report
            •     14 September 2004: The PIC receives the final Auditor-
            General’s report


         Due to the delays as mentioned above, the publishers of the PIC's
         annual report was not able to submit it to the printers in time to
         meet the deadline of 30 September 2004. The annual report is,
         however, now in the process of being finalised and printed and it
         is expected that it will be tabled in Parliament no later than 18
         October 2004.

         Kind regards

         signed
         Trevor A Manuel, MP
         MINISTER OF FINANCE


