---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-09-08
---

WEDNESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                      QUESTIONS NOT TO HAVE PRECEDENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 29(8), Questions shall not
   have precedence today.


Agreed to.


                    FULL CONFIDENCE EXPRESSED IN SPEAKER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move the
draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

  That the House –

  (1) notes –


        (a)      the allegations in the Sunday Times of  29 August 2004  to
             the effect that the Speaker of the  National  Assembly  abused
             parliamentary travel facilities; and


        (b)      calls for the Speaker to recuse herself pending
             finalisation of the investigation into the alleged abuse of
             parliamentary travel facilities;

  (2) further notes –

        (a)      a statement by the Directorate of Special Operations of
             the National Directorate of Public Prosecutions on 2 September
             2004 that: ``... based on the information at our disposal, the
             DSO is not investigating the Speaker of Parliament.  This we
             say because the impression is that we are and since the Office
             of the Speaker is the highest legislative authority in the
             country, we need to place things in perspective.’’; and


        (b)      that Parliament initiated a forensic investigation into
             allegations of the alleged abuse of parliamentary travel
             facilities;


  (3) believes that there is no basis for the Speaker of the National
        Assembly to recuse herself as she is not being investigated for any
        wrongdoing; and


  (4) resolves to express its full confidence in the Speaker.


[Applause.]

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to second the motion,
and I would like to address you if I may.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go ahead.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Deputy Speaker, in view of the fact that the Directorate
of Special Operations of the National Directorate of Public Prosecutions
has issued a statement confirming that the Speaker is not being
investigated, the DA has today agreed to support a motion in Parliament
stating that it is not necessary for the Speaker to recuse herself.

I gave the Speaker the advice to approach the Scorpions to request that
they confirm either that she was being investigated, or that she was not.
Having obtained that clearance, which is based on the information currently
at the Scorpions’ disposal, it would be churlish for the DA to insist on
her recusing herself.

If the situation changes because of new or further information, or if an
investigation were to commence, then it would be appropriate for the
Speaker to stand down.

We owe it to the people of South Africa to get to the bottom of all these
allegations quickly, to charge those who are alleged to be guilty and to
exonerate the innocent. Only then can we put Travelgate behind Parliament
and behind us, and put the interests of South Africa first.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like you and this House to note
our objection to this motion. Thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP would like to support this
motion.  As we said at the Chief Whips meeting this morning, we want to
speak in favour of this motion because of the statement of the Directorate
of Special Operations, or DSO, of the National Directorate of Public
Prosecutions on 2 September. They stated that they had sufficient
information at their disposal and that according to that information they
were not going to investigate the Speaker.

We feel that the newspapers cast aspersions, but that the facts are that
the Scorpions have investigated the matter. We as a political party feel
completely satisfied that they have made a statement, and therefore we want
to express our full confidence in the Speaker. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die VF Plus steun graag die
mosie wat voor die Huis dien. Ons het ook vandag ons standpunt so gestel by
die Hoofswepevergadering.

Daar kom ’n tyd wanneer ’n Parlement korrek moet optree, en dít is so ’n
geleentheid. Dit is baie maklik om allerhande bewerings oor die Speaker die
wêreld in te stuur, maar die feite in hierdie stadium toon dat daar geen
grond daarvoor is nie. Dit sal dus onverantwoordelik wees as die Parlement
nie sy steun uitspreek vir die Speaker nie. Ons wil dit graag steun.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus gladly supports the
motion before the House. We also put our view accordingly at today’s
meeting of Chief Whips.

There comes a time when a Parliament has to act in a correct manner, and
this is such an occasion. It is very easy to spread all sorts of
allegations about the Speaker, but the facts at this point indicate that
there are no grounds for doing so. It would therefore be irresponsible for
Parliament not to express its support for the Speaker. We gladly support
this motion. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I also want to give the PAC’s
unqualified support for the motion. At the Chief Whips forum last week we
discussed the issue, and it was actually suggested by that forum that we
should get a statement from the Scorpions. Now that we have that statement,
which indicates that there is no investigation against the Speaker, we
think it is only fair that the matter should be laid to rest. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSANE: Madam Speaker, as we said during the Chief Whips Forum,
given the facts, the IFP supports the motion. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the guys are disturbing me on
this side. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are no guys here. There are hon members.
[Laughter.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of Parliament, the
matter that we are supposed to endorse is a very simple one to Azapo. When
we debated the matter, it was very clear that there was no proof that
anyone had done any wrong. It is also is pleasing to have a statement from
the very people who are investigating, stating that they are not
investigating the Speaker. Therefore, as Azapo, we believe that it is
appropriate that we should support the motion, and let the matter rest.

If there are other things that come up later, we will deal with those when
they come. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Rajbally, I hope you are not one of the guys who
are disturbing the hon member. [Laughter.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I will not allow any guys to disturb
me. [Laughter.]

We support the motion, and the MF feels that the Speaker is innocent until
proven guilty. We believe this matter should be laid to rest and we fully
support the motion. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM would also like to put on
record its unequivocal support of the motion by the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party in the light of the statement by the DSO. I thank you. Let
the case rest. [Applause.]

Mr A C NEL: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports this motion. The ANC has
full confidence in the Speaker and the leadership that she is providing to
the National Assembly. We believe that there is no basis for the calls for
her to recuse herself.

The ANC commends the Speaker for the principled leadership that she has
given during the investigation initiated by Parliament into allegations of
abuse of Parliament’s travel facilities. Throughout this process the
Speaker, and the leadership of Parliament as a whole, have asserted a
commitment to clean, open and accountable governance. They have also
asserted the principles of the rule of law, namely that no one stands above
the law, that investigations will be thorough and that the law will take
its course.

It has also, however, been made equally clear that all citizens of South
Africa, including members of Parliament, have the right to be presumed
innocent, unless proved guilty, and to have their human dignity protected
and respected.

We welcome the statement by the Directorate of Special Operations of the
National Prosecuting Authority, the Scorpions, that they are not
investigating the Speaker. It is regrettable that the Speaker and other
members of this House, their families and loved ones, have had to undergo
extreme pain, suffering and distress, caused by baseless allegations. It is
also regrettable that sections of the media, and certain newspapers in
particular, along with certain political parties, have seen fit to cast
unfounded and unsubstantiated aspersions on the image of the Speaker,
Parliament and members of Parliament.

In a statement the Scorpions declare:

Recent media reports are exaggerated in large measure, if not inaccurate.

They go on to caution:

      The continued reference to Ministers and members of the executive by
      the media, in the absence of a sound factual grounding, could
      constitute defamation. We urge the media to report on these matters
      responsibly, bearing in mind that the investigation has not been
      concluded, and that members have the right to be presumed innocent
      until proven guilty. We reject the continued and irrational calls for
      the release of names of members.

The ANC expresses the hope that the investigation into the alleged abuse of
travel facilities is conducted thoroughly and concluded speedily. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Motion agreed to (Independent Democrats dissenting).


                         THE CENTRALITY OF LITERACY

                             (Draft Resolution)

 DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF  THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Chairperson,  I  move  without
notice:

 That the House -

     1) notes that-
   a) in its meeting of September 1966, the World Conference of Ministers of
      Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy, proclaimed September 8  as
      the International Literacy Day; and


   b) the Dakar Framework for Action and  the  Millennium  Declaration  both
      established  time-bound  gender  equality  goals  to  which   we   are
      committed;


   2)  reaffirms South Africa’s commitment to equality  in  education  where
      children are offered the same  chances  to  attend  school  and  enjoy
      teaching methods, curricula and  academic  orientation  unaffected  by
      racial or gender bias;

   3)  believes that it is in the private and social interest  to  eliminate
      gender inequalities in education as  this  would  result  in  improved
      livelihoods, healthier and better  -nourished  families  and  enhanced
      civic responsibility;

   4)   encourages  that  on  this  day  everyone  of  us  as   individuals,
      organisations, the Government and business will renew our  efforts  to
      combat illiteracy and  demonstrate  our  commitment  to  the  call  of
      education for all; and

   5)  calls on all South Africans, the Government, business, civil  society
      and communities to recognise the centrality of literacy in  the  lives
      of children, especially the girl child, its importance in the lives of
      adults in relation to skills development  and  in  the  fight  against
      poverty.

Agreed to.

      THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN STRENGTHENING MULTILATERAL REGIMES FOR
    NONPROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS AND FOR DISARMAMENT, IN THE LIGHT OF NEW
                             SECURITY CHALLENGES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms F HAJAIG: Chairperson, colleagues and comrades, the subject for the
debate is very important one. In the everyday problems one faces, one tends
to forget the threat of security to the person and to the nation.
Since May 1994, with the advent of the first democratic government, South
Africa has committed itself to democracy, sustainable development, social
justice and environmental protection. In keeping with this commitment, the
government has extended this policy to include the promotion of global
peace and security through elimination and nonproliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

Such weapons are normally classified as being nuclear, chemical or
biological in composition. If used, such weapons would have a horrific
effect on humans, the fauna, flora and the environment and indiscriminately
devastate populations and cities in a matter of hours, as witnessed when
the United States of America dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese people in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the Second World War. And, from the first Gulf
War, Iraqis are still showing manifestations of abnormal cancers and
diseases caused by incessant US bombings.

International awareness, including recognition by the US of the
catastrophic and indiscriminate effects weapons of mass destruction can
bring about, has resulted in the creation of a number of bodies and forums
to regulate and establish norms and guidelines aimed at preventing the
possible use of these weapons.

Before discussing the various conventions and treaties that govern the
control of weapons of mass destruction, it is interesting to note that the
nations that hold the world’s largest arsenals of weapons of mass
destruction are the US and Russia. The US holds some 10 250 nuclear weapons
compared to Russia’s 8 500. Russia holds less than 40 000 tons of chemical
weapons to the US’s 24 000 tons.

The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty opened for signature on 31 July 1968,
to which the vast majority of states – 189 – are parties, restricted the
possession of nuclear weapons to the five permanent members of the UN
Security Council. Several states, including Israel, India and Pakistan,
declined to sign that treaty.

Of course, as you know, South Africa was one of the world’s first countries
to unilaterally roll back its nuclear programme and to voluntarily
relinquish all its nuclear weapons. The late Minister Nzo in April 1995
made this comment in New York at the renewal of the Nonproliferation Treaty
Review and Extension Conference:

  South Africa took the decision to destroy its nuclear weapons and to
  become a State party to the NPT because we saw our security being
  guaranteed by its provisions. It is for this reason also that South
  Africa has become an active sponsor of an African Nuclear Weapon Free
  Zone Treaty.

The Treaty of Pelindaba has been ratified by 15 states. It actually
requires at least 28 states before it can enter into force. I think in this
respect the security organ of the AU and Pan-African Parliament will have
to take this matter forward to ensure that all the states ratify it so that
this treaty can come into being.

The late Minister Nzo, to his credit, successfully caused the conference to
reach agreement on a five-year process by entrants of nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes and on the establishment of the full nuclear test ban
- the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Unfortunately, the US refused
to sign or ratify it.

The Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits the development, production,
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons. It entered into force in 1997
following ratification by 65 states.

The Biological and Toxins Weapons Convention entered into force in 1975 and
bans the use of biological weapons. It also prohibits the development,
production and stockpiling of biological agents and toxins. There are 151
States party to the treaty. Israel has not signed it. Some African and
Middle East countries have signed but not ratified it.

The control of delivery systems is of utmost importance. The Missile
Technology Control Regime was established in 1987 to limit the risks of
weapons of mass destruction proliferation by controlling transfer of
weapons and delivery systems.

Before discussing conventional arms and small arms proliferation, which
contribute particularly to the ongoing conflicts in Africa, I wish to
outline the role of the UN in eliminating weapons of mass destruction.

Despite the various conventions and treaties globally, nuclear weapons
problems persist. Testing continues, smuggling of nuclear materials and
component manufacturing present grave security risks. A case in point is
here in our own backyard. A Mr Meyer, presently in our courts, serves as an
example. Changes in the global political environment should permit real
advances in the elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Today’s
security is no longer defined solely by military strength but includes
political stability, a healthy economy and environment and respect for
human rights; in other words, human security.

The UN has served a significant role in developing the world’s weapons
control regime and is in a position to forge the remaining work that needs
to be done. The UN is the only institution capable of serving the needs and
interests of a broad range of countries, each having multifaceted
disarmament goals. For the non-nuclear member states, the UN provides an
opportunity for individual and regional concerns to be brought before the
world community. For nuclear states, the UN has provided a forum for
addressing the need to hold weapons proliferation while at the same time
serving to impose on them certain international responsibilities, including
progress toward disarmament.

Multilateral action to prevent the spread of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons is essential. The UN is the only place to deal with both
vertical and horizontal arms proliferation. The UN is the only
international multilateral body that can perform the range of tasks
necessary to rein in weapons proliferation, from the creation of norms and
standards to the enforcement of international commitments.

However, one has to take into account the many challenges the UN faces and
the organisation’s capacity to deal with all its challenges in the face of
errant members – states that do not pay their dues. And, of course, as you
know, the US is the biggest culprit.

The necessity for the reconstruction and reform the UN Security Council
cannot be overstressed. The veto power of the five permanent members of the
council could result in selective enforcement of treaty violations. For
example, we have the US’s veto to allow ongoing Israeli aggression and the
Chinese veto to prevent sanctions on North Korea.

The UN Security Council has to be enlarged in order to be representative
according to different countries that are in the world, and not according
to what they had decided on in 1948. The veto power needs to be debated,
among other things.

With regard to the new security challenges, one has to consider the use of
terror worldwide as a governmental, ideological, political and religious
instrument to secure objectives by intimidation of force. The growing
imbalance of wealth and power radicalises impoverished people and motivates
them to pursue violent solutions. Unresolved political issues, which
fundamentally divide peoples and nations, such as the conflict in Israel,
Palestine, Kashmir, Chechnya and others, are also incentives to resort to
violence and armed conflict.

In conclusion, what can Parliament do? I do not have much time, so I will
quickly name but a few strategies. Firstly, mobilising public opinion
towards effective arms control, stockpiling, disarmament and marketing of
weapons. Secondly, monitoring and holding governments to account – through
our own national arms control committee. Can it be done? Thirdly, ratifying
treaties and other international, regional and continental instruments,
namely AU treaties and SADC treaties and conventions. Fourthly, we need to
monitor legislative and budgetary regimes that deal with arms control and
fifthly, women can be a formidable force for a peaceful world. Womankind’s
traditional role as the custodian of the highest human values needs to be
reinforced. In armed conflicts, three-quarters of civilian casualties are
women, but they are not included at the negotiating table in resolution of
conflicts and are omitted from post-conflict reconstruction.
Parliamentarians must bring pressure to bear on governments to involve
women more actively in preventative diplomacy, conflict resolution, peace-
making, post-conflict peace restoration and national reconstruction,
ensuring women’s participation in decision-making and eliminating all
obstacles to their participation. Peace, justice and dignity should apply
equally to everyone. A better and a humane world for all! Thank you.
[Applause.]


Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, ever since the beginning of the industrial
revolution, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, it has become
easier and easier and cheaper and cheaper to mass-produce weapons.
Moreover, with advances in technology has come the capacity to produce a
single weapon capable of killing hundreds and thousands of people, often
employing ghastly chemical, bacterial or nuclear materials - the so -
called weapons of mass destruction.

The nineteenth and twentieth centuries were also characterised by intense
rivalry between the states in Europe, Asia and America to achieve
superiority in trade in the colonies and in the arms race. The arms race
almost certainly contributed to the outbreak of both world wars, and it was
only the very real prospect of mutually assured destruction inherent in the
stockpiling of nuclear weapons during the Cold War that prevented the
outbreak of a third world war.  But it was precisely the fine balance of
military forces in the northern hemisphere that led to the proliferation of
arms elsewhere in the world.

Very often the superpowers poured arms into the developing world and
specifically into the African continent to further by indirect means a
strategy that they were unable to achieve directly.

In the decade following the independence of many African states, the
African continent, therefore, became the playground for separatist
movements, rebels groups, bands of missionaries and military dictators. As
a result, too many African governments were toppled by military coups. Too
many African states experienced civil wars, secession or armed rebellion.

For millions of ordinary Africans life during these times was hideous
beyond the telling of it. Millions of people died or were maimed. Whole
families were wiped out, whole villages were destroyed, and for millions
more these conditions persist today. Even when peace has returned to
regions on the continent, such as Southern Africa, one has to deal with the
aftermath of armed proliferation, usually in the form of an increase in
armed crime.

There was a time, not very long ago, when it was possible to buy an AK-47
in downtown Johannesburg for R40. Now, South Africa and this Parliament
have played a significant role in ending wars in Africa and in limiting the
proliferation of arms. South African soldiers are engaged in peacekeeping
operations in the DRC and Burundi. We are at the forefront of measures
designed to improve collective security through the organs of the African
Union and the SA Development Community. Once these organs are operating at
full efficiency, they ought to make it possible to rationalise the armies
of the various member states and bring down the number of weapons that are
in circulation.

South Africa is also a signatory to a number of international treaties that
limit the use of certain weapons or ban them altogether. Among these
treaties are the Ottawa Convention on Antipersonnel Mines; the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention; the Chemical Weapons Convention; the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons; the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty; and
the Pelindaba Treaty, declaring Africa to be a nuclear-free zone.

Moreover, South Africa has also passed its own legislation that regulates
the way in which arms produced in South Africa may be sold and exported.
The National Conventional Arms Control Act establishes a committee that
must approve each and every weapons transaction, more particularly for the
export market. We do not approve of the committee’s modus operandi and its
reasons for exporting arms to particular states, but at least there is a
control mechanism that, ex post facto, is open to public scrutiny and this
goes some way towards acquiring some sort of oversight. Now all these
measures contribute to improving the levels of security, domestically and
throughout the continent, but one needs to ask whether the steps that we
have taken go far enough - particularly in the light of new global security
challenges posed by unresolved political issues, religious and ethnic
extremism and global terrorism.

We also need to consider the new dimensions of security with which the
developed world is very largely unfamiliar; such as hunger, poverty,
drought, aids and refugees. These dimensions need to be publicised in
multilateral forums and to become part of the international debate.

It is an unfortunate fact that desperate people will resort to desperate
measures. Unless the root causes of insecurity are adequately addressed, no
amount of treaties or laws will stop determined people from arming
themselves. Just go and look at what is going on in Russia.

Multilateral action to prevent the proliferation of arms has its place, but
it needs to be recognised for what it is, and that is dealing with the
symptoms, rather than the cause of insecurity. We need to deal with the
causes. Thank you.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, this week’s appalling tragedy in Beslan,
Russia, seen against the backdrop of the recent terrorist attacks in
Madrid, Spain, and the continued waging of the “War Against Terrorism”, has
brought home the need to establish an international order of security and
peace.

The changing face of terrorism and warfare since the end of the certainties
of the bipolar Cold War means that no nation-state is safe from attack, and
that includes South Africa. The rise of terrorist groups such as Al Qaeda
makes the onerous task of halting the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and the proliferation of armaments much more urgent. From Cape Town to
London to Seattle, we all live in the shadow of fear of terrorist attacks
like those on September 11, 2001.

In an increasingly integrated and globalised world, the role of the nation-
state becomes increasingly more difficult to define. Transnational
institutions are supplanting national institutions. The information
superhighway makes the gathering of military intelligence and the tracking
of weapons development and movement ever more complex and sophisticated, as
the Butler report in Britain on the so-called sexed-up dossier on Iraq
revealed.

In common with all the great public policy challenges of our time, such as
the protection of the environment and a more equitable global economy,
global solutions are required for global problems. We live in a world where
more than 3 billion people live on $2 a day or less, and most of them live
in Africa. Yet, absurdly, military spending wastes around $800 billion a
year, and on average military budgets allocate more than 10% of government
resources to arms and related items.

Parliamentarians are, for international organisations, a virtual link to
international public policy. All parliamentarians who believe in the
peaceful settlement of conflicts bear a moral responsibility to voice the
public interests of their country and, indeed, of humanity.

As the Parliament of the nation, which has an intersecting leadership role
in the Nonaligned Movement, the Commonwealth, the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, we have a heavy responsibility
to work together with our colleagues represented in the Inter-Parliamentary
Union to mobilise action towards effective arms control.

In two weeks’ time the issue of the role of parliamentarians in
strengthening multilateral regimes for the nonproliferation of weapons and
for disarmament, in the light of the new security challenges, will be
tabled at the Assembly of the International Parliamentary Union in Geneva,
Switzerland.

South Africa has a wealth of experience in conflict resolution and, I
believe, our delegates will have much to contribute to the debate on how to
strengthen a multilateral framework to halt the proliferation of weapons.

In view of the vested interests of the arms industry, particularly in an
election year in America and because the advocacy of disarmament is often a
voice in the wilderness, I believe it is imperative that we furnish our
representatives with a clear mandate at this conference.

If we are to have a meaningful impact, I believe it is vital that a
mandate, drawing on our experience of conflict resolution, makes public
practical recommendations and directives, rather than being long on
rhetoric and discursive in nature.

More than anyone, we owe that to the many people in our country who live on
the $2 breadline per day, or less. Thank you.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Chairperson and hon members, a mere decade and a half ago
South Africa was an international pariah, a warmonger in the region, an
illegal arms trader and a rogue state in possession of nuclear weapons. It
is perhaps easy to dismiss the relevance for South Africa of international
arms reduction efforts as we have dismantled our nuclear weapons, ceased
military aggression against our neighbours, and signed nonproliferation
treaties, and implemented them locally.

In addition to these efforts, we’ve been assisting our neighbours, such as
Mozambique, in locating and destroying weapons and mines, whilst
domestically we have legislated the nonproliferation of small arms. We have
achieved all of this and we are in one of the safest nonaggressive regions
in the world. However, the events of the past week, in which a South
African was charged with selling parts in the building of nuclear weapons,
serve as a timely caution against complacency. Similarly, an academic at a
South African institution has been a suspect in the anthrax letter attacks
in America.

The truth is that terrorists and illegal arms traders know no borders. Such
people and groups care little for our illusion of safety. In fact, they
will ruthlessly exploit our complacency if we allow them to. The world is
an unsafe place. Weapons perpetuate violence and conflict. Safety and peace
can only be achieved through dialogue. No modern institution is better
equipped to pursue or enhance such peaceful dialogue as a democratic
parliament.

Therefore, we have a duty as such an institution of peaceful dialogue to
interact and communicate with other parliaments and to seek to make the
world a more peaceful place. As Thomas Jefferson was fond of saying: ”The
price of liberty is eternal vigilance.” I thank you.

Mr A HARDING: Mr Chairperson, world military spending has decreased little
since the Cold War era, but the cutbacks are minute in comparison to the
political transformations we have witnessed in other parts of the world.

According to the Bonn International Centre for Conversion: “To do a little
less of the same is the overriding principle of governments’ policy.” We
should not be altogether surprised: powerful vested interests, lack of
imagination and tunnel vision are enough to ensure that as little as
possible changes in the world of arms production.

The savings from small cutbacks in military programmes in the West have
mostly ended up financing the unemployment benefits of redundant arms
workers. In Warsaw Pact countries the massive cuts in military programmes
yield no benefits as the social and economic upheavals produce only
deficits. Elsewhere in the world military expenditure grows, such as in
East Asia where a local arms race is under way, or in the Middle East where
military expenditure shows few signs of declining.

Amongst some of the most worrisome aspects of such a weapons build-up is
the widespread proliferation of small arms. At the same time, South Africa
has on a number of occasions been fingered as a culprit in this area.

A measure long demanded by human rights organisations and other groups is a
binding code of conduct to ensure, at the very least, that weapons are not
exported to governments that fail to hold free elections, that trample
human rights or engage in armed aggression.

A voluntary code of conduct was adopted by the European Union in June 1998,
but it remains to be seen whether the region’s governments will live up to
it or ignore it when the code proves inconvenient. Establishing effective,
binding codes across the world remains a crucial step towards peace.

In strengthening the role of parliaments in multilateral forums, we first
need to look at our own defence policy, aligning where necessary and giving
effect to the signing and ratification of various nonproliferation treaties
of which South Africa is a part. Also, South Africa, via the chairperson of
peace and security of the African Union, must put the issue of disarmament
high on the agenda, especially in conflict areas such as the DRC, the Sudan
and Eritrea.
The Pan-African Parliament and the SADC regional parliament should play an
effective oversight role in monitoring hot spots on the continent and in
enforcing these provisions. There should also be more engagement… [Time
expired.]

Mr T S DODOVU: Ke a leboha Modulasetulo ya hlomphehang. [Thank you,
honourable Chairperson.]

It gives me great pleasure indeed to participate in this important debate
on the role of Parliament for the nonproliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in the light of the new security challenges facing the global
village.

The question of the weapons of mass destruction has occupied the global
peace and security agenda in the last few years. In this regard, I will
preface my speech to give it a relevant context by citing a quotation from
the speech of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Kofi Annan,
on the occasion of the Security Council meeting two years ago. He said:
  The United Nations and the rest of the international community can
  appoint envoys as negotiators, and spend billions of dollars on
  disarmament and peacekeeping missions, and on the nonproliferation of
  weapons of mass destruction, but none of this will solve conflict and
  bring about international peace if the political will and capacity do not
  exist.

Mohlomphehi Modulasetulo, ao ke mantswe a bohlokwa a buuwang ke e mong wa
batho ba hlomphehileng haholo lefatsheng kaofela. Ntate Kofi Annan o
kgothaletsa rona le lefatshe kaofela hore re tlamehile ho sebetsa ka thata
le matla ho lwantshana le diqhomane tsena tse kotsi tse sa dumellwang
molaong. Dibetsa tsena di kotsi haholo hobane di ka bolaya ditjhabatjhaba
kaofela. (Translation of Sotho paragraph follows.)

[Honourable Chairperson, those are important words spoken by one of the
most respected people in the whole world. Mr Kofi Annan urges us and the
world in general to work hard against illegal explosives. These weapons are
very dangerous because they kill whole nations.]

As a point of departure, it is indeed important to state that one of the
profound political and strategic consequences of the ending of apartheid
and the ushering in of a new democratic order in South Africa is the
unflinching commitment on the part of the ANC government to halt the
proliferation of armaments, especially the weapons of mass destruction.

During March 1993 former President of South Africa, F W De Klerk, informed
Parliament that South Africa had embarked on the development of a limited
nuclear deterrent in the years covering the 1970s and the 1980s. Indeed,
with this admission Mr De Klerk put to rest the speculation over many years
about the true status of South Africa’s suspected nuclear deterrent
programme.

During that period, the government produced these weapons due to the
international security situation around South Africa. The racially based
policies exacerbated its isolation and increased the international
restrictions on the supply of conventional arms against it.

It is common cause that weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear
weapons, represent one of the greatest potential threats to global security
and peace, especially in the post-Cold-War era. During the occasion of the
1994 OAU Heads of States Summit, and at the opening of the 49th session of
the UN General Assembly, President Mandela publicly expressed the
government’s policy on the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Today South Africa occupies a unique position in the history of the
nonproliferation treaty, being the first country that has willingly turned
itself into a country without a nuclear weapon capability. We are proud
that we have voluntarily rolled back the nuclear weapon capability by
eliminating all the means to acquire nuclear weapons. A historic move
indeed, hailed and applauded by the international community.

In this context, our government has unfolded the following remarkable
achievements to comply with international laws and conventions on
disarmament. The first one is to control the export of technology,
materials and equipment used in the production of weapons of mass
destruction and in other advanced systems, while also making it a criminal
offence for any South African citizen to develop or assist in the
development of chemical, biological as well as nuclear weapons.

The second one is the public invitation to the international community
regarding full access to details of the past programmes and facilities. The
third one is that South Africa is a state that is party to the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty, which concluded a comprehensive safeguard
agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency. We are also a member
of the nuclear supply group that monitors the material, equipment and
technologies used to develop or manufacture nuclear weapons.

We have acceded to the convention on the prohibition or restriction on the
use of certain conventional weapons such as land mines and booby traps,
which cause indiscriminate deaths and injury to civilians. As part of this
commitment, South Africa has placed an indefinite moratorium on the export
of land mines. South Africa has provided information on arms transfer as
required by the United Nations resolution establishing the register on
conventional arms.

One of the cornerstones of total transformation entails South Africa’s firm
resolve to make a meaningful contribution in Africa towards the intention
of the world at large to create a more peaceful place for the inhabitants
of this globe. The role of Parliament is critical in ensuring that all the
treaties and instruments to achieve the disarmament objectives are achieved
in the current world order. Parliament can achieve this by scrutinising the
operations of the responsible departments, by overseeing the implementation
of legislation pertaining to the nonproliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and by making recommendations on policy formulation and
implementation of all the programmes on arms control and disarmament.

The ANC government believes that the international issue surrounding the
halt on the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction can only be
resolved via the multilateral instruments and bodies that are capable of
resolving them. There is no country in the world, regardless of its
superpower status and influence, which can resolve these questions
unilaterally. A multilateral approach to the resolution of this question is
important.

In conclusion, we cannot equate the life of humankind with oil. Many
people, particularly women and children, are still being killed every day
with arms, in resistance and in wars for oil, in the name of the war to
stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Many more indeed
suffer wounds caused by unnecessary wars. The ANC believes that the planet
earth is humanity’s common home. Let us preserve it by intensifying our
resolve to halt the proliferation of these weapons.

Indeed, South Africa with all its institutions - including this Parliament
- its well-developed industrial strength and a significant nuclear know-
how, has a vital role to play in the world to further these objectives.
Thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Chairperson, the question that we should answer is: How
would arms negatively affect sustainable development? The recent Equatorial
Guinea debacle, the Great Lake Region dilemma, the Darfur crisis and other
flash points are a reminder that conflicts are retarding economic growth on
the continent. Mercenary activity is the largest contributor to African
conflicts; therefore there is an urgent need for an international arms
trade treaty. Such an arms trade treaty will help to stop the flow of arms
to human rights abusers. It will turn off the tap to irresponsible users
and drain the pool of surplus arms.

We must also bear in mind that the right of self-defence is entrenched in
the UN Charter; therefore arms per se are not the problem. Transfer of arms
needs authorisation, so international co-operation is urgently needed to
arrest the violators - whoever and wherever they are. National parliaments
have a large role to play in the regulation of the arms trade. They can
ensure that municipal laws make violations of arms embargoes a crime, that
intermediaries are forced to approach governments for licensing on each
deal, that weapons with an indiscriminate effect are banned, that municipal
laws are tightened to reflect international customary law and, lastly, that
agreements have a binding effect. Of course, all of this can only happen if
Parliament is given the treaty to ratify timeously. Thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, Parliament has a clearly defined
constitutional role to play in ensuring that the safety of the country and
its citizens is guaranteed. It is through this Parliament that we can at
least introduce or investigate regimes or laws that promote
nonproliferation of weapons.

We all know the consequences of easy access to weapons. We live in times
where weapons are no longer the exclusive domain of the SA National Defence
Force and other security establishments. As a matter of fact, we have
highly active private armies in the form of domestic private security
companies. On our streets we also have criminals with easy access to
weapons.

This poses serious security challenges in one form or the other. As
Parliament, how should we react in this type of environment to address this
challenge? While we are still pondering the type of action to take, we
should also think about the consequences of inaction. We are, as a first
step, challenged to review our existing policies in order to determine how
best to deal with any identified loopholes which might facilitate a fertile
environment conducive to the proliferation of weapons in this country.

The second step should be about Parliament working directly with other
counterparts throughout the continent for efficient and effective sharing
of ideas. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Egameni lamakhosikazi. [In the name of women.]
Chairperson, it makes so much sense that if the world should stop making
and developing weapons there would be less bloodshed. Reality, however,
exhibits the fact that terrorism and warfare is sadly the world’s answer to
survival. The mindset of killing to prove a point is barbaric and inhuman.
Why are we failing to learn from mistakes such as 9/11, Afghanistan, Iraq,
Israel, Palestine, Sudan and so many places from which the media daily
relate to us how many innocent lives have been lost.

We are so far ahead of prehistoric times, yet we continue the barbaric
killing of our people. Why have we not taken to developing and utilising
the only valid method to settle differences, namely that of verbal debate.
We live in the age of technological advancement, but the MF feels that the
technological advancement of weapons should not be on the world’s agenda.

Why not abandon this proliferation of weapons and work on measures to
instil global rule by using dispute settlement and methods to make sure
that it is abided to. The MF calls for the proliferation of suppressing
poverty and ensuring survival. The development of all nuclear weapons
should be abandoned. There is no need for it. We should rather be working
earnestly on finding a vaccine for the cure of the Aids epidemic. Thank you
very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms H M MPAKA: Chairperson and hon members, South Africa’s keen interest
arises out of the Government of National Unity’s commitment to a policy of
nonproliferation and arms control which covers all weapons of mass
destruction, and which extends to our concerns about the nonproliferation
of conventional weapons in order to create a better world.

In terms of this policy, democratic South Africa is a responsible possessor
of advanced technologies. We, as the ANC-led government, see our
nonproliferation and arms control policy as being integral to democracy,
human rights, sustainable development, social justice and environmental
protection. It was in this context that South Africa turned away from the
edge of the nuclear weapon abyss.

In July 2003 the members of the United Nations met in New York for the
first biennial meeting of states on the implementation of the UN programme
of action to prevent combat and eradicate the trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. The purpose of that week-long meeting was to
report on the progress made in implementing the programme of action
nationally and subregionally.

One of the important elements of that programme was to recognise that
controlling the proliferation, the availability and misuse of small arms
required different approaches at different levels. So, for example, while
political decisions may be required to change government policy on the
destruction of state-owned weapons, technical and operational expertise is
required to co-ordinate the destruction of weapons.

The question then arises when to start monitoring and evaluating these
control measures, which is a matter that countries across the continent
must resolve. The role of Parliament is then to strengthen multilateral
regimes for nonproliferation of weapons and disarmament in the light of new
security challenges.

We need to monitor the implementation of the existing treaties and
instruments. Are the disarmament objectives that have already been set
achievable in the current world order? We are raising this question with
the understanding that the proliferation of small and light weapons has
increased since the end of the Cold War, as lower defence budgets have
resulted in the downsizing of armed forces and the sale of surplus
equipment.

It is estimated that there are 500 million small and light weapons in
global circulation, exacerbating conflict, being used for committing
international crime and terrorism and undermining postconflict
reconstruction. All conflicts in Africa, in countries like Rwanda, Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia and other militias, escalated
because of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, as well as
the easy availability of these weapons. In areas after conflict, all small
arms and light weapons should be destroyed after disarmament.

We would like to request the delegation to Beijing to make this appeal. As
the ANC we are saying that whilst this topic could be a politically
contested area of discussion, there are some key ways in which parliaments
can play a role in this field.

As far as conventional arms are concerned, these arms should be well
controlled and authorities should ensure that they are not stolen, becoming
illegal weapons that are abused. The regulatory control of trade in
conventional arms should incorporate: firstly, the registration of persons
trading in these arms; secondly, authorisation to develop and manufacture
them; thirdly, authorisation to market specified products; fourthly,
authorisation to transfer these arms across national borders; fifthly,
authorisation for their internal transfer, utilisation and destruction; and
lastly, we need to have authorisation to enter into agreements to supply a
particular product or service to a person registered in a foreign country.

In conclusion, the ANC is saying that governments must ensure that their
security agencies are co-ordinated and alerted by the early warning systems
throughout the region and nationally, because this topic is important for
all humankind. Therefore, all implementation of treaties and protocols
should be monitored regularly, and legislation reviewed from time to time.

Lastly, parliamentarians who believe in the peaceful settlement of
conflicts should bear a moral obligation to voice the dictates of the
public interest and the needs of their countries and constituencies. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 18:02.
                                 __________


                 ANNOUNCEMENTS TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORT





TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government
     for the year ended 30 June 2003 [RP 123-2004].

2.    The Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Bala Farms (Pty) Ltd 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004 [RP 166-2004].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Diplomacy, Intelligence,
         Defence and Trade Education and Training Authority (DIDTETA) for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 43-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 83-2004].

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
     Tourism on the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
     Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 7
     September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
         having considered the subject of the National Environmental
         Management: Protected Areas Amendment Bill [B 2 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 2A - 2004].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Public Investment
     Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 1
     September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 6A - 2004].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
     Administration on the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
     dated 8 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration,
         having conducted an in-depth comparative analysis of the United
         Nations Convention against Corruption against the South African
         legal framework, came to the following conclusions:
         1. Our legal framework is not only compliant with the provisions
              of the Convention, but also goes beyond its requirements.

         2. The South African government will be able to implement the
              Convention.

         The Committee, therefore, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the United Nations Convention against
         Corruption, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

     Request to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the List of
     recommended Electoral Commissioners, dated 8 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the
         list of recommended candidates for appointment as Electoral
         Commissioners, received from the panel contemplated in section
         6(3) of the Electoral Commission Act, 1996, and referred to the
         Committee, nominates, in terms of section 6(2) of the Act, the
         following persons for appointment as Electoral Commissioners:

         Bam, B; Mpumlwana, N F T; Tselane, T; Van der Merwe, F.

     Nominations to be considered.


