---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-02
---

TUESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2004

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____
The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give
notice that I intend moving the following motion:

  That this House-


     1) notes –


        (a) the effective sentence of 12 months’ imprisonment with labour
             imposed by the Zimbabwean parliament upon Mr Roy Bennett, MP,
             because of a scuffle in the Zimbabwean parliament;


        (b) that Mr Bennett pushed Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa, who
             had alleged that Mr Bennett’s ancestors were thieves and
             murderers;


        (c) that Mr Bennett made a full and sincere apology to parliament,
             but despite this, parliament, sitting as a court without the
             possibility of leave to appeal, imposed a sentence which can
             only be described as grossly disproportionate, vindictive and
             an abuse of power; and


        (d) that the South African Parliament ...


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order, hon Mr Gibson! Hon members, it is very
important for us to listen to the member, even if we don’t agree with what
he is saying. Please! It is very important. Very soon you will be rising on
a point of order, and I won’t be following because I can’t hear. Will you
please respect the Chair. Thank you, hon members. Hon Mr Gibson, will you
please continue.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam Deputy.

   (1)      That the South African Parliament witnessed fisticuffs some
        years ago between Mr Johnny de Lange, MP, and Dr Manie Schoeman, MP,
        and that their penalty was to be required apologise to Parliament
        and to be suspended for one day in the one case and five days in the
        other;
   (2)      requests the Zimbabwean Speaker and parliament to reconsider the
        sentence and to impose a penalty appropriate to the offence; and

     3) calls –


        (a) ... upon the South African diplomatic representatives and the
             Department of Foreign Affairs to convey to the President of
             Zimbabwe the dismay of this National Assembly at this turn of
             events;


          b) for Mr Roy Bennett, MP, to be released from prison
             immediately;

 ... on the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
 of the Commonwealth, the Chairperson of  the Nonaligned Movement, the
 Secretary-General of the ACPEU Parliamentary Forum, the President of the
 Pan- African Parliament, the Chairperson of the African Union the
 Chairperson of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the Chairperson of the
 Southern African Development Community to communicate their dismay and
 disapproval of this persecution of a member of parliament; and

        (c) on all democratic parliaments in the world to refuse to have
             links with Zimbabwe while Mr Bennett, MP, continues to be held
             in prison.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Chief Whip, are you covered?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: No. I was just wondering
whether we were dealing with a motion or a statement here.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any other notice of a motion?

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice:

  That the House notes that –

  South Africans, particularly the poorest of the poor, are consuming
  genetically modified organisms and GM food products on a large scale
  without knowing it. South Africa is the only country in the world that
  has allowed GMOs to be used in staple food. When you eat mieliepap, the
  chances are that you are eating GM-contaminated food and only desktop
  health assessments have been made in South Africa. The South African
  government does not require GM-contaminated crops to be segregated from
  non-GM crops during production, processing or distribution. The
  government has failed to establish a food identity preservation system
  whereby GM ingredients can be traced through the food chain from farm to
  plate. Consumers have thus been robbed of their right to choose for
  themselves what they eat. If they wish to take the chance of eating GM
  contaminated foods, the effects of which no insurance company will
  provide insurance cover for, there is no effective recourse in the event
  of long-term health damage suffered.

  The House calls upon the government urgently to rectify the situation
  with the proper labelling and food handling regime like they have in
  Europe and elsewhere, that will allow consumers the right to choose what
  they eat, returning consumer sovereignty to them. [Applause.]


              ORDERS BESTOWED ON INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANISATIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

    That the House –

    (1)     notes that -


           a) on 29 October 2004 the President of the Republic of South
              Africa, on behalf of the people of this country, bestowed
              national orders on individuals and organisations; and

        (b)      the following orders were bestowed: the Order of
              Ikhamanga, the Order of Mendi for Bravery, the Order of
              Mapungubwe and the Order of the Companions of O R Tambo;

      2) congratulates all the recipients of this year's national  orders;
         and calls on all the people of our country, especially the youth,
         to emulate the example set by these heroes, to dedicate themselves
         to hard work and to the realisation of human imagination and
         talent as we work for the reconstruction and development of our
         country.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                     (The late Mr Nelson Moonsamy Raju)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

    That the House –

       1) notes with regret the untimely passing of Mr Nelson Moonsamy Raju,
          who until his death served as a permanent IFP member of the
          National Council of Provinces;

    (2)     wishes to pay tribute to his distinguished record ofpublic
         service in civic organisations and volunteerism, as well as in
         active politics, which has made a significant contribution towards
         the strengthening of democracy and nation-building in South
         Africa; and

      3) expresses its heartfelt condolences and prayers to his
          wife, Gloria, and family during this sad time.

Thereupon the Deputy Speaker, in the light of the nature of the motion,
with leave put it as a motion without notice.

Motion agreed to, all members standing.

                    ANC VICTORY IN MOSSEL BAY BY-ELECTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nkskz X C MAKASI (ANC): Sekela sithethi sendlu, Kwiveki edlulileyo
bekubanjwe ulonyulo lovalo-zikhewu korhulumente bezekhaya kuzolwenke.
Kwizikhewu ezilishumi ebezikhona, umbutho we-ANC uphumelele zalithoba. Le
nto ithethe ukuthi uphumelele ngamashumi asithoba ekhulwini. Kwezikhewu
zilithoba siziphumeleleyo, isikhewu sakwa wadi 9 eMosselbay
ebesiyakulawulwa yiDA, abantu baye bayinyevulela iDA, yakha phantsi isitya
sigcwele. Le mpumelelo ingaka icace okwekati emhlophe ehlungwini ukuba
abantu bayayithemba iANC.

Ubomi obungcono kumntu wonke buxhomekeke kwi ANC. Intliziyo ye DA ilihlwili
ngokuphenyelelwa kwale wadi kunye nomasopala waseMosselbay. Siyaphinda
singumbutho wesizwe iANC siyazibophelela ukuba siyakusebenzisana nabantu
ekuphuculeni ubomi babo nokulwa intlupheko. Ukwanda kwaliwa ngumthakathi
bahlali! (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs X C MAKASI (ANC): Deputy Speaker of the House, during the last week by-
elections were held for local government nationally. In the ten vacant
posts the organisation of the ANC won nine seats. This means that they have
unanimously won 90% of the seats. Out of the 9 seats, we have won the
vacant posts of ward 9 at Mossel Bay, which previously belonged to or were
under the jurisdiction of the DA. The people have turned their backs on the
DA; they could not get anything out of the full dish. This great
achievement is as clear as a black cat in milk, namely that people do trust
the ANC.

A better life for all depends on the ANC. The heart of the DA is bitter as
a result of the defeat in this ward, as well as in the municipality of
Mossel Bay. We again, as the organisation of the nation, the ANC, find
ourselves having to work hand in hand with the people to improve their
lives and to fight poverty.  One cannot diminish someone else’s success!]
                           ADOPTION OF NCOP MOTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC has placed itself in a
very embarrassing position. The NCOP adopted a motion last week, which
stated that it “regrets the refusal of the President to address the serious
issue of rape in our country and acknowledge the suffering of women and
children who are attacked on a daily basis”.

I am sure that the National Assembly supports this statement, and
congratulates the NCOP on passing this particular motion. [Applause.] But
now a very serious problem has arisen. President Mbeki is now doing his
impersonation of a very heavy-handed P W Botha, and is demanding that the
NCOP retract the motion.

Ever obedient, the ANC is convening a special plenary of the House while on
its outreach programme in KwaZulu-Natal so that they can comply with the
President’s request or demand.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Mr Ellis! Yes, Deputy Chief Whip?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, firstly could
the member substantiate his statement that the President has demanded that.
[Interjections.] Secondly, to the best of our knowledge ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members!

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Secondly, to the best of our
knowledge the NCOP is sitting in KwaZulu-Natal at the moment, so I don’t
know what the issue is.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: That is not a point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: I don’t think that is a point of order at all, Madam Deputy
Speaker. Quite frankly, it is a series of questions, which I will try to
answer if you want me to, but I would like to finish my statement first if
you don’t mind.

President Mbeki has allegedly threatened not to attend Friday’s sitting of
the NCOP, where he is due to address them, unless the House retracts. Once
again, the victims of rape and sexual violence are betrayed by the ANC as
it scrambles to correct what it now probably claims was a slip, which
occurred because its members were quite clearly not paying attention. Thank
you. [Applause.]


              UNFAIR DEPLOYMENT OF AN OFFICIAL TO KWAZULU-NATAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the National Department of
Education has deployed an official from the national department to replace
the chief executive officer at the provincial office in KwaZulu-Natal.

According to what the Constitution stipulates, this kind of replacement can
only be conducted if the department has reason to believe that the
administrative machinery is completely broken down to the extent that the
smooth functioning of the department in a province is completely eroded.

What is not known to the IFP at this stage is what assessment procedures
the department underwent in order to arrive at this decision of deploying a
national level official to act as a replacement for the chief executive
officer who has been temporarily relieved of his duties, an act which is
itself clouded in mystery. Thank you.


             CHRISTOPHER MONDLANE ON TRACK FOR A BRIGHTER FUTURE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the initiative
taken by the fourth-year students at Wits Technikon who were moved by the
condition of Christopher Mondlane from Mpumalanga. They acted together with
Mr David Field and Mrs Berneen Field to raise funds for the boy’s
treatment.

Christopher suffers from an extreme form of eczema that has turned his skin
into a scaly mess. The assistance came about when Mr and Mrs Field read
about Christopher’s plight in a newspaper.

This fact alone shows how damaging stigmatisation and prejudice can be to
those who are afflicted with diseases or disabilities. The 14-year-old boy
has not been able to attend school because he has been ostracised by his
peers.

The ANC applauds the initiative taken by the Wits Technikon students and
the Field and Matthews families to help Christopher Mondlane. Their
intervention shows how each citizen can help in fighting disease and
poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]


                  RICHMOND BY-ELECTION TESTS UDM’S STRENGTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M DIKO (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM would like to thank
community members of Ward 2 in Richmond who, despite the bad weather
conditions, made sure that they exercised their constitutional right by
voting during the by-election on 27 October 2004. We applaud the political
tolerance shown by the IFP and ANC on the election day.

However, to our dismay, on Sunday night, 31 October 2004, five election
posters of UDM members were burnt down. We urge the police to look into the
matter and bring the culprits to book. The unbecoming behaviour will have a
negative impact on the peace process initiated by the UDM, ANC and IFP in
Richmond where the UDM retained the ward.

The UDM as an organisation still commands huge support in Richmond despite
the perception recent defectors attempted to create. South Africans still
view the UDM as an alternative to the ANC. [Interjections.]

Uyeke aba bamana bengxola, bengenela unyulo lovalo-zikhewu kwiindawo
zokuhlala eziphezulu neziphucukileyo kuphela, bengalungeneli phaya
ezilalini. [Leave those who like to make noise, taking part in the by-
elections in better residential areas only, and who do not take part in the
rural areas.]

The UDM is correct in calling for an electoral reform. Instead of
proportional representation, we should have a constituency-based system.
The latter will definitely increase the level of accountability. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]


                        DISMAY OVER DEATHS IN PRISONS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms F BATYI (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, the recent deaths of three inmates
at Pollsmoor Prison due to a fire in the cells, allegedly started by
themselves, is unacceptable.

The ID sends out a message of condolences to the families of those who have
died. This comes on the back of previous deaths at the prison and the
investigation is as yet to be completed.

These problems relate to overcrowding. What is of more concern is that
government has been aware of the problem for the past few years but no
alternative arrangements have been made to either transfer prisoners to
other prisons or, if necessary, build an additional facility in the Western
Cape.

Government delegations on parliamentary visits have thus far not  addressed
any of the serious issues such as the inhumane conditions under which
prisoners are kept. The frustrations among inmates must be high.
Overcrowding not only affects inmates but also prison management,
especially wardens who must be suffering from extreme stress levels.
Surely, there is now an urgency that requires immediate government
intervention before we are faced with more deaths, escapes, violence and
murders in Pollsmoor Prison. I thank you.


                         POLICE INACTION INEXCUSABLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Madam Deputy Speaker, Saturday 6 November is National
Children’s Day and will be celebrated throughout South Africa. The question
arises whether we can have a celebration when we have widespread child rape
and abuse and when we have the situation of a 15-year-old being raped five
times in two years by five different people. The worst part in this
particular situation is that some of the suspects are known in her
community.

In the one case, one of the suspects was caught in the act by the girl’s
mother accompanied by witnesses. Yet, just because the matter was reported
74 hours later, the investigation was apparently aborted. Whilst we
appreciate that DNA samples must be taken within the window period, where
there are eyewitnesses to corroborate the child’s version as well as a
corroborating hospital report, there can be no excuse for not pursuing the
matter. The traumatised teenager has understandably quit school, and her
sister has also dropped out of school for fear of being targeted.

The ACDP shares the view that the police failed to perform their duties
particularly when investigating the first incident of rape. As stated in
Sowetan:

  Their inaction may have exposed the victim to further abuse and
  encouraged other suspects to act with impunity. We cannot allow this to
  happen in this country.

The serious issue of rape and abuse must be met head-on and dealt with
severely. We cannot fail our children in this regard any longer. I thank
you. [Applause.]


                           THE DEATH OF OPTEL ROOI


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E NGALEKA (ANC): Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, die ANC neem hiermee kennis
van die besluit deur die Direkteur van Openbare Vervolgings om die polisie-
offisiere te vervolg wat die Khomani San spoorsnyer, Optel Rooi, geskiet
het.

Mnr Rooi was ‘n gewaardeerde lid van sy gemeenskap wat sy spoorsnyvernuf
gebruik het om sy gemeenskap op te voed omtrent natuurbewaring. Sy ontydige
heengaan het ‘n geweldige leemte in die gemeenskap gelaat, asook in die
lewe van sy gesin.

Die ANC wil weereens sy diepe meegevoel betuig teenoor sy vrou, Elsie, en
hul driemaandoue dogtertjie, Romelia, wat van die geleentheid ontneem is om
ooit haar pa te ken.

Dit is vir die ANC ‘n riem onder die hart dat die mense wat mnr Rooi
geskiet het, uiteindelik gaan boet vir hulle daad. Dalk sal dit ‘n mate van
berusting bring vir die mense wie se regte voortdurend vertrap word deur
diegene wat veronderstel is om hulle te dien. Dankie.
[Applous.](Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms E NGALEKA  (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC has taken note of the
decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions to prosecute the police
officers who shot the Khomani San tracker, Optel Rooi.

Mr Rooi was a highly esteemed member of his community who used his tracking
skills to educate his community with regard to nature conservation. His
untimely death has left a huge void in the community, as well as in the
life of his family.

The ANC would once again like to express its deepest sympathy to his wife,
Elsie, and their three-month-old daughter, Romelia, who has been deprived
of the opportunity of ever getting to know her father.

It is a great comfort to the ANC that the people responsible for shooting
Mr Rooi will finally pay for their deed. Perhaps this will bring a measure
of acceptance to the people whose rights are continuously been trampled on
by those who are supposed to serve them. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                        SHORTAGE OF POLICE PERSONNEL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Thirty percent of all police
posts across the East Rand are vacant, leaving even more vacancies than the
previous year. There is a 35% shortage of detectives, a 47% shortage of
crime prevention police and a 12% understaffing of crime reaction police –
all this, despite the ANC’s promise of more police on our streets. Local
police stations in the East Rand have 218 fewer bulletproof vests than the
previous year, and 302 fewer two-way radios.

This critical shortage of manpower and essential resources in police
stations across the East Rand continues to put policemen and women in
danger, while giving a boost to criminals. Is it any wonder that crime is
being underreported? South Africans are losing faith in the ability of the
police to solve crimes. Moratoriums on appointments to the police force
cost lives. The DA urges the ANC government to take policing seriously and
to fill all vacancies. SA Police Service members are overworked and
underequipped. Their lives and ours are  deliberately being put at risk.


                       THE ANC’S BY-ELECTIONS VICTORY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mong L J MODISENYANE (ANC): Hlwaya tsebe o mamele, le boetse le dumme
lebatoweng la Fezile Dabi, ha ANC e ne e ikgapela dikgetho tsa tlatsetso
lebatoweng la pele, Ngoathe, lebatoweng la 15, Saki Rancho, le Ngwathe le
Mokoallo ka tatellano ntle le kganyetso.

Hang-hang kamorao ho kgweletso ya dikgetho tsa tlatsetso, yaba diqi tsa ANC
di a utlwahala mme ha tetema ka mpeng tsa makwala. [Kena hanong.] Mekga ya
kganyetso ya ikgethela ho di lala ka mmele, etswe ho ema kgahlanong le ANC
nakong ena ho tshwana le ho qapela pina seemeng. Dikgetho tsa tlatsetso di
ne di tla ba ka la 27 Mphalane selemong sona sena, empa sephetho sa
phatlalatswa ka la 19 Mphalane hoba IEC e bone hore ha ho nko ho tswa
lemina mekgeng ya kganyetso.

Re bona ANC e ntse e ilo feta mohalotso dikgethong tsa bommasepala, ha e le
moo mekga ya kganyetso e se ntse e peperana pele ho dikgetho. Baahi ba
Mokoallo le ba Ngoathe ba se ba entse mohlala wa hore ke ANC fela Freistata
le naha bophara le bolelele. ANC e a sebeletswa ha e na nako ya bo
mohlohlwa o rapame, mokotla o mahlo.
Pele ya pele, dikgethong re a ya. Halala, ANC, halala! [Mahofi.] [Kena
hanong.] (Translation of Sotho member’s statement follows.)

[Mr L J MODISENYANE  (ANC):  Listen carefully, there was another victory in
Fezile Dabi’s region when the ANC won the by-elections unopposed in the
first ward, Ngoathe, Ward 15, Saki Rancho, Ngoathe and Mokoallo
respectively.

Immediately after the proclamation of the by-elections, the ANC’s presence
was felt and the cowards were frightened. [Interjections.] The opposition
parties decided to keep quiet; in fact to stand against the ANC at this
time is a futile exercise. The by-elections were supposed to be held on May
27 this year, but the results were announced on May 19, because the IEC
could see that there was no competition from the opposition parties.

We foresee that the ANC will easily win the local elections as the
opposition parties are splitting up before the elections. The residents of
Mokoallo and Ngoathe set an example that it is only the ANC in the Free
State and nationally. There is a lot of hard work being done in the ANC, as
it does not have time for bone-idle people. Forward ever, we are going to
the elections. Viva ANC, Viva! [Applause][Interjections.]]


                    DA CONDEMNS WASTE OF TAXPAYERS’ MONEY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA condemns the waste of
taxpayers’ money by the Gauteng Department of Housing. The full-page colour
advertisement in the City Press lauding the contribution of the ANC’s
recently deceased MEC for Housing in KwaZulu-Natal, Dumisani Makhaye, must
have cost in excess of R46 000.

How can this cost be justified when thousands of impoverished people in
Gauteng are still living in shacks under appalling conditions even after
years of being on the housing waiting list? The cost of this advertisement
would have supplied housing to two families at the maximum subsidy amount.
Lauding the supposed achievements of an ANC party hack who presided over
wide-scale corruption in the housing department in KwaZulu-Natal, cannot
benefit the homeless in Gauteng. This is a clear case of the abuse of
public funds in an attempt to benefit the ruling party. This type of abuse
of power by the ANC cannot and should not go unchecked. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                            PAST LEADERS HONOURED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M L NGWENYA (ANC): The ANC is heartened by the honour bestowed on the
former President of the ANC, Comrade O R Tambo, and on Comrade Chris Hani
by the Ekhurhuleni Metro Council. Both were posthumously granted the
freedom of the city and both were once residents of the city. The honour
was also given to Dr Adelaide Tambo in recognition of her courage displayed
during the struggle for freedom and democracy. The awards were part of the
city’s ten-year celebration. They also mark O R Tambo’s birthday on 27
October, and in our tenth year of democracy we celebrate his 87th birthday.
It is a conscious attempt to show the historical link between those who
planted the tree of liberty and the succulent fruit blooming on that tree.
As we continue to celebrate the lives of these icons, we in the ANC
rededicate ourselves to the ideals and the beliefs of those leaders. I
thank you. [Applause.]




                    MUNICIPALITIES FACE FINANCIAL CRISIS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K VAN DYK (DA):  Mevrou die Speaker, dit is met skok en verbystering dat
die inwoners van Suid-Afrika die afgelope week in die media moes kennis
neem dat stadsrade wat die voedingsaar van basiese plaaslike dienslewering
is, hulself op die randjie van finansiële ineenstorting bevind.

In ‘n verslag van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies is bevind dat stadsrade
‘n gebrek het aan kennis van skuldinvordering, rekeningdienslewering,
waterbestuur en finansiële verslagdoening.
Terselfdertyd het menige stadsrade geen kredietwaardigheid oor nie.
Stadsrade is ook deurspek met korrupsie en finansiële wanbestuur.
Bogemiddelde salarisse word aan munisipale hooggeplaastes betaal. Raadslede
het nie die tersaaklike vaardighede en ervaring nie, terwyl amptenare
vermoëbeperkings toon om effektiewe dienstelewering daar te stel.

Dit is veral kommerwekkend dat 90% van hierdie 284 munisipaliteite deur die
ANC beheer en bestuur word. Die ANC-Minister van Plaaslike Regering se
aankondiging dat nog R15,6 miljard aan hulp vir die volgende twee jaar aan
munisipaliteite verleen gaan word, is net ‘n korttermyn-
krisisbestuurinspuiting en bied geen langtermynoplossing nie. Om net die
belastingbetaler se geld te vat en aanhoudend vure dood te slaan, is
onaanvaarbaar.

Die DA is van mening dat die effektiewe toepassing van die Munisipale
Finansiële Bestuurswet nodig is, wat sal behels dat ordelike
skuldinvordering op agterstallige en bestaande diensterekeningsgeld
toegepas word en kredietbeheer aan die orde van die dag sal wees. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr K VAN DYK (DA): Madam Speaker, it was with shock and bewilderment that
the inhabitants of South Africa were informed via the media this past week
that the city councils, which are the main supply channel of basic local
service delivery, find themselves on the brink of financial collapse.

In a report of the National Council of Provinces it was discovered that
city councils had a lack of knowledge concerning debt collection, account
service delivery, water management and financial reporting. At the same
time many city councils no longer have any creditworthiness. City councils
are also riddled with corruption and financial mismanagement. Those who are
highly placed in the municipalities are paid above-average salaries.
Councillors do not have the relevant skills and experience, while officials
exhibit limited capabilities for establishing effective service delivery.

It is especially disturbing that 90% of these 284 municipalities are
managed and administered by the ANC. The announcement by the ANC Minister
of Local Government with regard to giving further R15,6 billion in aid to
municipalities for the next two years, is just a short-term crisis
management injection and does not offer any long-term solutions. Simply
using the taxpayers’ money continually to extinguish fires is unacceptable.

The DA is of the opinion that the effective application of the Municipal
Financial Management Act is necessary; this will entail orderly debt
recovery on overdue and existing service fees and will ensure that credit
control will be the order of the day. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I am rising on
two points of order. The first is that Mr Ellis in his statement attributed
statements and motives to the Head of State. I would want you to study the
statement and rule whether it is in order for the attribution of such
statements and motions to be made without any substantiation whatsoever.
[Interjections.]

Secondly, Mr Steyn made a statement that an advert was placed, “lauding the
supposed achievements of an ANC party hack who presided over wide-scale
corruption . . .”  That statement is being made in relation to an hon
member of a provincial legislature who has passed away. I think that is
disgusting. I would request that you come back to the House and give
directives as to how we treat each other and how we speak about each other,
especially about those who have passed away.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you briefly?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I first want to respond to Mr Nel. May I be allowed to
respond to Mr Nel, Mr Gibson?

Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes. You are the one who decides what you can do and what
I can do. I asked whether I could address you on the presumed point of
order raised by Mr Nel.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, I am politely asking you to sit down . . .

Mr D H M GIBSON: Yes, I will.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: …so that I can respond to the request made by Mr Nel.
Mr Nel, the request is well taken. The statements will be studied and if a
ruling is needed on any of the two statements, it will be done at the next
sitting of the House after we have studied the Hansard. Thank you very
much. Mr Gibson.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam, I wanted to address you on the very ruling you’ve
made to ask whether…
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not made any ruling.

Mr D H M GIBSON:  …that was a point of order. Mr Nel did not say that it
was a point of order. I am not sure whether he was making a statement to
the House or raising a matter on a point of order. If it was a statement,
then one does not have to study Hansard at all. One would simply tell him
that the time for making statements has passed.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I make decisions for myself. And I have
said that I would study the Hansard.

Mr D H M GIBSON: Thank you, Madam. That’s the point I was going to make
before you spoke.

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Deputy Speaker, it is most disgusting and it is a shame
about the member of the DA who remarked on the late Dumisani Makhaye. The
member is in this House because Dumisani Makhaye sacrificed his life to
bring them here. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Mr Sikakane, I think there are many of us in this
House who are still mourning. We have just buried someone who was very,
very close to us. Let us allow each other the period of mourning.

I also think it is very disrespectful for any of us to be rising on a point
about a matter that is still so painful to many South Africans. I therefore
think the point made by Mr Nel that we should go and look at the contents
of the statements and that a ruling be made is valid. Let us leave the
matter at that point.

I don’t think that his family is happy - watching what we are doing now -
because they are proud of what their father has been doing for many years,
trying to fight for the liberation of South Africa and for all of us who
are here, not members of the ANC or any members of any other party. All of
us are seated here because of some and many of the sacrifices that
Dumisani, as a person, has made. I think that we must end this at this
point and wait for the ruling to be made at a subsequent sitting of the
House. May his spirit rest in peace and let us not play games about his
departed spirit! [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want to bring to the
attention of the Speaker that during the time allocated for members’
statements the IFP was called only once. I think we are entitled to two
slots; I don’t know what happened.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to take this opportunity and make a
statement?

Hhayi, ungabosenza njalo, baba. Velaphi, awuthathe leli thuba wenze
isitatimende-ke baba. [No, don’t do that to us, Mr Velaphi. Could you take
this opportunity to make a statement.]




             CONCERNS REGARDING AL-QAEDA FORCES IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the Minister for Intelligence, hon
Ronnie Kasrils, MP, recently brought to our attention the fact that there
are Al-Qaeda forces based in South Africa. It is of great concern that
there are terrorist forces in the country, especially at the time when
South Africa is passing its legislation on terrorism.

Our concerns, with regard to Al-Qaeda forces in South Africa, are related
to concerns about what activities they are currently engaging in that might
possibly put the lives of South African citizens at risk. It is therefore
imperative that adequate attention be given to this issue, as it pertains
to the safety and security of the citizens of South Africa and the
stability of the country in the long term.

If we do not take this issue seriously now, we might live to regret at a
later stage not having done so.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Siyabonga baba. Siyabonga nakuwe baba uMpontshane. [We
thank you, father. We also thank you, father Mpontshane.]

   THE FUNDING OF SOCIAL SERVICES GIVEN THE MAJOR CHALLENGES AND OBSTACLES
    FACING DELIVERY OF SERVICES WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO THE ENORMOUS
     BURDEN ON NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS IN THE WELFARE SECTOR TO DO
                 STATUTORY WORK WITHOUT THE BUDGET TO DO SO.

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker…

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Dudley, I just want to remind the House that we
are at motion number one. I was in the middle of reading out the topic when
the IFP demanded their next slot. The item on the Order Paper is the
Subject for Discussion in the name of Mrs Dudley on the funding of social
services. Hon members, hon Mr Ellis, please, we would all like to listen to
hon Dudley.

Mrs C DUDLEY:  Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The ACDP has called for
this debate today in view of the major challenges and obstacles facing
delivery of social services. We refer particularly to the enormous burden
on nongovernmental organisations and the welfare sector to do statutory
work without the budget to do so.

I would like to stand here today and call for more money for everyone,
especially NGOs which are rendering valuable services. But, the truth is,
we all know that the needs are limitless and resources severely limited. To
find more money we must either take from other strained budgets such as
education, or we must borrow money and increase our debt, or we must
increase tax and cripple productivity.

With welfare spending for this year at R45, 7 billion and rising to R64
billion in three years, South Africa now spends more than any other
developing country on welfare. Despite constant warnings by Minister Manuel
that the rate of increase in social grant spending is unsustainable, we
simply continue as if we believe that by ignoring the facts they will
somehow go away.

The ACDP is concerned that poverty is increasing its grip on the people of
South Africa, and we agonise over the hardships and suffering experienced
by so many. We, like you, want to help the poor but it is for the sake of
the poor that we just must not allow ourselves to be party to bankrupting
the country. We cannot sell out the next generation by hawking the future
to pay for the present.

Despite four years of rapidly rising welfare grants, levels of poverty
remain desperately high with the poor sinking deeper into poverty,
according to the HSRC research. This expanded safety net aimed at
alleviating poverty in South Africa takes up 91% of the Social Development
budget. How sure are we that what we are doing has more benefit than cost
to society? What are the alternatives? How can we strike the balance? What
is affordable and what is not?

The ACDP supports the idea of a commission of inquiry to relook at this
picture as a whole, to redetermine priorities and redirect - where
necessary - our limited resources to where they will be most beneficial and
truly impact positively on the lives of the most needy. Our first priority
must be to get people working so they can escape the poverty dependency
trap. This means tax incentives for those who actually create work and not
fantasy programmes which put R1,5 million into the hands of ANC youth, as
witnessed in the Eastern Cape recently, to equip fancy but unused offices
with top-of-the-range equipment and furniture, and expect them to magically
stimulate the economy by facilitating skills development and finding jobs.
These youths have the passion and even the desire but no clue on how to
accomplish their task, and certainly no experience or expertise.

The ACDP believes efforts with regard to developmental aspects of social
welfare make good common sense. We know the commitment of NGOs to
developmental work, but realise that dire restrictions imposed by the very
small percentage of 4,5% of the total budget, which is allocated to social
welfare services, means developmental projects are often overshadowed,
leaving prevention, awareness and early intervention strategies shelved.
The immediate needs of the overwhelming numbers of Aids orphans, in other
words, simply take priority.

Tragically, the budget for social services is entirely inadequate to meet
the ever-increasing needs of our society, and fundraising has become
increasingly difficult for NGOs. The department reported this year that
almost 62 000 orphaned and vulnerable children, and 10 000 child-headed
households have been identified and have received appropriate services.
However, these achievements sadly pale in comparison to projections of 800
000 Aids orphans by 2005.

Nonprofit child protection agencies are, in terms of draft legislation,
legally responsible for rendering services on government’s behalf. Yet the
state is not legally responsible for funding them. This, of course, is
problematic for the already stretched and underresourced child protection
system which is in danger of collapsing under the strain.

As much as 85% of the work of many NGOs is statutory, yet less than 50% of
their budget is subsidised by government. Some organisations doing amazing
work receive between nothing and 35%. Overseas funders, they say, do not
want to fund the statutory work. NGOs believe government should contract
rather than subsidise them and pay in full for their services.

The ACDP believes the need for undertaking a costing exercise to accurately
assess the costs involved before services are contracted or commissioned by
government and targets set, to be long overdue. At present NGOs are unable
to pay social workers the salaries that are paid in the public sector. This
results in staff turnover of 50% to 90% and leaves little to no chance of
NGOs ever having black senior staff or meeting transformation criteria. One
organisation in the Western Cape experienced a 300% turnover in one year.

A recent survey shows that 61% of NGO staff earns less than R3 000 a month.
The NGOs say that they have become training facilities for the public
sector but are progressively unable to provide services themselves. In this
way, NGOs are crowded out by government. Lack of adequate funding impacts
very seriously on communities and it means that many, many children, often
Aids orphans, are stuck in the system.

With insufficient social workers to undertake the necessary statutory work,
children are unable to be suitably placed in foster care or adopted. In one
agency that looks after orphaned children, there is a backlog of 1 500
foster care applications because they are unable to investigate these
cases. The one and only person working on these cases is overseas-funded
and not state-funded.

Children are dying before case workers get to them. This distressing
reality devastates and discourages workers. State-subsidised posts have not
been increased in 15 years. Thousands of older persons, many caring for
orphaned grandchildren, are also not receiving community-based support
services as promised by government, along with drastically reduced
financing of homes for the aged. Of course, late and erratic payment of
subsidies has also exacerbated the situation.

The latest draft finance policy for NGOs which deliver services on behalf
of government was presented at Minmec recently. This long overdue policy
however does not seem to present a solution. While the concept is fine, the
policy contains no details of who will be funded. Financing criteria are
still not clear and no measures are in place to monitor or ensure provinces
implement policy, in line with any specific criteria.

NGOs do not hold that much hope that the revised policy will be any more
workable than the previous one. They were hoping for a policy document
which was more than just philosophy and transformation principles. The
sweeping generalisations and innuendos accusing NGOs of ignoring
transformation have hit below the belt for the majority of NGOs, of whom
this is absolutely untrue and an unfair reflection. Those on the ground who
work hands-on in communities face crises situations daily. [Time Expired.]
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms I W DIREKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the
topic of today is one that is close to my heart. We in the ANC have worked
towards the liberation of our people for years and it gives me particular
pleasure to lay another stone on our foundation to empower our people on
this journey to extricate ourselves from poverty.

The Department of Social Development has always co-operated with civil
society in the area of welfare services to children, in particular. During
the apartheid years, this co-operation was racially graded because spending
was skewed heavily towards expensive institutional provision for white
children or white beneficiaries. A further bias was the disproportionate
subsidy of organisations run within the Dutch Reformed Church for services
for  white people only. Consequently there were several specialised
nongovernmental organisations that had significant funding from government.

These organisations were mostly based in white urban areas. They mostly
focused on processing adoptions under the Child Care Act of 1983. They
undertook procedures for the alternative placement of children and removed
children from their parents’ care. But, thank goodness, with the advent of
an ANC democratic dispensation, a significant portion of services in South
Africa are now provided by  more than 3 600 community-based organisations.
These services range from prevention to the continuum of care and embrace
all ages and conditions. They cover every terrain: women, older persons and
the youth, children, families, drug abusers, disability, crime, HIV and
Aids, poverty and income generation.

These services benefit more than 11,5 million people of all ages throughout
South Africa; employ more than 26 000 social service professionals and
other personnel; and involve at least 42 000 volunteers from the community.
At this point one needs to emphasise the pivotal role played by volunteers
in any community and this has happened over decades.

Government financing constitutes less than 30% of the total cost, however.
It is therefore imperative that as we move forward we look at critical
issues that need our attention. These issues are: financing of services
provided by NGOs, and the partnership between the department and the NGO
sector. These are issues that we need to address as a government.

The inadequate funds available for social services really need our
attention. We are in the process of dealing with the financing policy,
which we need to look at very carefully. We need to come up with a
financing policy that will reduce the burden of poverty on the less
advantaged people in our communities.

The funds that are needed are necessary for development and social welfare
services, and to support and care for people, families and communities who
are poor and vulnerable. The percentage of the national budget that is
allocated for social welfare services is alarmingly small - and we need to
take note of this - compared to the 91% for social security. It is totally
inadequate to meet the needs that are only too prevalent. This is even more
apparent when considering that this amount must cover the services provided
by the provincial departments, as well as services provided by NGOs.

I will highlight the following facts and examples to convey to you how this
situation is impacting on the ability of NGOs to provide services and how
people are suffering as a result. The brain drain from the NGO sector has
paralysed services and this has had the effect of putting the poor in
distress. There are too few social workers left in the NGO sector, and they
go into private practice or go oversees. Nongovernmental organisations
cannot compete with the salaries these bodies offer their workers, so the
social workers that remain do not have the necessary experience to carry
this burden.

The NGO sector’s remaining pool of social workers is mainly an
inexperienced workforce, and this seriously impacts on our standard of
service. Most importantly, the lack of adequate funding impacts very
seriously on communities and means that many children, often Aids orphans,
are stuck in the judicial system. The children and their carers are caught
up in legal processes to ensure that the children are placed in foster
care. Nongovernmental organisations report backlogs of up to 1 400 and more
cases of foster care applicants who require investigation.

It is an unfortunate fact that there have been instances where, despite
having been promised assistance, organisations have not received funds
timeously. The children’s homes undertake a statutory service on behalf of
the state. The fact that government children’s homes cost R5 699 per child
per month as compared to the average of only R857 per child per month paid
by the department to NGO children’s homes starkly portrays the vast
difference between the two in their funding.

The Aids pandemic continually increases the demands made on existing NGOs
to provide care and protection services. The simple fact is that we are
unable to meet these demands due to inadequate financing. The number of
orphaned children reported to child welfare societies throughout the
country tripled between 2000 and 2003 compared to the data of the previous
three years. This is in all provinces of the country, and it highlights how
this has become a national crisis that affects all our communities and all
NGOs.

The department’s financing of the various services often stays at the same
level for years with no increases being given. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Deputy Speaker, can I say from one democrat to another that we
wish Senator John Kerry all the best in today’s US elections. [Laughter.]

The stifling of economic growth by the ANC through choking labour
regulations, its inability to address the Aids pandemic and the loss of
over 1 million real jobs since 1994 has led to over 25 million South
Africans living below the poverty line. This is defined as a family of four
earning less that R1 300 per month. This places a huge burden on social
security.

The DA believes in an opportunity society, one where the individual can
achieve his or her full potential. The current welfare system offered by
the ANC is becoming too costly according to the Minister of Finance, where
welfare spending is set to rise from R45, 7 billion to R64,6 billion in
three years.

The government is said to be shocked at the sudden rise of people receiving
grants. In April this year, nearly eight million people were beneficiaries
to one or other form of grant, six months later this has risen to 10
million. One could say the ANC has itself to blame for failing to rise to
the challenge of HIV/Aids. What we witness each day with 1 000 Aids deaths,
and the emergence of a new phenomenon, child-headed households, could have
been substantially reduced had the ANC tackled HIV/Aids head-on earlier.

The excuse of the Minister of Health that treatment of HIV/Aids was too
expensive is now being exposed for what it really is, namely a farce. The
fact of the matter is it is now more expensive to look after the orphans
and the destruction that Aids leaves behind than it would have been to
treat people years ago.

Another reason for the corruption and abuse that is taking place with
regards to the awarding of grants is the chronic shortages of social
workers. According to a reply to a parliamentary question of mine, there is
a 74% vacancy rate of social workers in the Department of Social
Development when one takes the ratio of one social worker to 5 000 people.
The international norm is one social worker to 1 500 people. This means our
actual shortage of social workers is a staggering 92%. There is no way
social workers, along with all their other responsibilities, can assess
every single grant application that is made. It is just physically
impossible.

In addition, the current welfare policy of the ANC leaves millions of
impoverished South Africans out in the cold, as they do not meet the
requirements for grants and are unable to support themselves. This is not
because they are physically incapable of it, but rather because there is
simply no room for them in South Africa’s economy as it is currently
constructed. They are chronically unemployed, because they lack skills that
the labour market demands and have no means to obtain these skills. They
are sentenced to a life of destitution.

The DA believes that government should provide a basic income to poverty-
stricken South Africans who have no way of supporting themselves. To this
end the DA will introduce a basic income grant, BIG, implemented, and I
must stress, in conjunction with policies designed to achieve faster
growth.

According to Robin Lee who writes in this week’s Financial Mail:

      The arguments for BIG are well known. It increases choice rather than
      dependency. Even at a moderate level it has a measurable impact on the
      57% of our population below the poverty line. It is aimed at poverty
      itself, not the consequences of poverty, and does not encourage people
      to disadvantage themselves to qualify for a grant, for instance, by
      becoming pregnant to access a child grant. It would be much easier to
      administer than the current welfare grants.

The basic income grant’s reach would be deep into the areas where the
current grant system fails to reach, namely the eight million unemployed.

However, the DA and I would like to stress that BIG, or any other grant
system, can only at best alleviate poverty, and not eradicate it. The only
way we will eradicate poverty is through job creation. That will free
millions of poor people from the shackles of poverty, which is normally a
life sentence. The BIG will be able to close the poverty gap by 74%.

As we all know, governments cannot and do not create sustainable jobs. The
ANC is proof of that through the loss of over one million jobs since they
came into power. All that governments can do is to create an environment in
which the economy will flourish and jobs will be created.


To this end the DA proposes that, firstly, the labour legislation is
amended to allow more flexibility in the labour market while still
protecting workers from exploitation. Even the ANC admits through its
policies that the minimum wage is stifling job creation. Why then does the
ANC suggest paying the poorest of the poor less than the minimum wage
through its Public Works Programme? It is hypocritical of the ANC to
exclude itself from stringent labour regulations when it imposes such
regulations on struggling small and medium businesses to the detriment of
economic growth.





Secondly, we propose the direct reimbursement of business in full for money
spent on approved training. This would replace the dysfunctional and
inefficient Setas. Thirdly, we propose tax break deductions of 150% for the
first R2 000 per month of employees’ salaries, and lastly, exemption from
capital gains tax for small businesses.


Under a DA government, fewer and fewer people will rely on government for
their survival and wellbeing as economic growth, job creation and training
will empower people to take control of their own lives and destinies. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Deputy Speaker and colleagues, South Africa is a country
with a history of deep-seated systemic and structural inequalities, and it
is still undergoing processes of restructuring and transformation. Access
to services is one of the major issues that form part and parcel of the
effects of multifaceted poverty.

Consequently, budget allocations in relation to social services are a
critical factor in determining how many people will be able to have access
to life-saving and life-changing social development,  health and education
programmes. These are absolutely critical for the emancipation of our
poorer South Africans from conditions of endemic poverty.

With regard to education since 1994, budget reviews have indicated that
there has been a significant increase of 117% in the education budget.
Almost 6% of South Africa’s gross domestic product, GDP, is spent on
education, putting the country on a substantially high rate of government
investment in education.

Developing countries generally devote a large share of their GDP to
education, much more than they did in 1980. However, this share, of course,
is still smaller than that of developed countries, which spend a great deal
more. However, it has to be noted that the increase in expenditure on
education is most significant in dealing with systemic poverty, which is
closely linked to illiteracy and access to jobs.

Job Seeker require, first and foremost, an education in order to have
access to other resources. Therefore, it has to be recognised that
education is a key tool for the reduction of the poverty of education and
its effects of deprivation. The poorer and more rural provinces are most
burdened with the problem of the endemic backlogs that were created by 40
years of apartheid education. The government should therefore consider
substantial budgetary increases for the poorer provinces.

Another concern is the estimation that there are just over 152 schools
where learners are physically taught under trees in South Africa. Budget
allocations have to be conducted in line with provincial needs, which
include the infrastructural requirements of each province. It is for this
reason that budgetary reform processes are critical in order to ensure that
the deadlines indicated by the President, namely that by 2005 there will be
no learners under trees, can be met.

As indicated by provincial trends in government spending, the provincial
health budgets rose by 4,4% in real terms to R40, 6 billion between 2003-
04. Over the MTEF period they are projected to grow by 3,3% a year in real
terms, to reach R47, 4 billion by 2006-07.

The health sector’s HIV/Aids conditional grants will rise to R1,6 billion
over the next three years to fund the roll out of the ARV programme. The
HIV/Aids pandemic is known to exacerbate conditions of poverty, which makes
it imperative for poor people to have access to ARVs to save their lives.
There are still many people who have not been tested, which means that the
number of those infected will be considerably higher than currently known.
It is, therefore, critical for our government to increase its budget for
the ARVs in other to cater for the millions of people infected by HIV in
South Africa.

In relation to social spending . . . [Time expired.]


Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Speaker and hon members, the funding of social
services is a fundamental duty of the state. No socially responsible state
can escape or avoid its vital duty to support the weak, the poor and those
in society who find themselves in need, nor should it wish to do so.

Whatever the incentives offered to civil society and private enterprise to
contribute, the lion’s share is inevitably and quite correctly borne by the
fiscus. Presently social security enjoys a vastly improved status over any
previous time. But that is not high praise, because a more dismal social
security regime than the one that pertained under apartheid is hard to
contemplate.

The most welcomed aspect of present policy has been the much wider casting
of the social security net. It now includes many millions more of the needy
than ever before. However, it is insufficient merely to cast a wider net.
It is a fundamental requirement of social security benefits that they are
adequate for the purpose intended.

Most grants and all present social pensions are wholly inadequate to
maintain any independently living person. They constitute no more than
emergency financial relief. The UDM does not accept hon Minister Manuel’s
assertion that adequate social pensions are not affordable. On the
contrary, what we cannot afford is to allow the old, the weak and the sick
to live out their lives in abject poverty. We cannot afford to allow them
to live without dignity, comfort or hope, always dependent on the goodwill
of others.

How can we afford, year after year and budget after budget, to give away
billions in tax breaks to the rich, but we cannot afford to care adequately
for those in need. [Interjections.] No, in this country we do not lack the
wherewithal. What we do lack is the political will to find the funds to
finance an adequate, holistic social security system. [Time expired.]

Ms F BATYI: Hon Deputy Speaker and members in the House, significant
progress has been made in bringing better education, health care, housing
and other social amenities to the previously disadvantaged. Yet poverty is
so widespread and income disparities remain enormous as economic liberation
and tight budgetary policies complicate efforts to improve living
conditions and expand opportunities for the poor.

Studies indicate that spending on health, education, welfare and housing
have risen from 52,9% to 58,3% of the total budget from 1994 to the
present. A recent report by the Human Sciences Research Council argues that
increased access to social services largely benefited urban and peri-urban
households. Authorities are still struggling to provide basic
infrastructure and social services to the rural poor.

A number of local governments in rural areas have complained of
insufficient funding for service provision. Key constraints in delivery
were insufficient capacity and uncertain funding, the report said. Many
local governments have encountered problems like poor service provision in
townships, including lack of economic viability due to a rent boycott
culture. Institutional arrangements need to be altered in order that
development goals might be met.

The health sector continues to be challenged by questions of quality and
efficiency, particularly at the provincial level. More specifically,
challenges are posed by the lack of basic infrastructure in many rural and
peri-urban areas, and insufficient personnel to staff new clinics recently
built.

The move to equity between provinces has not necessarily resulted in
shifting resources from the privileged to the disadvantaged sectors of the
population. With large portions of the entire provincial education budget
fixed in personnel costs, difficulties associated with increasing the
teacher pupil ratio and the . . . [Time expired.]

Mrs H I BOGOPANE-ZULU:  Deputy Speaker, the Department of Social Services
has committed itself to enabling the poor, the vulnerable and the excluded
within the South African society to secure a better life for themselves in
partnership with them, and with all those who are committed to phasing in a
caring society.
+
It is extremely important that as this debate takes place we understand
that the Department of Social Development relies on the effectiveness and
efficiency of the capacity provinces have to deliver their services. But it
is also important for us to understand that social services alone cannot
make South Africa a better country. We also want to ensure that we don’t
create a dependent society.

The post-1994 era has brought about major changes in South Africa. These
changes have had an impact not only on the South African people, but also
on the institutions.

We acknowledge that it would be incorrect for us to say that social
development can change the lives of people, especially when acknowledging
the fact that despite the above, service delivery has not taken place. But
we also bear in mind the challenges facing the delivery of services. The
hon Waters, for example, outlined the whole issue of social workers. It
takes four years to train a social worker, and I don’t think that during
the time when your government was in power they did a good job either.
[Interjections.] But it is also important for you to acknowledge that
unfortunately the DA will not be in power. You had your chance, and your
recommendations should have made a difference then. [Applause.]

Attempts have been made to develop a financing policy for the nonprofit
sector, but we acknowledge that that policy has not been successful. It
would be important to acknowledge the attempt that has been made. The hon
Dudley referred to it, but in her reference to the policy she indicated
that the policy does not outline who has to be funded. I was sitting there
and trying to understand whether the policy should determine the names of
NGOs that are going to be funded, because it is actually very clear who is
eligible for funding.

The policy sets guidelines that NGOs must comply with, and amongst other
things, NGOs must be registered. The policy must provide for equitable
distribution, because the reality is that it is those empowered NGOs that
used to receive government funding under the previous government that
continue to receive it.

We need also to ensure that the balance between urban and rural areas
becomes a reality. Equity to other people means . . . I am not sure what it
means to them, but in the ANC it means that we need to ensure that we find
a balance between NGOs that receive funding from the state in terms of
their geographical location.

The reality is that NGOs in the urban areas have received, and continue to
receive, funding based on the facts that they have the required capacity,
meet the donor demands, as well as have the ability to monitor and
evaluate.

However, in the rural areas our people don’t have the capacity. The
commitment that social development made to ensure that it changes the lives
of those that need it most remains a challenge. The moving away from
welfare services to social development, hon Dudley, literally means that we
will also have to align our funding policies in line with that. But not
only that, we also need to acknowledge the realities. We have HIV/Aids, as
the hon Waters said, but it is neither correct to say we did not respond,
nor that it is becoming costly to care for orphans.

If in the past an African child lost a parent, the brother, sister, nephew,
niece or whoever was available would automatically take care of the child.
No African child used to apply for a foster care grant, and hence the
response that you feel that the system is overcrowded. We used to raise our
dependants based on the fact that we are a community. But today it has been
proven that we cannot. As more black children are accessing the foster care
grant, surely it is meant to increase.

Another aspect that you need to understand is the whole issue of the
participation of recipients of the grant. It is extremely important that we
acknowledge the fact that unless the people who need the grant are able to
have a say in how this grant is to be distributed, we can’t continue.

Poverty alleviation remains a challenge, and we have to acknowledge the
high unemployment rate. The whole issue of moving away from disability as
welfare and a medical model, to a social issue, also poses a lot of
challenges. The acknowledgement of early childhood development, and the
funding thereof, especially in those rural areas, are issues that this
particular financing policy will respond to.

The acknowledgement of the Expanded Public Works Programme and its
successful implementation will also go a long way to addressing the aspect
of the funding of social grants.

Pensions can create a dependent society. But if we teach people how to fish
and provide them with fish, we will definitely go a long way towards
changing their lives. We acknowledge that government has not been very
successful in that respect. But at the same time, measures have been put in
place in an earnest attempt to respond to that.

The whole issue of learnerships will go a long way towards ensuring that
young black people, who never had access to jobs and who never had access
to the market during the time when the hon Waters’ party was in power, get
work. [Interjections.] But also, the whole issue of the effectiveness and
efficiency in relation to the review of the funding of provinces will also
go a long way to responding to some of the realities that our people are
faced with.

The establishment of the social security agency, surely hon Dudley, goes a
long way to responding to the issues and the challenges faced by social
development in relation to their social funding.
It is really not correct for us to indicate that social funding or the
financing policy on the table does not respond. I believe that it was
developed in partnership with the nongovernmental organisations. They have
indicated in partnership how they are prepared to commit themselves to
caring and improving the quality of life of people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the legitimate object of
government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have
done, when cannot do it all in their separate and individual capacities.
Poverty alleviation is one example in which government has to play a role.

The introduction of the National Lottery was hailed by civil society
organisations as a source through which they hoped to receive substantial
funding, because government had curtailed all their fundraising abilities.
The lottery funds are instead used to fund community development agencies
to support income-generating projects. Nongovernmental organisations remain
without sufficient funding. The centralisation of funding institutions
leaves organisations on the ground with little or nothing. There have been
reports of hospices, old age homes and other institutions struggling to
make ends meet. Some have gone for weeks or even months on end without
lights or water.

The passing of legislation always raises the hope that where will be
improvement. The fanfare with which the National Development Agency
Amendment Act was passed in 2003 and its mentioning by the President in his
state of the nation address raised the hope that the social services would
be well attended to. Yet civil society organisations are still struggling
with problems as before because of lack of capacity, even though this is
offered in the Act. Chinua Achebe was right when he said things fall apart
if the centre cannot hold. Provinces where welfare organisations are based
have yet to get the relevant staffing, yet people keep suffering.

Parliament is a place for making and passing legislation, but the object of
such pieces of legislation is that they should be applied and not quoted as
the best in the world while they are not being applied properly. We call on
the Ministry of Social Development to ensure that development does take
place so that social services should neither stagnate nor deteriorate. I
thank you.

Mr N T GODI:  Madam Deputy Speaker, from its inception the PAC envisioned a
society that is democratically formed, nonracial in character and
socialistic in content. These obviously imply a central role for the state
in the economy and in the provision of social services. Social services are
provided as a primary obligation of the popular state to its citizens and
especially to mitigate for the vulnerable in society.

There have been sustained programmes on the part of the democratic state to
extend social services to the majority who had been excluded under white
domination. Much has been done and much more still needs to be done. The
PAC is convinced that the state should remain the primary vehicle and
guarantor of social service provision. The PAC remains steadfastly opposed
to the privatisation of social services like water, electricity, etc. The
PAC is concerned about the slow pace of bringing into effect the policy of
a free water and electricity quota, which negatively affects the poor.

The provision of social security grants to the vulnerable has dramatically
increased since 1994, meaning that more of our people have access to
poverty alleviation means. Other government programmes to empower the poor
and unemployed are hampered by the disintegrated and unco-ordinated
programmes by various government departments. With the co-ordination and
clustering of departmental programmes aimed at poverty alleviation, more of
our people can be skilled and lifted out of absolute poverty. As I have
said, a lot has been done but more still needs to be done. As we build a
new and caring society we have to take care of the vulnerable in society,
and government has a central role to play in this regard. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Poverty alleviation and
social development are our biggest challenges. All sectors are working hard
at putting government policies and initiatives in place in order to deal
with the above-mentioned challenge. And today, as  in the past, we have
many entities striving to attain the same with each one making its
contribution to the wellbeing of all South Africans.

Unlike the apartheid state, our democratic South Africa does not depend on
the voluntary sector for social services, but has taken the responsibility
of socially developing South Africa upon itself.

However, there appears to be a number of hiccups preventing us from
attaining this reality. We are still heavily dependent upon NGOs that are
dedicated to such social services. Since abandoning the failed policy of
social services financing of 1999 in 2000 we have, for years, not had a
policy framework for such finance, which has yielded many negative effects
for civil society organisations regarding finance, social workers and
organisations.

The promised financial policy, which will come into effect in April 2005,
appears to be a ray of hope in this social services funding chaos. There
appears to be major issues surrounding the employment of social workers and
their conditions of employment. It further appears that, even though the
new policy addresses the salary issue, the remaining issues need to be
addressed to ensure the efficiency of social services.

It is furthermore noted that the much sought after National Lottery does
not contribute as much to civil society organisations as they have
anticipated. The MF regards the National Development Agency as the most
important key to sourcing funds for social services. However, with regard
to the R116 million of the medium-term budget, civil society organisations
criticise the NDA for not serving the sector adequately as a result of its
lack of capacity. The MF feels that if the NDA and the IDT give a valid
indication of the scope of their work, the Treasury will award the sector a
larger budget.

The MF feels that for social development to be effectively
inculcated, the issues pertaining to funds and resources need to be
earnestly addressed. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Nkul T M MASUTHA: Manana Xipikara, rixaka hinkwaro na vayimeri va rixaka
lava hi nga hlengeletana hinkwerhu namuntlha, ndzi nga se ya emahlweni ndzi
lava ku hlamula swin’wana leswi nga vulavuriwa hi... [Minkavanyeto.]
(Translation of Tsonga paragraph follows.)

[Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Speaker, the nation at large and public
representatives gathered in this House, before I continue I would like to
respond to some statements that were made by . . . [Interjections.]]

That’s not my problem. You will have to find a solution to that.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Masutha quite rightly points out
that it is not necessarily his problem because he understands perfectly
what he is saying. The trouble is that the rest of us can’t understand what
he is saying because there is no interpretation. We certainly don’t want to
make it difficult for him, but we hope that they will get themselves in
order and sort this out.

Mr T M MASUTHA: I am speaking one of the 11 languages.

Mr M J ELLIS: But you are lucky. You told me the other day that you speak
all 11 languages and I told you that I don’t.

Mr T M MASUTHA: What should I do about it?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, I think you need to improve on your two
languages. Add two more languages. But, I am told that there is
interpretation.

Mr T M MASUTHA: I can volunteer to give him lessons in Shangaan if he so
wishes.[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The interpretation is being sorted out. Please
continue, Mr Masutha.

Nkul T M MASUTHA: Manana Xipikira, leswi ndzi lavaka ku sungula hi swona i
ku hlamula swin’wana leswi nga vulavuriwa hi Manana Dudley na Tatana Waters
eka mbulo wa vona eka mhaka leyi hi nga langutana na yona namunthla. Leswi
humelelaka eka leswi va nga swi vulavula hi leswo, xo sungula, a va swi
twisisi leswaku hi vulavula hi yini.

Namuntlha a hi vulavuli hi timhaka ta midende. Siku ri tata laha hi nga ta
bula ha yona. Namuntlha hi vulavula hi ndlela leyi mfumo wu nga tiselaka
mintirho ya minhlangano ya rixaka leyi pfuneka ku tisa nhluvuko na ku
pfuneta rixaka leswaku ri lwa na timhaka ta nhlupheko, hi timali, swikili
na sw. na sw. (Translation of Tsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T M MASUTHA: I would like to start by responding to what Mrs Dudley and
Mr Waters have said in relation to this debate. I think they do not
understand the matter at hand. Perhaps we will set aside a day to discuss
it.

Today’s debate has nothing to do with pensions. Today’s debate has to do
with the way in which government can assist nongovernmental organisations
in the welfare sector that is there to improve the quality of life of our
people by fighting poverty, by way of providing funds, skills, etc.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Mr Masutha. There is definitely no
interpretation. Well, I understand what you are saying, but just for the
benefit of other people, may we please . . .

Mr T M MASUTHA:  Okay, under the circumstances, I will reluctantly speak in
English.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Could you pause for a while.  We do not want you to
switch to English.

Mr T M MASUTHA:  That’s fine. I can continue my speech in English in any
case, in the interest of time.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to make it quite clear to the
hon speaker on the podium that we don’t bear a grudge against him in any
way whatsoever. We appreciate his willingness to co-operate and speak
English, but we are more concerned about the fact that the interpreters
don’t appear to be doing their work. That is our concern.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, no, no! I think it is also incorrect to say that
they don’t want to do their work. We don’t know what challenges they are
faced with. If the challenges they are faced with cannot be resolved,
whatever they may be, we will then appeal to the hon member to use a
language that is convenient to you and other people who don’t understand
what he is saying. However, the majority of us are actually very
comfortable with the language.

Mr Masutha, please take your seat whilst I get an indication from the Table
staff as to what is now happening in this regard.

I can say anything in Xitsonga and make sure that . . . Are they okay now?
We should be having an interpretation, and I think we should rather wait
for it. [Interjections.] We can’t, because the next speaker will conclude
the debate. Therefore, we have to wait so that Ms Dudley can respond to Mr
Masutha if she wants or needs to.

Well, in other Parliaments we would have adjourned the sitting and made
sure that there was interpretation at the next sitting. However, we are not
actually doing that at the moment. We are just hoping that…
[Interjections.] Okay, Mr Masutha is insisting on continuing in English.

Mr T M MASUTHA:  Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon members, I hope I
will get the benefit of the minutes that I’ve already lost.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, definitely!

Mr T M  MASUTHA:   As  I  have  said  on  several  previous  occasions,  the
pervasive poverty in our country is not an accident of history.  It  is  the
result of calculated, yet ill-conceived socioeconomic policies of the  past.
The policy framework introduced by  the  democratic  government  proposes  a
clear shift away from the welfarist approach  of  the  past  and  away  from
treating vulnerable individuals and families from a  perspective  that  such
people must be saved and their pathologies corrected, as was the  case  with
the welfare policies under the apartheid regime.

The new policy framework, as set out mainly  in  the  1997  White  Paper  on
Social Welfare, places emphasis on  a  developmental  role  for  the  state,
namely that the  state  must  make  available  services  that  would  enable
individuals and communities to realise their full potential.

The deepening political crisis in South Africa in the middle  of  the  1970s
provided the impetus for the  emergence  of  grassroots  organisations  that
mobilised around the everyday needs felt in communities  otherwise  rendered
voiceless by the repressive, racist regime. Their work emphasised  the  need
to address mass poverty  and  underdevelopment,  as  well  as  the  need  to
integrate social development initiatives with national political activism.

Very specific  measures  were  introduced  in  1978,  soon  after  the  1976
uprisings,  to  ensure  that  social  service  organisations  serving  black
communities were apolitical and were controlled by  a  national  fundraising
regime that also  ensured  that  those  organisations  that  employed  black
social work professionals had access to lower levels of funding.

In the period between the  unbanning  of  political  organisations  and  the
first democratic elections in 1994, the future of welfare policy in the  new
South Africa became the  subject  of  intense  debate.  These  deliberations
culminated in the publication of the White Paper on Social Welfare in  March
1997, which called on South Africans to participate in  the  development  of
an equitable, people-centred,  democratic  and  appropriate  social  welfare
system.

As  part  of  the  ANC-led  government’s   move   towards   providing   more
developmental social services, we began work on a new financing  policy  for
welfare services in 1998 to ensure that  such  services  and  resources  are
appropriately distributed. A new policy document was published in 1999,  but
abandoned owing to several difficulties, as has already been mentioned.

In the  meantime,  the  funding  system  that  was  being  employed  by  the
department still favoured well-developed, urban welfare  organisations,  and
those communities most in need of social welfare services were  still  being
disadvantaged. Civil society organisations also reported  that  the  funding
they received was completely inadequate for the work they were  expected  to
do.

Furthermore, as a result of the serious dearth of qualified  social  workers
in government departments, a  lot  of  NGOs  have  been  forced  to  provide
conventional welfare  services.  This,  obviously,  also  hampers  the  move
towards providing more developmental services.

It is quite encouraging to note that the department has  recently  presented
a new financing policy to Minmec, as was mentioned earlier,  and  that  this
policy will now be subject to public scrutiny. The new policy  is  aimed  at
guiding the country’s response to the financing of service providers in  the
social development sector to facilitate transformation  and  redirection  of
services and resources, and to ensure effective and  efficient  services  to
the poor and vulnerable sectors of society.

Another difficulty in the area of social services is the ability of  service
organisations to  source  funding  from  outside  of  government.  When  the
National Lottery was introduced there was an expectation from civil  society
organisations that they would be able to receive  substantial  funding  from
this source  as  their  other  fundraising  abilities  had  been  curtailed.
However, the National Lottery has  provided  a  limited  source  of  income,
especially in relation to those smaller community-based organisations.

There must be a concerted effort on the side of  the  distributing  agencies
to ensure that they target the most needy organisations  for  support.  This
targeting must include making available information  about  the  application
procedures for the requirements attached to applications.  It  must  further
proactively  link  community-based  organisations  with  resources  such  as
financial training, bookkeeping, drafting business plans and, if  necessary,
subsidise those services and resources outside of the amounts  allocated  to
the  individual  organisations.  This  may  also  include  appointing  staff
members to do community extension work or actively link the information  and
services  available  through  the  National  Lottery  Distribution  Fund  to
community development structures already in place.

The National Development Agency, the NDA,  is  intended  to  act  as  a  key
conduit  for  funding  from  the  government  of   the   Republic,   foreign
governments and other national  and  international  donors  for  development
work to be carried out by  civil  society  organisations.  In  addition,  it
should  contribute  towards  building  the   capacity   of   civil   society
organisations, to enable them to carry out development work effectively.

Civil society organisations assert that the NDA lacks the capacity to  serve
the sector adequately. With the passing of the National  Development  Agency
Amendment Bill early in 2003, the expectation was raised that  its  location
in  the  Department  of  Social  Development  would  contribute  to  a  more
appropriate alignment of its priorities and  that  it  would  be  easier  to
ensure that the work done by this funding agency complements  other  aspects
of  the  development  work  managed  through  the   Department   of   Social
Development. However, this would require that the NDA ensures  that  it  has
the capacity in all the provinces to adequately reach out to communities  so
that it will not only be the  established  organisations  in  urban  centres
that will benefit from the available funding.

In conclusion, it becomes critical that the  role  and  importance  of  NGOs
providing welfare services be supported, so as to enable  them  to  continue
their good work in the fight against the poverty our community is  currently
faced with. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Masutha, thank you very much. One admires your skill
to switch from one language to the other with ease. [Applause.] However, I
also have to re-emphasise the point that it is unacceptable that our
languages continue to be marginalised. [Applause.] We will, therefore, seek
a report on what happened this afternoon, so that we all can happily use a
language that we feel comfortable with. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY:  Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Bogopane-Zulu, it is true
that there are many people who are hoping that once the national agency
gets up and running, it will relieve financial difficulties and have more
of a focus on social services. But, of course, the reality is that the
funds for social grants will move with the grants to the national agency
and the major problem will be left behind, and that is the funding.

Obviously, if the guidelines for the funding of NGOs are not clear, then
they can’t be clear if NGOs do not find them clear. So I think it is
important that we just take that into consideration. Of course, NGOs have
an important role to play and must not be undervalued. Their concerns must
be taken seriously because, I believe, we do need to work together to find
solutions.

Mr Masutha, thank you for speaking in English and we do stand amazed at
your skills. The solution, of course, does not lie in state welfare, but in
mobilising people to volunteer their services. Without a doubt, churches
and faith-based organisations have the greatest potential to rise to the
challenge. We must not underutilise our greatest resources and must ensure
that legislation does not make it impossible for willing hands and willing
hearts to present themselves as solutions to the many problems. What is
stopping us from unblocking foster care and adoption procedures by
involving reputable community and church organisations?

Of course, the ACDP agrees with Minister Manuel that the balance at this
point between welfare and stimulatory spending on infrastructure is
critical, and supports an increase in the level of investment spending in
the economy.

Again, we must stress that our first priority must be to get people working
so that they can escape the poverty dependency trap. As I have said, this
means tax incentives for those in the private sector who are actually
creating the work. Again, education and skills are also key factors and
they offer the poor the most effective opportunity to find a way out of
poverty.

The ACDP would like to thank you for this opportunity to put this subject
on the table. We believe that it is of vital importance. We know that there
is not one person in this House who doesn’t believe that this is a critical
issue. I am sure that we all want to find solutions. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                       RETRENCHMENT OF TELKOM WORKERS


                          (Subject for discussion)

Dr P W A MULDER:  Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to ask every member in this
House what would they see as the saddest picture in South Africa at
present. Every day on my way to Parliament I drive past people sitting on
street corners, asking me with their eyes for a job - strong, healthy men
and women. If you look closely you can see the despair and hopelessness in
their eyes. They are fathers and mothers who must support their families.
In their own eyes they are failing their families. What a sad picture.

Sir, if you could solve this problem and create more jobs, most of the
other problems in this country would easily be solved. The ANC doesn’t want
to solve it; that’s its reaction, I suppose. Dignity will return to these
men and women and crime will come down.

I want the House to meet Piet Marais, a Telkom employee. At the end of this
year he would have completed 18 years as a loyal employee of Telkom. In the
past five years he was part of a team that installed more than two million
new telephone lines – most of them in disadvantaged areas. He was proud of
making a real contribution to bettering the lives of these people and to
bettering South Africa. When he heard that Telkom made a profit of more
than R4, 5 billion in the past financial year, he was very excited. He
predicted that Telkom management would thank him as a worker in terms of
this achievement and that a personnel bonus was a possibility.

What really happened? The next thing he heard was that he would be
retrenched by Telkom. He has a wife and three children. All his efforts to
get a new job have failed. Within months this family will be without money.
Most probably Piet will join the men on the street corners who have despair
in their eyes. He asks what this people’s contract to create jobs and fight
poverty really means. From his perspective, the government creates poverty
and fights jobs.

While he was struggling to survive, he read in the newspapers that the
Chief Executive Officer of Telkom received a salary of R11 million during
the same period. That is R30 000 a day. I repeat:
R30 000 a day. Telkom directors were paid R60 million last year, one
American director receiving over R15 million.

With a profit of more than R4 billion on the one hand, Telkom announced
their intention to reduce their head count by 7 600 in the next three
years. The CEO gets an increase and over 7 000 people lose their jobs. Is
this what it’s all about? Is this what privatisation is all about? This can
never be right. It is very wrong. Somebody must do something. Who? Maybe
the government, or maybe the ANC. Why don’t they do something?

Until today there has been no reaction from these quarters. If I look
around me today there are no Cabinet Ministers, no Deputy Ministers here
for this important issue. [Interjections.] Well, sir, if it is so
important, where are they? Why aren’t they here to discuss the issue? Only
one would have been good enough.

The FF Plus protested and said it was wrong. Solidarity protested and said
it was wrong. The Communications Workers’ Union protested and said it was
wrong. On behalf of all those Telkom workers in trouble, I want to thank Mr
Flip Buys, the General Secretary of Solidarity, and Mr Dirk Herman who is
in the gallery today, as well as the President and the General Secretary of
the Communications Workers’ Union, Mr Joe Chauke and Mr Kiti, also in the
gallery, for their presence here and for their efforts.

The FF Plus went further and asked for today’s special debate on this
issue. A solution must be found for the sake of Piet, the retrenched Telkom
employee, and the other 7 600 Telkom employees. A solution is also
necessary to save the whole concept of privatisation.

Telkom management says they act on instructions from their board of
directors. Who is the main shareholder in Telkom? They surely can do
something? The main shareholder in Telkom is the South African government.
The government holds a 39% share in Telkom. Until now there has been no
real reaction from government. Is it possible that the same government that
promised in April to help create jobs now helps to destroy 7 600 jobs?
Why will they allow it? I don’t know. But I do read in the newspapers of
the possible sale by Thintana of its 15% stake in Telkom. Thintana is the
government’s strategic equity partner in Telkom. The speculation is that
current and former ANC heavyweights are interested in this stake. These
include former Communications Minister Jay Naidoo and ANC spokesperson
Smuts Ngonyama. Is that the reason why the ANC is quiet? Maybe. We shall
have to watch this space to see. But if that is true, I can understand the
problem. If your spokesperson is involved, who speaks on behalf of the ANC?
They are very quiet.

Is daar ’n oplossing vir hierdie probleem? Ja, verskeie oplossings is reeds
deur die vakbonde en kenners voorgestel. Ek sou graag elke oplossing wou
bespreek as ek meer tyd gehad het. Is die probleem privatisering en is die
VF Plus gekant teen privatisering? Nee, die VF Plus is ten gunste van
privatisering. Maar as privatisering beteken dat een maatskappy daardeur ’n
monopolie kry met nog staatsbeskerming daarby, dan is ons daarteen.

In ’n vrye ekonomie is die slegste wat jy kan kry ’n maatskappy wat ’n
monopolie het en daarom sy kliënte of gebruikers kan ignoreer. Al wat
slegter as dit is, is ’n staatsbeheerde maatskappy met ’n monopolie en
staatsbeskerming. Dit is wat hier gebeur het. Dan kan die verbruikers nie
eers na die staat toe gaan om hulle teen onbillike tariewe te beskerm nie.
Vergelyk net vir ’n oomblik die monopolie van Telkom aan die een kant met
die selfoonmaatskappye aan die ander kant wat in kompetisie met mekaar is.
Volgens sommige navorsers is Telkom die duurste telekommunikasieverskaffer
in die wêreld. Maar dan kry Telkom se grootbaas R30 000 ’n dag en die
maatskappy dank meer as 7 000 werkers af.

Ek gaan Chris Hani, die vorige SAKP-leier, aanhaal ter wille van mnr
Cronin, wat luister. Hani het in een van sy laaste onderhoude gesê, en ek
haal hom aan: “Wat ek vrees, is dat die bevryders hulle as elitiste sal
ontpop . . . en ’n Mercedes-Benz sal ry en hierdie land se hulpbronne sal
gebruik . . . om in paleise te lewe en rykdom te vergader.” Dit was in
1992. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Is there a solution to this problem? Yes, various  solutions  have  already
been suggested by the trade unions and  experts.  I  should  have  liked  to
discuss every solution if I had more time.  Is  privatisation  the  problem,
and is the FF Plus opposed to privatisation? No, the FF Plus  is  in  favour
of privatisation. But  if  privatisation  means  that  one  company  gets  a
monopoly, and state protection on top of it, then we are opposed to it.

In a free economy, the worst that you can  get  is  a  company  that  has  a
monopoly and can therefore ignore its clients or consumers. The  only  thing
worse than that is a state-controlled company  with  a  monopoly  and  state
protection. That is what has happened here. Then the consumers  cannot  even
turn to the state for protection against unfair rates. Just  compare  for  a
moment Telkom’s monopoly, on the one hand, and the mutually  competing  cell
phone companies, on the other. According to some researchers Telkom  is  the
most expensive telecommunications service provider in the  world.  But  then
Telkom’s big boss gets R30 000 a day, and the company retrenches  more  than
7 000 workers.

For the benefit of Mr Cronin, who is listening, I  will  quote  Chris  Hani,
former leader of the SACP. Hani said in one of his last  interviews,  and  I
quote: “What I fear is that the liberators will turn out to  be  elitists  …
and will drive a Mercedes Benz and will use this country’s  resources  …  to
reside in palaces and to gather wealth.” That was in 1992.]

Tony Ehrenreich from Cosatu wrote in the Cape Times last week that today
many of our ANC leaders were more inclined to enjoy the trappings of wealth
and luxury than to care about the needs of our people.

To have a debate on this issue and to believe that this alone will solve
these problems is, unluckily, not enough. The President or Parliament must
appoint a commission of inquiry into what exactly is going on at Telkom. It
is that serious.

The FF Plus agrees with the unions that in the meantime all retrenchments
must be postponed for 12 months and that a working group consisting of
representatives of Telkom, the unions and external experts should analyse
the problems and come forward with mutually acceptable solutions. Only then
will people believe that we in this House are serious about addressing the
problems of unemployment and that we really want to create jobs. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M R MOHLALOGA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the issue of unemployment continues
to be a challenge that all of us have to face. All or most of us who come
from previously disadvantaged communities are affected by this problem. We
know of a brother or a sister who is unemployed. We know of our relatives
who are unemployed. And most of us bear the responsibility of having to
take care of extended families.

When we talk about unemployment, we are talking about something that we
have direct experience of. When we talk about retrenchment, we speak about
something we have direct experience of. It is not merely something
abstract.

Any person who loses his or her job is one person too many, because it
means that all who relied on that income will be without bread and the
comforts that used to characterise their family life. Hence, as the ANC we
have isolated this matter of unemployment as a challenge that as a country
and as a people we have to confront and defeat. As we deal with this
problem we have to understand its nature and complexities, otherwise we
will resort to shortcuts, populism and tricks in our attempts to resolve
it. That will not be sustainable neither will it be workable.

We have inherited an economy that was facing a train crash, an economy that
was moribund and sterile. As a result even the parastatals that we have
inherited were in the doldrums. They were running at huge losses year on
year. These parastatals were firmly on their way to the grave, and as the
ANC government we had to salvage them.

Since 1994 significant progress has been made to align the state- owned
enterprises with the priorities of the agenda of our government. We have
managed to reorient them towards playing a fundamental and strategic role
in the ongoing development of our country, be it in transport, electricity,
and so on. We will continue, of course, as part of this process, to revisit
their mandates to ensure that they remain aligned to our development
agenda. As you know inefficiencies still continue to hamper the optimal
operation of these assets and we will continue to be seized with these
matters moving forward.

One of the challenges that we face, as well, with regard to the
restructuring of state assets is the issue of modernisation in sync with
the global technological environment. The ICT industry is a high-end,
technology-based industry with technological innovations that happen on a
continuous basis. For instance, Telkom used to rely on copper to roll out
lines, and now it does not. As in other sectors, the development of
technology means fewer hands can do jobs that used to be done by even ten
people.

However, the greatest emphasis in the process of restructuring of state
assets has got to be on job retention and creation of new jobs. The ANC is
clear about this, and we are not likely to retreat from this position.
Hence we had to intervene when Transnet wanted to retrench 20 000 workers,
without any plans for those that were to be affected. We will not allow any
state-owned enterprise to go on a retrenchment crusade, because the issue
of jobs and job creation and retention is at the heart of fighting poverty.

We are aware that in the process of modernisation and technological
innovation there will always be redundancies. Our view is that as and when
that happens there has to be retraining and creation of adequate safely
nets for those workers who cannot secure continued employment. But we also
need to make sure that our skills needs move in tandem with the needs of
our economy and developments in our technology. Such safety nets must
include effective retraining, counselling and assistance to find
alternative employment. This is why we intervened in the case of Transnet,
because at that time this was not the case.

In the instance of Telkom, what are we dealing with? Telkom presented its
alternative strategies and approaches to avoid or minimise job losses and
created alternative career options for its employees. The unions and Telkom
have agreed on these alternatives to minimise job losses on 30 September
this year. For heaven’s sake, I do not know what we are debating about
then, because people who are legitimate representatives of the workers have
agreed on this particular matter.

I hope in that sense we will not be setting a wrong precedent, because
there is a bargaining chamber in Telkom and there is no crisis in that
chamber that warrants and requires the attention of the public
representatives. Of course, people can go out with mala fides and mislead
the public. However, the facts will remain and truth will speak for itself.

In the first instance, the figure of 7 600 allegedly affected, as quoted by
Solidarity, is incorrect. The number that will be affected by possible
reductions is 4 181 in the next three years. As we have said, one job loss
is one too many.

The unions and Telkom have agreed that these employees must be retrained or
reskilled and redeployed within Telkom in the ICT sector and beyond. These
affected workers will be handled by an agency for career opportunities for
purposes of retraining and reskilling. This is an example that the private
sector should also emulate, rather than throwing our people out into the
streets.

The question is: In the context of this debate what can we do as public
representatives where the unions and the employer agree? Our role cannot be
to create confusion or seek to score political points, but rather to
encourage that spirit and to respect our labour laws.

The unions and Telkom should continue to engage and evolve medium to long-
term measures to deal with these particular challenges. But there is an
important reason why we are debating this issue today. Telkom has been
going through this process in the past seven years and never have we been
asked to have this kind of a debate. And the question is, why now? This
time around, because more white employees are affected, and because Mr
Mulder has just recently discovered Piet Marais who has been affected, it
is convenient for Solidarity to run helter-skelter for political shelter of
its members. Hence we are having this debate today.

The telecommunication industry has seen major developments in the last 10
years. In addition to modernisation of the sector, people have access to
mobile telephony, which provides a further challenge to the demand for
fixed-line telephony. Interventions have also been made to introduce
licences for underserviced areas, as well as the impeding second national
operator. These developments and more provide a challenge to Telkom.

However, we as the ANC will neither rest nor lose concentration in ensuring
that as part of our monitoring and evaluation of Telkom’s mandate we make
sure that our people have access to basic means of communication so that we
can close the digital gap. We will neither rest nor lose concentration in
ensuring that our people receive affordable and quality basic means of
communication, and Telkom must do so. We will neither rest nor lose
concentration, as the ANC, in ensuring that state-owned enterprises play an
important role in creating and sustaining jobs to further the objectives of
eradicating poverty and unemployment; and Telkom must do so as well. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms M SMUTS: Madam Chair, I used to receive individual phone calls from
individual workers when Telkom first began the process in 2000 to slash its
workforce from 60 000 to 30 000.

There are few things worse in the world than losing your job, and at a time
of such high unemployment, we do feel considerable sympathy for workers
whose posts are lost and who have to decide now on taking a package,
reskilling or on one of the creative options on which Telkom has quite
regularly reported to MPs and which have our approval. As far as I am
aware, I have to agree with the colleague who preceded me. The question is
why now; why raise the matter now? I have a suspicion that it may be
because I cried foul on Telkom’s profits in June, and Dr Mulder took
notice.

Ek is bly om te sien dat hy die helfte van sy feite gekorrigeer het. Die
wins was natuurlik nie R4,5 miljoen, soos sy mosie dit stel nie, maar R4,5
miljard. [I am glad to see that he has corrected half of his facts. The
profits were, of course, not R4,5 million, as stated in his motion, but
rather R4,5 billion.]

And, I would suggest respectfully that he has a look at the other figures
he has cited, namely the more than 7 000 affected posts, which I too
believe are 4 000. But, may we get back to the point. My answer to the
workers then is still the answer now: Telkom is preparing for competition
and that competition must provide alternative jobs. Indeed the three unions
themselves in their report note that, ``it is only where there have been
additional entrants into the market following privatisation that there has
been some employment growth’’.

Now, Dr Mulder wants Parliament to take a stand on what government should
do. The answer is that government should get fixed-line competition going.
The solution is the SNO in the short-term, and may I say that we welcome
developments with the SNO. Now it is beginning to look as if we may have
one.

We are also invited today - and I am more interested in debating with the
unions than with Dr Mulder - to discuss the unions’ report. It deals with
two matters on which I think our position is quite well known. Firstly,
there was the roll-out of more than 2,5 million lines under the Jay Naidoo
deal, followed by the disconnection of more than 2 million of those lines
when they were priced out of the market. The problem with rolling out
networks is that they cost money, and in this case around R40 billion. They
also need to be market responsive. Now, the Naidoo deal promised the
investors that they would earn the returns later, but made the roll-out
obligatory. Later, there was 2001 for 2002’s telephone tariff findings and
the result was that our present Minister was locked into her predecessor’s
undertaking and therefore blocked Icasa’s attempt at imposing the price cut
formula. That is the second issue the unions raised.



En ek dink Solidariteit is vertroud met my argumente. [And I think
Solidarity is familiar with my arguments.]

The Minister promised us earlier this year that she would not block
reasonable regulatory rulings. I personally believe that we can look
forward this year to more affordable rates. The September inflation figure
is low and productivity, including reduced worker numbers, will be deducted
from it.

I agree with our unions that the 10% fixed teledensity should be improved.
I do, however, remind them that cell penetration is close to half the
population. I agree with them also that proper market strategies and new
pricing could increase volume and revenue. Unfortunately, I do not believe
this is the path to growth.

A comparative study has been done of 10 Asian telecommunication companies,
which shows that their profits come from cost cutting. Now, you will recall
that when I accused Telkom of excessive profits - also on its fixed line
sector where there was a profit of        R6,5 billion - the answer was
that only 4,6% came from revenue and the rest came from cost cutting. Now,
the only Asian phone companies who delivered double-digit revenue did so on
the back of their cellular operators, and I do not need to remind you how
large a portion of Telkom’s value sits in its 50% of Vodacom.

Now, we need to take note. As if the cell threat is not enough, the
traditional telecommunication companies are anxiously watching the advent
of voice-over Internet protocol from new generation competitors. They are
considered by experts to be on a burning oil rig platform facing death
either by fire or by sharks. Their choices are considered to be rip and
strip the legacy network, grow both that and an IP network, or cap the old
network and grow IP.

Now, Telkom has some IP, and it may want to look at building more. Sentech
has built an IP core. The IP networks are cheap and here is the crunch:
They require only a small core of highly skilled workers. These are facts
and it behoves us not to ignore them.

The unions have commissioned an economist’s report which you know really
puts this matter beyond debate. That report points out that by comparison
with Australia, Telkom’s labour expenses should be further reduced by R1, 2
billion.

Madam, the workers have told us that this is a battle between two ideas:
shareholder fundamentalism and the stakeholder approach. The DA believes
that it has a better idea and, that is, to expand the shareholder base to
more South Africans by creating a people’s consortium, which should include
stokvels, burial societies and ordinary South Africans, instead of seeing
our former Minister Naidoo or our former DG, Andile Ngcaba, buying
Thintana’s remaining 15% stake. We should expand Telkom’s already good
employee share scheme. We cannot ignore the technology, but we can spread
the benefits around. [Time expired.] [Applause.] Thank you.

Prince N E ZULU: Deputy Speaker, the IFP believes in consensus-seeking
politics until an agreement is reached. Telkom and the unions operating
there are engaged in this process. If this debate is held before the
conclusion of the talks, we are obliged to accept it as a wake-up call for
Telkom and the unions that Parliament is watching you.

It is economically misplaced for Telkom to create an impression that those
who dwell in the first economy do so at the expense of those who belong to
the second economy. The country’s economy needs to be managed and balanced
properly for the benefit of all who make it and must be shared equitably
among shareholders, stakeholders and wage earners. Salary inequalities tend
to depress the real wages of workers thus shrinking the number of jobs the
economy could be able to create.

As people’s representatives in this House, we are mindful of our
responsibility to create jobs and fight poverty by way of enabling
legislation. Telkom’s argument for retrenchments is based on redundant job
positions caused by technological inventions and Telkom therefore offers
voluntary packages to its more than 7 000 workers, we have been told this
afternoon.

This kind of talk has for many years become the industrial scapegoat for
retrenchments. The argument on the side of workers is that the technology
we buy from foreign lands is man-made by hand. The more technology we buy
from abroad the more jobs we create in those lands, and thus more jobs are
lost to technology here at home. It is a complex scenario, which only the
industrial sector can unravel. The retrenchment of so many workers will
have adverse effects on families and dependent children, resulting in close
to 38 000 hungry stomachs.

Telkom will tell us that a handsome cash package is prepared for them. Our
counterargument will be that a once-off payment is no sustainable solution
to livelihood if no other income is envisaged. Have these people been
properly trained to manage their once-off package? How did Telkom prepare
these people for the new world of joblessness and poverty they would be
thrown into? Is Telkom in the fight to reverse the frontiers of poverty or
are they in the fight to do the opposite?

Poverty-stricken society will soon find it hard to accommodate these
people. Instead, many may be absorbed by crime syndicates, irrational
gangsters or be caught up in a cycle of various diseases.

Telkom may further argue that these people will be redeployed and reskilled
in other jobs. To that we say, suspend all retrenchments until the workers
themselves express satisfaction with the new initiatives. Among the
reskilling initiatives, co-operatives and credit unionism is again proposed
for the rural and semi-urban people who may find some comfort that way.

The former Minister of Correctional Services defended that department many
a time by stating that correctional services was not manufacturing the
prison population, but society out there was responsible. I warn that one
day society will refuse to be the dumping ground of retrenchees from any
sector. Instead, they will demand that the stratospheric salaries paid to
senior managers be shared in order to create more jobs for the country.

I thank you, mam. [Applause.]

Mr M DIKO: Madam Chair, the UDM condemns Telkom’s continued insistence on
extensive job cuts. Telkom insists that it will proceed with its
restructuring programme that will result in jobs being cut over the next
three years. It is puzzling that Telkom’s chief executive can adopt such an
intransigent position in the face of appeals by unions and government to
the contrary. Are the unions and government no longer stakeholders in
Telkom? Is Telkom now a force unto itself? This occurs despite the fact
that Telkom operates very profitably as a monopoly by the grace of the
government.

This puzzling behaviour is best explained by the fact that for many years
government pursued a macroeconomic policy, with the compliance of Cosatu,
of profits before the people. There may have recently been a shift away
from this, but for years the accepted wind storm was of neoliberal
economics and widespread retrenchments.

It is necessary for government to prove its commitment to job creation and
the preservation of jobs by bringing Telkom to heel. Telkom is running a
monopoly in which it milks the consumers for every cent it can,
irrespective of inflation targets or actual delivery improvements. It makes
massive profits and pays its executives handsomely. The message has to go
out that this exploitative form of crony capitalism that exploits thousands
of workers and countless more consumers to enrich a select few will not be
tolerated. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Chair, there can be no debate about the fact that one of
the greatest problems facing this country is poverty and unemployment. With
more than 40% of South Africans without jobs, Telkom’s announcement that it
intends to retrench 4 000 workers in two years and 7 600 workers over the
next three years is almost unbelievable.

What makes the planned retrenchments even more unpalatable is the fact that
Telkom’s CEO was paid an astronomical amount and the profit for the company
for last year was just over R4, 5 billion. However, what I find most
distressing is that the major shareholder in Telkom has kept far too quiet
about the loss of income for these workers. The ANC-led government has,
unfortunately, failed the workers and the voters of Telkom. The ANC-led
government promised a better life for all, and committed itself to job
creation and job retention - not job losses - at the Growth and Development
Summit and during it’s election manifesto.

However, ladies and gentlemen, the entire backlash cannot be squarely
placed at the doors of Telkom. Yes, they are being irresponsible in the
current job environment, but they also have a fiduciary responsibility to
maximise their profits for their shareholders. To this end, they have
exceeded expectations.

I would like to argue, however, that there needs to be an honest and frank
debate about the causes of these retrenchments, particularly the
competitive environment or, more importantly, the lack thereof in which
Telkom operates. Telkom has been under threat of competition from various
sectors for a number of years now. Telkom, in anticipation of this
competition, quite correctly needed to make their operations more
streamlined and more efficient.

Telkom has evolved into a highly efficient and competitive operator which,
unfortunately, has no competition. The delays in the roll-out of the second
national operator and the continued, failed promises of convergence
legislation have been a death knell for these more than 7 000 workers. Had
there been competition and a clear, unambiguous legislative framework,
these skilled people would have been absorbed into the SNO or other
operators wanting to make inroads into 80% of South Africans who still do
not have access to telephony. [Time expired.] I thank you.

Rev M S KHUMALO: Madam Chair, hon members, it is painful to be poor, it is
terrible to be unemployed, and to be retrenched is worse. Ukuba mpofu
kubuhlungu nokungabi namsebenzi kunzima. Ukuphelelwa umsebenzi kubi
kakhulu.

In the context of huge profits and huge bonuses, it is hard to understand
this contradiction of huge bonuses for the top-level employees and job
losses for bottom-level employees at Telkom. The ACDP says to the
government, as a shareholder, that it is not impossible to find a workable
solution to retain those earmarked for retrenchment at Telkom.

The hon Dr Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri issued a statement on retrenchment at
Telkom on 18 August, saying that job creation and job retention is at the
centre of government’s programme. This wise statement did give expectation
of a particular solution. While the rest of us are celebrating 10 years of
democracy, others are faced with fears of retrenchment at Telkom. Their
celebration is clouded by pain about the unknown and the frightening,
increased level of unemployment.

As we celebrate gains of democracy, let us influence those who have power
to retain their existing employees at Telkom and work hard to create more
jobs. Some may say that the arrival of new technologies and digital age is
one of the causes, because a company is enabled to produce the same results
with fewer people. We, the ACDP, say that we need to embrace those new
technologies and the digital age, and at the same time create more jobs and
fight unemployment. [Time expired.] I thank you. Ngiyabonga.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the ANC government ascended
to power by, amongst other things, promising jobs, and that people would
have a better life. But statistics in the Census 2001 report indicate that
in 1994 an amount of 20 866 people had no jobs, and by March 2003 a whole
29 555 were jobless. Yet, Telkom, a company in which the government has a
majority shareholding, comes up with a decision to have people out of jobs
and swell the numbers of the unemployed. This cuts across the government’s
Batho Pele policy, which spells out clearly that the interests of the
ordinary people should rank supreme.

Telkom’s decision to lay off employees also cuts across the face of the job
creation mandate that was confirmed through the resolutions of the Growth
and Development Summit to the effect that proposals have to be sought to
avoid job losses. This about-turn by Telkom cannot be accepted. Telkom made
a profit of over R4 billion in the past financial year and the CEO’s salary
was an obscene R11,1 million, an amount that is equal to the budget of some
provincial departments.

With this type of success in business, what informs Telkom to have
thousands of workers consigned to the streets? My understanding of the word
“voluntary” is that the action should come from the affected party himself
or herself. Retrenchments are not and will not be voluntary if a number is
predetermined regarding who has to be ditched. We in the UCDP interpret
this as benign dismissal.

Government and Telkom should know better from past experience that the so-
called voluntary severance packages have left people destitute and
helpless, as was noted in the Public Service way back in 1995. Dispensing
with 7 600 workers has to be seen as reducing the quality of life of those
people and their families.

We, in the UCDP, believe that Telkom should stop retrenchments while
retaining those already in the system, and allow lateral attrition to take
it’s course for the next five years. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, before we proceed, I
would like to announce that the figure of “R4, 5 million” as it appears in
Dr Mulder’s motion on the Order Paper is a misprint; it should read “R4,5
billion”. The error is regretted and the correct figure will appear in
today’s minutes. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chair, the PAC condemns in the strongest terms the
planned retrenchment of Telkom workers, whether they are 7 600 or 4 800.
The recommendations and report of the three trade unions at Telkom to
address this serious matter must be favourably considered. The government,
as the majority shareholder in Telkom, must prevent these retrenchments.

The country already suffers from a 42% unemployment rate. In 1999 Telkom
employed 61 237 workers. This number has almost been halved to 31 624 this
year. It is a conundrum of conundrums that the CEO of Telkom, Mr Sizwe
Nxasana, has received an award of R11 million for good performance. This
translates to a daily income of R30 410. Nxasana’s R11, 1 million could
keep 183 people employed for one year at a salary of R5 000 per month. As
if this trend to make South Africa the economically most unequal society in
the world is not enough, an elite group of managers has been paid bonuses
of up to R200 000 while workers have been paid a pittance of R1 800 to R5
000.

Telkom has rewarded its directors with bonuses worth a total of
R48 million while their salaries were R60 million, in 2000. The continuing
high rate of unemployment causing hunger, poverty and crime is a recipe for
political instability and revolution in this country. [Time expired.] I
thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chair. The MF notes that Telkom
substantiates its intended retrenchment of 7 600 workers on the basis of
its finances. It appears that the fixed-line industry is at the point of
saturation as more and more people indulge in the use of mobile phones.
Telkom has taken Vodacom and it’s reported that Vodacom contributes about
22% of Telkom revenue, and contributed 33% of the 2002 to 2003 operating
profit. And even greater job losses are expected with the introduction of a
second national operator.

It appears that between 1999 and 2003 Telkom reduced its employees from 61
237 to 33 800, and stands in a strong financial year-end profit of R4, 592
billion for the 2004 financial year. They appear to be doing quite well.
What’s even more mind-boggling is that Telkom’s chief executive received an
income of R11, 1 million for 2003 and the basic salary of R1,8 million.
Further, its directors received R60 million, and its fixed-line staff
totalled R6, 7 billion for the year-end 2004.

The MF, having looked at the statistics of the staff retrenchment profile,
is a bit baffled. It is felt that we in South Africa are battling to attain
poverty alleviation and to incorporate efficient social development. These
retrenchments are going to contribute to poverty, unemployment and social
breakdown.

Telkom is a state-owned enterprise and the MF feels that the exorbitant
salaries of the chief executive officer and directors should be reduced in
order to continue with the employment of these 7 600 workers. Telkom needs
to be seriously looked at; it’s making a great profit.

Though the aim is to make a profit and seek the best way to do so, it must
be acknowledged that we have much larger responsibilities to civil society
in terms of poverty alleviation and social development, and one such is to
create employment, not contribute to unemployment. By supporting these
retrenchments, we are defeating our people. The MF says: ”Send the chief
executive officer’s salary for a cut and keep the workers employed.” The MF
does not support the retrenchment of 7 600 workers at Telkom. Thank you
very much.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, tradition has it that whenever a group of
people has tasted the fruits of privilege, security and other benefits, it
begins to find it more comfortable to act in a manner consistent with their
acquired status, thereby accepting it as normal that it alone is entitled
to privileges. Secondly, Azapo believes that advanced economies such as
ours thrive on the marginalisation of unskilled workers. In other words,
the advancement of technology, which advances economic growth, leads to the
retrenchment of those whose skills are not on par with the advanced
technology. I am saying this in order to draw the attention of this House
to the logic of the capitalist class and it’s managers, as well as the
consequences of living in a capitalist mode of production.

Telkom management seems to have proceeded from what I have stated, thereby
forgetting that they are managing a parastatal that has been put into
operation with the intention of using it’s profits to deal with our
country’s unemployment, inequality and poverty. Indeed Azapo understands
that Telkom should make profit. But if out of this profit a single person
gets R11, 1 a year plus other benefits, let alone the other millions that
end up in the hands of other managers, and ordinary workers have to be
retrenched, then Azapo indeed calls for intervention by government.

On top of this, Telkom is reported to have made a profit of R4,5 billion.
To this end, the statement made by the hon Minister of Finance and the
Association of Black Securities and Investment Professionals to the effect…
[Time expired.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Madam Chairperson, hon members and members in the public
gallery, I want to greet you all. Many of the opposition parties in this
House and elsewhere fail to acknowledge that they contributed in a big way
to the creation of a racially skewed, divided and impoverished South
African economy in which black people were denied opportunities to interact
meaningfully with the broader economy; except when they were considered as
relevant material for cheap labour and indebted consumers of a white-
dominated economy.

Many blacks in this country have gone through terrible periods of stress,
oppression, detention, eviction, retrenchment, kidnapping, death and unfair
dismissal whilst lots of white people enjoyed luxuries such as job
reservation. Today our country continues to suffer from a skills scarcity
because of these restrictions.
Whilst the majority of you were basking in the sun reaping the benefits of
apartheid, today your hypocrisy teaches you to abuse our hard-earned
democracy and freedom. As a result, you find it very convenient and easy to
point a finger at the ANC-led government and to blame it for not doing
enough for its people. We want to assure you that regardless of the
strategies you adopt, the ANC government will continue to push forward with
its broader agenda for the transformation and deracialisation of the
economy.

In consideration of the motion tabled, we as the ANC-led government have
noted the continuing challenge of unemployment and recognise the fact that
high unemployment continues to exacerbate poverty and other social
problems; that the unemployment crisis continually affects women, young
people and the rural poor; that there are many people in the informal
sector and that many of these people are still underemployed; that there is
a need to encourage our people to engage in self-initiated income-
generating projects.

Many people resort to a mixed strategy for improving household incomes that
combines hawking, subsistence farming, the state pension, income transfer
from family members, and the provision of services at a very low level.

Having realised that, the ANC-led government has committed itself to
building an economy that will encourage long-term growth and prosperity and
that will contribute towards sustainable job creation and large-scale
people empowerment. Economists have indicated that for the past 10 years
our economy has grown by almost 3% per annum, thereby making it quite
difficult to create a significant amount of jobs in a very short space of
time.

Privatisation is a worldwide phenomenon, which has been proven time and
again to increase economic efficiency. One of the most dramatic examples is
that of the United Kingdom, which, in the 15 years from when privatisation
began in earnest, recovered from being the sick man of Europe to one of the
healthiest economies. An economy that was notorious for high unemployment
is now operating at virtually full employment. The pound has been one of
the strongest currencies in the world and the UK has never had it so good.

Chile, New Zealand and other countries have also wrought miracles. Even the
once prosperous social democracies of Scandinavia are mending their
dirigisme ways and reducing the role of the state in their economies.

Throughout its 10 years of existence, our government has always recognised
that unemployment coupled with poverty remains one of the key challenges
facing our young and fragile democracy and that it has the potential to
reverse the gains of peaceful development in our country.

The successful Jobs Summit held in 1998 and the recent Growth and
Development Summit held in 2003 have clearly outlined and refined the
government’s comprehensive programme to tackle the challenges of
unemployment and gross impoverishment in our society. The subsequent
holding of these activities at the provincial level has further reinforced
government’s level of privatisation, and has drawn massive support and
commitment from the business sector and ordinary members of the public.

In view of all that, the life of an ordinary South African today is better
than yesterday. More people are reaping the benefits of what started out as
a risky economic intervention by our government. More people are more at
liberty to interact with the economy as they wish, whether as consumers
with choices or producers in a competitive environment.

In terms of the restructuring of the state assets with reference to the
issues of the debate, it is very important to emphasise that   state-owned
enterprises, of which Telkom is one, represent entities and agencies that
operate in various ways in our country and which will continue to play a
fundamental and strategic role in the ongoing development of our country
and our continent.

It is of note that these state-owned enterprises operate in all spheres of
government, be it at the national, provincial or local government level.
Significant progress has been made to align state-owned enterprises and
agencies with the priorities of our developmental agenda. However,
inefficiencies continue to hamper the optimal operation of those assets
and, hence, equality and the quality of service they provide.

We are very cognisant of the challenges that can be brought about by
restructuring state assets, especially as they relate to the following:
quality; accessibility; affordability of services provided to communities,
in particular the poor; the efficient operation of strategic sectors of our
economy; employment and human resource development.

Fundamental to the process of restructuring state assets was ensuring that
we leveraged the state potential and business capital to create employment
and to foster a deracialised and transformed economy. It is very important
that we continue to reiterate this position of the ANC-led government on
issues of restructuring and transformation and to find a way to engage with
their impact.

We will continually reaffirm our position on restructuring, particularly on
the role of state-owned enterprises in the transformation, democratisation
and deracialisation of the economy, which will ensure the transfer of
assets to the private sector in order to strengthen our developmental
agenda. We will continue to extend the National Framework Agreement to
provincial and local government, ensuring that in the process of
restructuring emphasis is placed on job retention, job creation, social
planning and training.

The mandates of state-owned enterprises must also be revisited, evaluated
and monitored more closely to ensure that the social and economic mandates
remain aligned to our developmental agenda, which covers procurement,
equity and transformation. Telkom, as a state-owned enterprise, despite its
planned retrenchments, has at least responded to the sociodevelopmental
mandate, as reflected in the RDP.

Key areas of consideration in the National Framework Agreement with state-
owned enterprises include ensuring that job retention, employment creation,
a social plan and training for workers really take place.

Apart from the many jobs it will shed, we are convinced that Telkom has
been one of the first - and one of the few - state-owned enterprises to
adhere to the National Framework Agreement, which prescribes that there
must be a social plan and ultimately the creation of a safety net to
cushion the effects of retrenchment on workers. The position of Government
has always been that retrenchment will be the last resort, taken after all
options have been explored and have proved to be failures.

In the instance in which restructuring has the potential for negative
consequences on workers, we will expect the responsible institution,
together with the relevant stakeholders, to adopt social plan solutions.
The underlying approach is that restructuring should not be at the expense
of workers, especially in state-owned enterprises. Where restructuring is
likely to result in retrenchment, downgrading or transfer, a social plan
must be negotiated with the unions so that it takes into account the
interests of the workers.

Whilst it is important and necessary for government to chastise Telkom for
the upcoming retrenchment of 7 600 staffers, we also have to acknowledge
that Telkom has managed to create and open more job and empowerment
opportunities in the ICT sector for the emerging BEE companies, the
majority of which are its former employees and the unemployed.

As a result Telkom has achieved the top Empowerdex BEE ranking. This
milestone goes hand in hand with the government’s legislation and policy on
transformation, which require companies in the public and private sectors
to comply with the scorecard on transformation. It is important to note
that one job lost will be 10 more social burdens on government. May
prosperity rule South Africa. I thank you, mam. [Applause.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte Voorsitter, die twee sprekers na die agb leier
van die VF Plus, Dr Pieter Mulder, het altwee vorendag gekom met beweringe
dat hy nie sy feite korrek het nie. Dit is nogal interessant dat die DA en
die ANC saam in hierdie speletjie was. Ek wil vir die agb lid van die ANC
sê ons het dit gekontroleer. Daar was nie ’n ooreenkoms tussen Telkom en
die vakbonde nie. [Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.]

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the two speakers who spoke after the
hon leader of the FF Plus, Dr Pieter Mulder, have both come up with claims
that he did not have the correct facts. It is rather interesting to note
that the DA and the ANC were together in this game. I want to tell the hon
member of the ANC that we have verified this. There was no agreement
between Telkom and the trade unions.]

The only agreement there was was an agreement to disagree! That is the
correct fact as far as that is concerned.

Die agb lid Dene Smuts – ek sal haar maar verskoon. Ek het gesien sy het ’n
afjak gekry by hul Wes-Kaapse kongres, so sy is seker nog ’n bietjie
gefrustreerd daaroor. So ek sal nie eers daarop reageer nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Die kern van hierdie debat is dat Telkom oor ’n tydperk van drie jaar 7 600
minder werkers gaan hê. En Telkom kom natuurlik en sê dis onwaar, want hy
sê daar was natuurlik bedankings, daar is vrywillige skeidingspakkette en
vroeë aftreepakkette. Die werklikheid is dat dit niks anders is as
indirekte afdankings nie, want daar word ’n klimaat van werksonsekerheid
geskep wat dan veroorsaak dat mense hul  werk verloor. Dit is die
werklikheid.

As ons gaan kyk na die regering van die dag, dan is hulle die
spreekwoordelike drie apies, wat sê, “Ons sien niks, ons hoor niks, en ons
sê niks nie”. Hulle is doodstil, sodat die vet katte net vetter kan word.

Ons het mos nou gehoor wie hierdie vet katte is. Dis mense wat almal senior
lede van die ANC was. ’n Mens kan jouself die vraag afvra: As hulle hierdie
groot bedrae geld gaan kry, hoeveel gaan hulle op die einde van die dag
skenk aan die ANC, vir munisipale regeringsverkiesings volgende jaar? As
ons gaan kyk na die opbrengste, dan sien ons dit is astronomies. Ek wil
vandag vir u sê . . . (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The hon member Dene Smuts – I shall pardon her. I noticed that she was
snubbed at their Western Cape conference, so she is probably still feeling
a little frustrated about that. Therefore I shall not even respond.
[Interjections.]

The crux of this debate is that Telkom will have 7 600 fewer workers over a
period of three years.  And, of course, Telkom states that this is not
true, as there have of course been resignations, voluntary severance
packages and early retirement packages. In reality this is nothing more
than indirect dismissal, because a climate of job uncertainty is being
created which in turn causes job losses. That is the reality.

If we take a look at the government of the day, then they are actually the
proverbial three monkeys that say, “See no evil, hear no evil, and speak no
evil”. They remain absolutely silent so that the fat cats can become even
fatter.

We have after all now heard who these fat cats are. They were all senior
members of the ANC. One can ask oneself the question: If they are going to
receive these large amounts of money, how much will they donate to the ANC
at the end of the day for next year’s municipal government elections? If we
look at the yield we see that it is astronomical. I want to tell you today
. . .]

And I want to say to the hon members, you think that BEE stands for “black
economic empowerment”. When you look at Telkom I want to assure you that
BEE actually stands for “black and elite enrichment”. That is what it is!
[Time expired.]

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF ELEVENTH TO FIFTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
                               PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Mr F BEUKMAN: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you for the opportunity to
introduce the five reports on behalf of Scopa this afternoon. In terms of
Rule 206 of the National Assembly the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
must consider, in terms of (a)(iii), any reports issued by the Auditor-
General on the affairs of any executive organ of state, constitutional
institution, or other public body and may, in terms of (b), report on any
of those financial statements or reports to the Assembly.

Certain legislative provisions also impact upon the functioning of Scopa.
One of these is the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999, as
amended. The object of the Act is to secure accountability and sound
management of the revenue, expenditure, assets and liabilities of the
institutions to which this Act applies. This Act, to the extent indicated
in the Act, applies to departments, public entities listed in Schedule 2
and 3, constitutional institutions, Parliament and the provincial
legislatures.

Chapter five deals with the responsibilities of accounting officers, and
chapter six with accounting authorities for public entities. In chapter 11
of the PFMA provision is made for the Accounting Standards Board to set
standards of generally recognised accounting practices for the annual
financial statements of departments, public entities, constitutional
institutions, municipalities, boards, companies, corporations, funds or
other entities under the ownership or control of municipalities. That also
includes Parliament and provincial legislatures.

The fourteenth report specifically refers to the Accounting Standards
Board, which I referred to. Our committee commends the management of the
board for the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the independent
auditors. I trust that the future audit opinions shall be equally
unqualified.

With regard to the eleventh report, which deals with the Media,
Advertising, Printing, Packaging and Publishing Sector Education and
Training Authority, Scopa commends the management of the MAPPP Seta for the
unqualified audit opinion. However, there are certain issues that need
attention. The committee noted that the Auditor-General could not place
reliance on the internal audit work due to the following: no three year
strategic plan was prepared in consultation with the audit committee; the
scope of each audit was not indicated in the plan; reports detailing the
performance against the plan were not submitted to the audit committee; and
the internal audit function of which the purpose, authority and
responsibility were not formally defined in the audit charter is contracted
to a private firm.

Scopa therefore recommends that within two weeks of tabling this
resolution, the MAPPP Seta should provide Parliament with the following: a
copy of the investment policy for unspent funds which includes
consideration of both risk and return; full details of the investment
portfolio for unspent funds; and the document strategy on how it intends to
utilise its unspent money for the intended purposes, while also ensuring
value for money. Scopa will make a follow-up on the information requested
as well as specific matters raised during the consideration of the next
annual report.

With regard to the twelfth report, dealing with the Council for Geoscience,
Scopa commends the management of the council for the unqualified audit
opinion, although there are two issues that need further clarification. We
therefore recommend that the motivation for the retention of the R123
million in cash and cash equivalents, as well as a copy of the investment
policy for unspent funds, which includes consideration of both risk and
return, should be made available to Parliament.

The thirteenth report deals with the Corporation for Public Deposits, which
is an important institution. There are no matters that need further
interaction and we therefore await the next report.

The last report, the fifteenth report, deals with the Insurance Sector
Education and Training Authority. We commend the management of INSETA for
the unqualified audit report, although there are three matters that need
further attention. We believe that a copy of the investment policy for
unspent funds, which includes consideration of both risk and return, full
details of the investment portfolio of unspent funds, and a document
strategy on how it intends to utilise its unspent money for the intended
purposes while also ensuring value for money should be made available to
Parliament.

Scopa will follow up on information requested as well as on specific
matters during the next annual report.

In conclusion, effective financial management is a prerequisite for good
governance, and we as the legislature should ensure that departments,
public entities, constitutional institutions, and national government
business enterprises should adhere to these principles. Thank you very
much.

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 16:53.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS





                          THURSDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    National Small Business Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Trade and Industry on 27 October 2004.  Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select
         Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Regulation of Constitutional Amendments Amendment Bill, 2004,
         submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development on 27 October 2004.  Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Declaration of an Amnesty in terms of section 139(2)(a) of the Firearms
     Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
         Language Board (PANSALB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         166-2002].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     Employment Equity Report of the Department of Water Affairs and
     Forestry in terms of section 22(2) ofthe Employment Equity Act, 1998
     (Act No 55 of 1998).





                           FRIDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2004


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Executive Summary of Report of the South African Members of the
         Pan-African Parliament on the Second Ordinary Session of the Pan-
         African Parliament


                              Insert "1029pap2"



     (b)    Report of the South African Members of the Pan-African
         Parliament on the Second Ordinary Session of the Pan-African
         Parliament


                              Insert "1029pap3"


2.    The Minister of Housing


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
         Registration Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 169-
         2004].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the People's Housing
         Partnership Trust for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Finance

     Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and Development Programme
     Fund for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
     Development on Notice for Designation of United Kingdom in terms of
     section 2(4) of Cross Border Insolvency Act (for purposes of section
     2(2)(a)), dated 26 October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
         having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the
         Notice by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
         for Designation of the United Kingdom in terms of the Cross Border
         Insolvency Act, 2000 (Act No. 42 of 2000), recommends that the
         House, in terms section 2(4) of the Act, approve the said Notice.

     Request to be considered.

                          MONDAY, 01 NOVEMBER 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 26926 of 25 October 2004.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 2 November 2004.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following members of the National Assembly have been
         appointed to the Committee mentioned, viz:

         Ad Hoc Committee on Annual Report of Auditor-General:

              African National Congress

                  Asiya, Mr S E
                  Fubbs, Ms J L
                  Gabela, Mr L S
                  Gumede, Mr D M
                  Hogan, Ms B A
                  Johnson, Mr M
                  Mabe, Ms L L
                  Smith, Mr V G
                  Tobias, Ms T V
                  Zita, Mr L

              Democratic Alliance

                  Trent, Mr E W
                  Van Dyk, Dr S M

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Woods, Dr G G

              United Democratic Movement

                  Madikiza, Mr G T

              Independent Democrats

                  Wang, Mr Y

              African Christian Democratic Party

                  Durr, Mr K D S

              Minority Front

                  Rajbally, Ms S



                          TUESDAY, 02 NOVEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 61B - 2003] - Act No 18
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 28 October 2004);
         and


     (2)    National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14D - 2004] - Act No
         22 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 28 October
         2004).

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 2 November
         2004:


         (i)     Dental Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003] (National
              Assembly - sec 76)

National Assembly

1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Bill, as amended, passed by Council on 2 November 2004 and
         transmitted for consideration of Council's amendments:


         (i)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D -
              2003] (National Assembly - sec 76)

         The amended Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health for a report and recommendations on the Council's
         amendments.


     (2)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 2 November 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12B - 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76).

         The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial
     Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 25 October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 20A - 2004].
CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert No 2 from ATC1102e

