---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-11
---

THURSDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mr M WATERS (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall
move:

  That the House-

     1) congratulates Kempton Park on the occasion of its centenary;


    2) recognises that in addition to being the gateway of Africa -
       Johannesburg International Airport - Kempton Park has played an
       important role in the shaping of the South African political
       landscape;


     3) notes -


           a) that it was in Kempton Park that the negotiations for South
              Africa’s first democratic constitution took place, where our
              new democracy was born;


           b) that it was also at Kempton Park where the tide turned
              against the National Party, where it was dealt its first
              political defeat in the new South Africa, losing a key by-
              election in March 1997;

           c) that the residents of Kempton Park have been celebrating
              their centenary through 60 cultural activities, including a
              Mardi Gras and a banquet held last night; and



           d) that in honour of our centenary Kempton Park has a star named
              after it, and a rose has been cultivated and named after the
              city; and


  (4) hopes that the next hundred years will be as prosperous for Kempton
       Park as the first hundred.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE



                     (The late President Yasser Arafat)


The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice as follows:

     That the House -


     (1)    notes with shock and profound sadness the death of President
         Yasser Arafat, who passed away on 11 November 2004;


     (2)    recognises that President Arafat was a veteran of the liberation
         struggle of the Palestinian people, a patriot who throughout his
         life demonstrated unwavering commitment to the liberation of the
         Palestinian people and the achievement of a just peace in the
         Middle East;


     (3)    recalls that -


         (a)     President Arafat as the leader of the Palestinian people
              withstood tribulations and endured extreme hardship in pursuit
              of peace in Palestine and Israel;


         (b)     the United Nations in numerous resolutions has called for
              peace in Palestine and Israel; and


         (c)     the peoples of South Africa and Palestine have profound
              bonds of brotherhood forged in a common struggle to achieve
              national liberation;


     (4)    believes that the passing on of President Arafat puts more
         urgency on the United Nations to act decisively for the resolution
         of the Israel-Palestine conflict; and


     (5)    conveys its condolences to the Arafat family, the Palestinian
         National Authority, the Palestinian Liberation Organisation, and
         to all the people of Palestine.


 Agreed to.




                               REMEMBRANCE DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice as follows:

    That the House –

       1) notes that today is Remembrance Day when those who died for their
          country or cause in various wars and conflicts across the world
          are formally remembered;


     (2)    believes that -


         (a)     it is important for them that we ensure a form of
              collective consciousness so that they should never be
              forgotten;


         (b)     as long as the people of the world remember those who
              died, the democratic countries have a good chance of remaining
              at peace; and


         (c)     those who died will not be forgotten and that their
              sacrifice was not in vain; and


     3) therefore resolves to observe a moment of silence as a  tribute  to
        those who lost their lives in all wars and conflicts.

Agreed to.

 FURTHER MANDATE FOR AD HOC COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED TO CONSIDER ANNUAL REPORT
                   AND BUDGET OF OFFICE OF AUDITOR-GENERAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
the draft resolution printed in the name of the Chief Whip on the Order
Paper, as follows:

    That, with reference to the resolution  adopted  by  the  House  on  19
    October 2004 establishing the ad hoc committee to consider  the  Annual
    Report and the  Budget  of  the  Office  of  the  Auditor-General,  the
    committee be further mandated to maintain oversight over  the  Auditor-
    General and for that purpose to continue with its functions  until  the
    oversight mechanism envisaged in the Public Audit Bill is established.


Agreed to.


                             MEMBERS’STATEMENTS



       HIV/AIDS WORKSHOP FOR TRADITIONAL PRACTITIONERS IN EAST LONDON


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, kutshanje eMonti bekubanjwe
ingqungquthela ebekukho kuyo amaxhwele, oogqirha nabanye abasebenzi
bezempilo. La maqela abantu ebedibanise iintloko egwadla iqhinga lokulwa
nesi sifo singugawulayo. Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC, uyalamkela inyathelo
elithathwe nguRhulumente oxhuzula imikhala ngokuphumeza umthetho ophawulayo
yaye usamkela nento yokuba amaxhwele ayinxalenye yabantu ababonelela
ngempilo.

Intatho-nxaxheba yoogqirha bemveli ibalulekile ngenxa yokuba amashumi
asibhozo ekhulwini abantu bakuthi bayabahambela befuna uncedo. Into
efumanisekileyo yeyokuba amaxhwele ngabona bantu bazaziyo izidingo zabantu
bakuthi kuba bahlala nabo. Umbutho wesizwe i-ANC iyalamkela eli nyathelo
lithatyathwe liSebe lezeMpilo eMpuma Koloni kwaye lilinqwenelela impilo
nempumelelo. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms N M MAHLAWE (ANC): Deputy Chair, recently a workshop was held in East
London where there were herbalists, doctors and other health workers. This
group of people was meeting to discuss solutions and strategies to fight
the scourge of Aids. The national organisation, the ANC, welcomes the
initiative taken by the government in power in passing legislation and also
recognises that herbalists are among the people who offer health services.

The participation of traditional doctors is crucial because 80% of our
people consult these people for help. It has been found that herbalists are
the people who are familiar with the needs of our people because they live
among them. The national organisation, the ANC, welcomes the initiative
taken by the Department of Health in the Eastern Cape and wishes it
strength and success. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                    ALLEGATIONS OF BRIBERY AND EXTORTION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D H M GIBSON (DA): Madam Speaker, members of the House will have noted
reports about a substantial bribery scandal. A micro finance company known
as Gems, which is a subsidiary of the African Bank, has paid a fine of R5
million and has agreed to pay compensation of R60 million.

The Scorpions have implicated a number of SAMWU officials and a DA
councillor in Cape Town. The Scorpions have indicated that certain persons
will be arrested within days.

I wish to place on record that the DA is committed to the principle that
any public representative who is arrested or charged on a serious offence
will immediately be suspended. Any Member of Parliament, Member of
Provincial Legislature or city councillor who is convicted of a serious
offence, particularly one involving dishonesty, must be deprived of his or
her seat.

I am challenging the ANC to say the same. [Applause]

          SOUTH AFRICA’S ``BLACK CHRIST’’ PAINTING BACK FROM EXILE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the fact  that
one of South Africa’s extraordinary oil paintings, in terms of both its
history and artistic audacity, has gone on display in the National Gallery
in Cape Town, where it forms the centrepiece of an exhibition on ten years
of democracy.

The eight-foot canvass, which was the creation of Cape Town artist Ronnie
Harrison, was first unveiled in 1962. It was considered blasphemous and
subversive by the apartheid government. It depicts former ANC president and
Nobel laureate Chief Albert Luthuli being crucified by former Prime
Minister Hendrik Verwoerd and his Justice Minister John Vorster.

It left the country in 1961. It hung in the St Paul’s Cathedral in London
and later toured the UK and Europe where it raised millions for the victims
of apartheid. At the same time Mr Harrison was arrested and repeatedly
interrogated and tortured by the then regime.

However, despite the state’s attempt to quash the message and destroy it,
the painting has developed a life of its own and, to use the artist’s
words, remained ``protected by divine providence’’. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                      CRISIS IN EASTERN CAPE DEPARTMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M DIKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the UDM is dismayed at the crisis
experienced in the social department in the Eastern Cape. The most recent
example of this is the death of 12 grant beneficiaries in the Uitenhage
area after being turned away by the social department officials. Members of
the community claim that at least some of these people suffer from full-
blown Aids, but were nonetheless turned away because they had to reapply.

Many of these people were referred to a certain Dr Pillay, before the
elections, who provided the necessary medical certification for their
disease. But it is unacceptable, Madam Deputy Speaker, that three months
after the elections these people were told that they had to reapply.

Siyalibongoza iSebe lezeNtlalontle ukuba malijonge enye indlela
yokunxibelelana nabantu, kuba ezi ncwadi azifiki ebantwini. Ubuncinane ezi
ncwadi mazikhutshwe iinyanga ezintathu phambi kokuba kuphele ixesha kwaye
zikhutshelwe kwezaa ndawo bathi abantu bafumane inkamnkam kuzo, hayi ukuba
zithunyelwe ebantwini. Enkosi. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[We are appealing to the Department of Social Development to consider other
ways of communicating with people, because these letters do not reach the
intended people. At least let these letters be handed out three months in
advance; and they should be handed out at their pension paypoints, they
need not be posted to them.]


                            ARRIVE ALIVE CAMPAIGN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr C B HERANDIEN (NNP): Agb Adjunkspeaker, tydens verlede jaar se
feesseisoen het duisende mense in ongelukke op Suid-Afrikaanse paaie
gesterf. Ons kan nie ’n herhaling van so ’n slagting hierdie jaar op ons
paaie toelaat nie.

Die NNP het by verskeie geleenthede sy kommer uitgespreek oor
padveiligheid. Daar is ongeveer ses miljoen motoriste op ons paaie, daarom
wil ons ’n beroep op almal doen om asseblief die padreëls te gehoorsaam.
Baie van hierdie ongelukke kon vermy gewees het.

Padveiligheid is almal se verantwoordelikheid, veral oor die Kerstyd,
aangesien die hoeveelheid motoriste op ons paaie gaan verdubbel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C B HERANDIEN: Hon Deputy Speaker, thousands of people died in
accidents on South African roads last year during the festive season. We
cannot allow a repetition of a massacre like this on our roads this year.

The NNP has expressed its concern about road safety on many occasions.
There are approximately six million motorists on our roads, and therefore
we want to appeal to everyone to please obey the rules of the road. Many of
these accidents could have been avoided.

Road safety is everyone’s responsibility, especially at Christmastime,
because the number of motorists on our roads is going to double.]

The NNP would also like to urge members of Parliament and the public to
donate blood as the SA National Blood Service indicated that blood supplies
are at their lowest level in 30 years. By donating blood, you could save a
life.

The NNP pledges its support to the Arrive Alive campaign. Let’s all arrive
alive at our destinations. Thank you.


                                LEARNERSHIPS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. It is worth noting that
there has been a steady increase in the enrolment of learners in
learnerships since the programme was first introduced in the Department of
Labour.

The first year saw more than 3 000 learners register in different centres.
In the second year more than 25 000 learners registered, and by March this
year a total number of 65 725 learners had been registered. The National
Skills Development target of 80 000 does not seem too far to reach, and we
wish the Department of Labour well in its endeavour to fulfil the mandate.

However, what remains to be seen is whether these learners are getting jobs
or have become skilled unemployable youth who run the risk of being poached
by or are lost to other countries. A recent study on this matter indicates
that the placement rate of learners who have completed their learnerships
is in excess of 60%.

Given the state of the economy, which is unable to generate jobs the way
everybody would like to see, 60% is not an absolute disappointment but a
steady progression in the right direction. We can only hope that the
figures quoted above do spread even to the rural areas of Nongoma and other
places.


                       LANGUAGE POLICY OF UNIVERSITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Mevrou die Speaker, die VF Plus stem saam met
die NNP se beroep op ’n veldtog oor veilige verkeer en op Arrive Alive. Dis
net jammer die NNP het nie ‘arrive alive’ nie, Mevrou.

Die Grondwet bepaal in artikel 6.2 dat die staat praktiese en daadwerklike
maatreëls moet tref om die status van inheemse tale in Suid-Afrika te
verhoog en te bevorder. Die VF Plus glo dat die waardigheid van ’n persoon
regstreeks in verband staan met die erkenning van sy taal. Dan verwelkom
ons ook die feit dat steeds meer parlementslede in hierdie Huis hul
toesprake in hul moedertaal hou en dat die vertaaldienste tans uitgebrei
word.

Prof Jakes Gerwel het in ’n verslag vir universiteite voorgestel dat een
manier om inheemse tale se status te verhoog is om spesifieke universiteite
verantwoordelik te maak vir spesifieke inheemse tale en op hierdie wyse
hierdie tale te bevorder. Die VF Plus steun steeds daardie voorstel wat nie
deur die regering geïmplenteer is nie.

Deel van dié voorstel was dat universiteite soos Stellenbosch en
Potchefstroom verantwoordelikheid aanvaar vir ’n taal soos Afrikaans.
Huidige voorstelle by die Universiteit van Stellenbosch dat Afrikaans as
voertaal in die weg van transformasie staan, is kortsigtig en toon geen
begrip van hoe mense deur hul moedertaal bemagtig kan word nie. Dit bly vir
ons onverklaarbaar dat niemand dink of besef dat Engels as die enigste
voertaal by die Universiteit van Kaapstad dalk ’n hindernis kan wees vir
die grootste hoeveelheid inwoners in die Wes-Kaap waar meer as 60% van
hulle Afrikaans as moedertaal het nie.

Dis tyd dat die regering erns maak met artikel 6.2 in die Grondwet, óf
erken dat dit nooit die erns van die regering was om inheemse tale werklik
te bevorder nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Madam Speaker, the FF Plus agrees with the
NNP’s appeal for a campaign on safe traffic and for Arrive Alive. It is
just a pity that the NNP did not  arrive alive, Madam.

The Constitution provides in section 6.2 that the state must take practical
and positive measures to elevate and promote the status of indigenous
languages in South Africa. The FF Plus believes that the dignity of a
person is directly related to the recognition of his language. Then we also
welcome the fact that an increasing number of politicians in this House are
making their speeches in their mother tongue and that the translation
services are being extended.

Prof Jakes Gerwel proposed in a report for universities that one way in
which the status of indigenous languages can be elevated is by making
specific universities responsible for specific indigenous languages,
thereby promoting these languages. The FF Plus continues to support that
proposal which has not been implemented by the government.

Part of this proposal was that universities such as Stellenbosch and
Potchefstroom take responsibility for a language such as Afrikaans. Present
proposals at the University of Stellenbosch that Afrikaans as a medium of
instruction hampers transformation are short-sighted and show no
understanding of how people can be empowered by their mother tongue. We
find it inexplicable that no one thinks or realises that English as the
only medium of instruction  at the University of Cape Town could possibly
be a hindrance to the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Western Cape,
where more than 60% of them have Afrikaans as their mother tongue.

The time has come for the government to become serious about section 6.2 of
the Constitution or to admit that the government never seriously intended
actually promoting indigenous languages.  I thank you.]


                           DUMISANE MAKHAYE’S ROLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms Z A KOTA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC notes that the objective
of creating a better life for all is being achieved in the province of
KwaZulu-Natal through, amongst other things, the provision of housing.

Under the leadership of Comrade Dumisane Makhaye, the foundation for
accumulated delivery of housing was firmly laid. The Durban Metro Mayor’s
mid-term report records great strides in all areas of housing delivery,
including the delivery of units and the conversion of hostels into proper
family units.

The slums upgrading project is a true reflection of a people-centred and
people-driven delivery project. Not only are the communities involved in
the building of houses, however, but the owners of the new units also
dismantled their slums themselves as they took occupation of their new
houses. This is simple proof of the ANC-led government’s commitment to the
creation of a better life for all. I thank you. [Applause.]




                   PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED BY MUNICIPALITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr S F HAASBROEK (DA): Mev die Adjunkspeaker, altesaam sowat R1,2 miljard
van hul begroting die afgelope jaar is nie deur die 34 staatsdepartemente
bestee nie, wat aandui dat dienslewering aan die publiek in die gedrang is.
Byna al die munisipaliteite in Suid-Afrika ervaar erge finansiële probleme
en wanbestuur, en sommige is deurweek met korrupsie.

President Mbeki self wys daarop dat 136 munisipaliteite min of geen vermoë
oor het om dienste te lewer nie. Pas het dit bekend geword dat die Oos-Kaap
ook in duie stort wat betref dienslewering, terwyl die Vrystaat R5 miljoen
betaal het om net ses toilette te bou. Dit toon duidelik dat daar iets nie
lekker ruik nie. Die oorhoofse probleme word toegeskryf aan ’n gebrek aan
bestuursvermoë, kredietbeheer en ondoeltreffende regeringstelsels.

Adjunkspeaker, die Departement van Openbare Dienste is op al drie vlakke
van regering die boustene van die demokrasie. Dit is waar kiesers hul
daaglikse bestaan voer, en daarom sê die DA dat dit die staat se
verantwoordelikheid is om toe te sien dat indringende maatreëls
geïmplementeer word om tweede- en derdevlakregering na ’n gesonde basis van
doeltreffende rekeningstelsel te dwing. Dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement  follows.)

[Mr S F HAASBROEK (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, approximately R1,2 billion of
their budgets for the past year has not been spent by the 34 government
departments collectively, which indicates that service delivery to the
public is being jeopardised. Almost all the municipalities in South Africa
are experiencing severe financial difficulties and mismanagement, and some
of them are fraught with corruption.

President Mbeki himself has pointed out that there remains little or no
capacity in 136 municipalities to deliver services. It has just become
known that the Eastern Cape is also in a state of collapse with regard to
service delivery, while the Free State paid R5 million to build only six
toilets. This shows clearly that something smells fishy. The key problems
can be attributed to a lack of management capacity, credit control and
inefficient governing systems.

Deputy Speaker, the Department of Public Services is the building block of
democracy on all three tiers of government. It is here that voters lead
their daily lives and therefore the DA is saying that it is the
responsibility of the state to ensure that in-depth measures are
implemented to coerce second and third-tier government towards a sound
foundation for an efficient system of accountability. Thank you.
[Applause.]]




                       C-MAX JAILBREAK ATTEMPT TRAGEDY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M W MAKGATE (ANC): Madam Speaker, the bloody incident that claimed the
lives of four people at C-Max prison on Sunday, 7 November 2004, must be
condemned. This event deserves most urgent investigation. The staff at C-
Max prison work under very difficult, risky and testing conditions.

In dealing with this matter, we would suggest that the government should
also consider wide-ranging measures, including tougher security clearances
for people recruited to work there. The Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services must pay an oversight visit to the prison urgently to get an
assessment and briefing on the matter.

The ANC commends the police and officials of the Department of Correctional
Services on their bravery in containing the situation at C-Max prison. The
ANC would like to convey its deep-felt condolences to the families of the
deceased officials and their beloved ones. [Applause.]




                  HISTORIC LAND CLAIMS FOR COLOURED PEOPLE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Adjunkspeaker, die onlangse bespreking deur die
Kabinet rondom eerste-nasiestatus en historiese grondeise vir bruinmense is
die regte ding om te doen. Dit sal in die volheid van die tyd gestalte
vind. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr S E OPPERMAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, the recent discussion by Cabinet
surrounding first nation status and historical land claims for coloured
people is the right thing to do. This will come to fruition in the fullness
of time.]

It is important to deal with foundations because foundations determine
destinations.

Die bespreking kom op ’n tydstip dat al hoe meer bruinmense hul godgegewe
mandaat herontdek en hul profetiese roeping begin verstaan. Ons weet dat
die bitterheid van die amandels nog dik loop in ons gemeenskap, waar die
goeie gesindheid van “ ons behoort aan mekaar” gedurig misbruik is.

Hierdie wortel van bitterheid sal verwyder word. Bruinmense sal vryspraak
aanvaar. Ons sal versoen word sodat ons met ons mandaat as bedienaars van
versoening hierdie kontinent kan beïnvloed.

Die 24/7-baton wat George Schmidt in 1738 na ons land gebring het en wat
meer as 50 jaar lank gedra is deur ’n Hessekwa-vrou, Vehettge Tikhuie - die
Genadendallers noem haar Magdalena - word met ’n nuwe passie gedra en deur
nóg duisende opgetel. Die Ottentottoe (Hottentotte) sal inderdaad, soos
Saartjie Baartman, uit ’n wêreld van eensaamheid, vernedering en verwerping
huis toe kom. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The discussion comes at a time when more and more coloured people are
rediscovering their God-given mandate and beginning to understand their
prophetic calling. We know that the bitterness of the almonds still runs
deep in our community whose good disposition of  “we belong to each other”
is continuously misused.

This root of bitterness will be removed. Coloured people will accept
exoneration. We will be reconciled in order for us to influence the
continent with our mandate as servants of reconciliation.

The 24/7-baton that George Schmidt brought to our country in 1738 and which
was borne for more than 50 years by a Hessequa-woman, Vehettge Tikhuie,
whom the people of Genadendal call Magdalena, is being carried with a
renewed passion and thousands more are picking up on this. The Ottentottoe
(Hottentots) will indeed, like Saartjie Baartman, come home from a world of
loneliness, humiliation and rejection. Thank you very much. [Applause]]


              FRONTING IN BLACK ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT COMPANIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J BHENGU (IFP): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. It is widely
acknowledged that the practice of companies using black people as fronts in
order to obtain contracts on the strength of their empowerment credentials
is a problem. Fronting is also hindering the advancement of true black
economic empowerment in this country.

An example of this practice is an instance where it was recently discovered
that a man from Durban was allegedly promoted from working as a driver to
being a director of the business that he was working for and yet had had no
involvement whatsoever in the day-to-day running of the business.

The company had secured several contracts from eThekwini municipality on
the basis of its empowerment credentials, including a project worth R5
million. We are therefore glad to hear that the company’s existing
contracts with the municipality were terminated after the completion of the
investigation by eThekwini municipality into companies who had received
tenders on the basis of their economic credentials.

Fronting should not be tolerated and businesses or organisations that are
known to be taking part in this immoral practice should be dealt with
accordingly, as they are taking business away from organisations with true
empowerment credentials. We therefore hope that the relevant authorities
are giving their full attention to this problem and that they are actively
pursuing ways and means of identifying people who are involved in fronting
so as to put a stop to that. Thank you.


            PENDING SUSPENSION OF PENSION GRANTS IN EASTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr F BHENGU (ANC): Madam Speaker, we are disturbed to hear that several
legitimate pension grants may not be paid out in the Eastern Cape. Reports
are that the elderly and the disabled were unable to meet the deadline
within which to reapply for their grants because of a shortage of doctors
to assess them. We appeal to the provincial government to reconsider that
decision, taking into account the geographic and demographic make-up of the
Eastern Cape and other problems that members of the public may experience
when they have to be assessed.

The ANC applauds the drive to stem corruption in the administration of
grants and fully supports the process aimed at ensuring that only those
people who are genuinely in need of grants receive these grants. However,
the ANC cannot support the situation where thousands of vulnerable old
people are deprived of their constitutionally guaranteed social assistance
grants due to an administrative process.

We urge the Minister to intervene in this situation and to ensure that the
poor and the vulnerable in the Eastern Cape are not unreasonably deprived
of their social grants and assistance. Thank you. [Applause.]


           ARREST OF POACHERS IN PLATTEKLOOF NATURAL HERITAGE SITE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B M KOMPHELA (ANC): Madam Speaker, eight suspected poachers were
arrested last week after conservation officials caught them red-handed
collecting the restios and indigenous fynbos reeds which had been illegally
cut in the Plattekloof Natural Heritage Site.

The ANC welcomes these arrests and urges the courts to pass maximum
permissible sentences should these suspects be found guilty. The
conservation and preservation of natural heritage is in the best interest
of our country and our people.

The Plattekloof Natural Heritage Site is the habitat of 155 plant species,
12 of which are listed as critically endangered in a Red Data Book. These
plants are unequally distributed in the Western Cape.

The ANC calls on our people to join hands with the natural conservation
workers to protect natural heritage for the sake of our children and future
generations. Thank you. [Applause.]


                             MINISTERS’RESPONSES



                  MEDIUM OF INSTRUCTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION


                            (Minister’s Response)



The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I thought it
important to, perhaps, briefly comment on the statement made by the hon
member of the FF Plus. I think it is important to state that while one
recognises the composition of the province in terms of language - which is
mother tongue - there is no university in South Africa that is a regional
university. All our universities are striving to be national institutions
as well as, increasingly,  international institutions. That is the
character of higher education that I sincerely would want to preserve: a
national and global character and not a regional one. I believe any
university on which we would want to impose a very limited character would
resist such a limitation.

We also must recall that language medium is a choice made by institutions.
There is no government imposition in terms of language utilisation in a
particular higher education institution. Having said that, we must also
emphasise that in terms of education Acts, as well as in terms of our
Constitution, language medium cannot be used as a means of exclusion.

Regarding all languages, we are looking forward to the report of the task
team appointed by the former Minister to look into the further development
of our higher education institutions and to identify whether indeed we can
develop one of our indigenous African languages into a language for
instruction in higher education. But I would think, even in the absence of
that report that what is vital for higher education is to maintain its
character of diversity and openness for all who wish to access it.

We need to ensure that we don’t in any way limit access to a range of
languages, including Afrikaans, English and maybe one of the other official
languages of our country, but we also need to ensure that every young
person in South Africa can attend any of the institutions in our country.
That is our policy and that is the approach we wish to maintain.


             PROBLEMS FACING THOSE WHO RECEIVE STATUTORY GRANTS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker. I thought it necessary that, on behalf of the social cluster, one
should respond on the matters that were raised by hon Diko and hon Bhengu.

Indeed, it is sad to note the circumstances that some of the people who
have applied or are eligible for statutory grants have found themselves in,
as was explained. It cannot be a matter that we, as government, should take
lightly. It cannot be that we should allow administrative challenges to
actually impede the process of assisting those who require such support. We
will therefore ensure, through discussion with our colleagues in the
provinces, that at least some precautions are taken. Some of those have
been proposed by hon Diko, such as that a three months’ time lead should be
given to ensure that people can be informed in time.

We also need to look at measures of communication that may make it possible
that those who are affected are reached in time. I therefore would like to
say to hon members that I will convey this message to Minister Skweyiya
who, in turn, will have discussions with his provincial colleagues at
Minmec level. Thank you. [Applause.]

  CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE LATE DUMISANI MAKHAYE TO HOUSING AND ERADICATION OF
                                    SLUMS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. I welcome the
statement made by the hon Zoe Kota on housing in KwaZulu-Natal, especially
in reference to the leadership of Dumisani Makhaye. Regarding the statement
by the hon member, I just wanted to elaborate on some of the work that the
late MEC Dumisani Makhaye was involved in in respect of housing.

History will record Dumisani Makhaye as a selfless, dedicated servant of
the people of South Africa who contributed immensely, not only to the
destruction of apartheid but also the creations that it had left behind. As
he plotted the downfall of the enemy in the trenches, he also plotted the
return to social justice for all South Africans. He gave hope to millions
of people that one day they will have a place to call home. He gave the
last days of his life to ensure that this hope was achieved.

The late MEC Makhaye conceptualised the pioneering work of slum clearance,
which today we have adopted as one of the pillars of our housing policy.
This was started off in KwaZulu-Natal, where Makhaye worked and served his
people, most of whom have moved or continue to move to decent houses. The
number of people whose lives have been improved by this measure - by the
actions of the late MEC Makhaye - is in excess of 20 000 households,
because he believed in the commitment to the principles of the Freedom
Charter.

Before his untimely death, Dumisani had made a commitment to ensure that in
six years’ time there would be no family in a shack in KwaZulu-Natal. It is
under the leadership of Dumisani Makhaye that housing development and
housing delivery improved in KwaZulu-Natal by at least 80% between 1999 and
2002. Rural communities, for the first time, had access to government
houses provided under the leadership of this sterling comrade.

It was Comrade Dumisani who launched the rehabilitation of houses that had
been damaged in political violence. That rehabilitation was successfully
implemented immediately after he took over the leadership of the housing
project in KwaZulu-Natal. He lived to undo the legacy of apartheid and
often he was seen in informal settlements and in run-down buildings.

The people of KwaZulu-Natal will never forget that it was Dumisani Makhaye
who gave hope to the people of Mpumalanga, Ezakheni, Wembesi and Embali.

Finally, under the leadership of Dumisani Makhaye the department of housing
in KwaZulu-Natal was the first in the country to come up with the housing
policy to accommodate HIV/Aids orphans. The programme provides funding for
the establishment of cluster homes for Aids victims and orphans, and for
accommodation of adults with HIV/Aids and those who have been neglected by
their families. Subsidies are given by the state to aid such affected
families. The two projects which he pioneered are Lilly of the Valley and
Golden Acre, and they will provide homes for 200 children.

I have done this to ensure that we all recognise and bear testimony to what
the President said when we buried the late hon MEC, Dumisani Makhaye. He
said, and I quote:

  We need not one, nor two, nor ten but thousands of Dumisani Makhayes for
  this country to thrive.

Thank you. [Applause.]


                  PRESIDENT MBEKI AND RETRACTION OF MOTION


                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we come to the subject for discussion, I just
want to make sure Mr Ellis is here, and Mr Nel.

During Members’ Statements on 2 November 2004, the hon Mr Nel raised a
point of order regarding remarks made by the hon Mr Ellis, asking me to
rule whether it was in order to attribute statements and motives to the
head of state without any substantiation. I undertook to study the Hansard
and give a ruling. Having had the opportunity to study the unrevised
Hansard, I wish to rule as follows:

Mr Ellis, with reference to a motion passed by the NCOP on 26 October 2004,
said that President Mbeki was demanding that the NCOP retract the motion
and had allegedly threatened not to attend Friday’s sitting of the NCOP
unless the motion was retracted. The suggestion by Mr Ellis that the
President might have sought to compel the NCOP to take a certain course of
action by allegedly threatening not to attend a sitting of the NCOP, and
that the NCOP, ever obedient, complied with the demand, is both a
reflection on the NCOP and the President. I must therefore ask Mr Ellis to
withdraw his remarks. Hon Mr Ellis?

Mr M J ELLIS: Yes, Madam Deputy Speaker. May I ask on what grounds I must
withdraw. Is it unparliamentary what I said? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, the Chair is asking you to withdraw the
statement. I’m not asking you to make a statement.

Mr M J ELLIS: Am I not entitled to ask on what grounds I must withdraw,
Madam Deputy Speaker? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just explained . . .

Mr M J ELLIS: In terms of which Rule must I withdraw?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Ellis, you know as well as I do that business of the
NCOP is business of the NCOP. It has nothing to do with this House. In
fact, the practice that we found here was that there was no reference at
all to the NCOP. It used to be referred to as “That Place” because we did
not want, as this House, to interfere in what they were doing. And, of
course, I have gone through the Hansard. Some of the things that I
mentioned, even earlier on, which I found as the culture of the House, are
that it is not necessarily unparliamentary language that we have to rule
against, it is also the way in which we use parliamentary language to
actually hurt other people. So, it is in that light that I am saying to you
it is not a written Rule, but a Rule - I am stating now - whenever we do
things in this House.

In fact, if you go back to Mr Nel’s question, he asked how you could
substantiate what you said. You said that the head of state threatened the
NCOP. I think it is in bad taste. It is in that vein that I ask that you
please withdraw that reference to the President. We have no proof – all of
us – that he ever said so.

I don’t have to address you on a matter that I have ruled on, because I’ve
ruled. What I would like you to do is just to withdraw that reference to
the President when we don’t have proof that the President actually
threatened the NCOP, and to refrain from taking business that is before the
NCOP and making it our business. I don’t want to address you further than
this.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I will withdraw in respect of your . .
.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not in the future. You withdraw now, and then we
close this matter and continue as there is such a lot of business.

Mr M J ELLIS: Then I will not withdraw, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will not withdraw. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Well, of course, we get advice from the Table. But it is up to us as
presiding officers to take the advice or not. The first part of the advice
is that we are within the Rules, in fact Rule 63, which we could take out
and read.

The second part of the advice is that I should wait for Mr Ellis to come
back and ask him to withdraw, which I don’t want to do. He has no reason to
leave while I am still addressing him. I want to come back to the House and
rule against his behaviour, because it is disrespectful. It shows that he
does not respect the Chair and this House. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you
on this point of order? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Gibson, this matter is closed. This matter is
between me and Mr Ellis, and Mr Ellis and this House. He has just shown us
that he has no respect for my ruling. And, whilst I am still addressing him
– this matter is not closed as yet – he walks out of the Chamber. So, I
think, this House is going to be respected, irrespective of whether people
like the rulings or not. You don’t walk out on anybody. But walking out of
a Chamber is, I think, something that should be seen as very serious.
Therefore sit down, Mr Gibson. We’ll address the matter . . .
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, with great respect,
you can’t have it both ways. You tell me the matter is closed and then you
say the matter is not closed. Will you please decide whether it is closed
or not. [Interjections.] If you still want to take it further with Mr
Ellis, then it is not closed and I would like to address you on the matter.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, the matter is between Mr Ellis and the
Chair. If Mr Ellis was here to speak on the matter, I wouldn’t have a
problem. But the ruling I made was not directed at you. I think that it is
out of disrespect that an hon member would walk out of the Chamber while we
are addressing him. That is why I say in as far as still opening up this
matter for discussion is concerned, it is closed. The matter will be
reopened by Mr Ellis, the Chair and this House. I want to come back to this
House in the presence of Mr Ellis, having looked at all other things and
this kind of behaviour, and rule on this behaviour.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Are you declining hearing me before you
rule on the matter? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point do you want to address me, Mr Gibson?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, are you saying I can address you,
or saying I can’t address you?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can’t . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, it is very difficult with the mob
jeering and cheering over there. [Interjections.] If they would please keep
quiet while I attempt to address the Chair, then I’ll try to do so and to
be helpful on the matter.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, there is noise from both sides. There is
cheering from both sides. If you are trying to bring order, they are also
trying to bring order. What makes you believe that when you cheer you bring
order while they can’t bring order? So, if we say that there is cheering on
this side and cheering on that side . . . Hon members, the cheering should
also stop, because it is not helpful. I have made a ruling. I think it is
disrespectful of any member, whilst they are being addressed, to walk out.
I think let us leave the matter there.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I wanted to explain to you what happened.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why he left? [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Yes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why can’t he come and explain himself?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Sorry, Deputy Speaker, Mr Gibson,
could we please, for the purpose of the decorum of the House, avoid this
exchange between you and Mr Gibson. It is very clear, Madam, in your ruling
that you want the matter to be postponed until Mr Ellis is present. Could
we please appeal to Mr Gibson as well to let the matter rest until Mr Ellis
returns to the House? Please.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I hear what the hon Chief
Whip is saying. I simply wanted to say to you that it was quite evident to
me that Mr Ellis thought the matter had been disposed of. You asked him to
withdraw the matter, he declined to do so, and he took the honourable way
of leaving. That is exactly what he did.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that is honourable, I still need to be schooled on
what honourable means.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Right. Okay. I needed to address you on
that point.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: We now come to the subject for discussion . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, you won’t hear me.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I rule that you sit down. We now come to the Subject
for Discussion: Sixteen days of activism: Unite against Woman and Child
Abuse. I now call the hon the Deputy President.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, if you would
just indulge me. In the course of making his intervention, Mr Gibson
referred to hon members here as a “mob”. I think that is highly
unparliamentary and he must withdraw it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, in the heat of the argument, I could have skipped
that, but let me come back to that with a ruling. If the hon member did
refer to the ANC members as a mob and he wants to withdraw that, he may do
so now and then we move on.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam, I don’t actually want to withdraw
it.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, great. That’s fine.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: But if you tell me to withdraw it, I will
withdraw it. They were carrying on like a mob. That is all I was saying,
but if that is unparliamentary I withdraw it, Madam.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not,“if that is unparliamentary”. It is
unparliamentary to refer to hon members as a mob, and you know that. What
you can now do, which is honourable, is to withdraw it and sit down.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I withdraw it unreservedly.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

SIXTEEN DAYS OF ACTIVISM: UNITE AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILD ABUSE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, in Kliptown, at
the Congress of the People 49 years ago, the people of South Africa
declared, among other things, that there would be peace and security, when
they adopted the Freedom Charter. The campaign and programme of action to
create a safer environment for women and children is in line with this
vision.

As we prepare for the beginning of the campaign 16 Days of Activism: No
Violence Against Women and Children, from 25 November to 10 December, we
are affirming our belief that the rights of women and children are human
rights, and that their violation runs against the spirit and letter of our
Constitution. President Mbeki will launch this campaign in Port Elizabeth
on 25 November, and his involvement indicates the seriousness with which
this matter is taken at the highest level of government and the country.

The campaign brings us together as a nation, to recommit ourselves to the
goals of eradicating women and child abuse, and to create an environment
that is conducive to the growth and development of women and children. We
are holding this debate today because we realise that this problem still
exists, and that we need to further share views on what can be done, and to
report back on the progress we have made in dealing with this scourge.

As government, our commitment to this goal has been supported with firm
action, and we are pleased with the progress we have made in preventative
measures, as well as remedial action. Our comprehensive programme has
involved working through a number of strategies. These include investing in
young people to prevent crime and violence, promoting moral regeneration
and rebuilding the social fabric, transforming the criminal justice system,
improving the status of women and the overall programme of social and
economic development.
We have embarked on this comprehensive approach, because law enforcement on
its own is not sufficient to prevent domestic violence and the abuse of
children. This is due to the complex nature of the crime. Most of these
crimes take place in people’s homes and are not reported to the police. If
they are reported, there is always a possibility that the case may be
withdrawn, due to family or social pressure, and also due to economic
dependence on the perpetrator and other reasons.

The 16 days campaign is therefore one of the most important public
communication efforts to raise awareness and instil confidence in victims.
Domestic violence occurs amongst couples of all classes and social
backgrounds, from suburbs to informal settlements. It occurs amongst young
and old couples, married or unmarried. Younger women, especially teenagers,
need more assistance, as their youth puts them at risk. Middle-class women
are also vulnerable, as social status may deter them from exposing their
partners and from seeking legal recourse.

We are also aware that most of the domestic violence cases take place
amongst the poorest of the poor. These are cases where families reside in
low-cost housing or informal settlements, which could be characterised by a
lack of access to sufficient social services. Part of the solution
therefore is tied to government’s integrated development strategy.

Key to the strategy is women’s empowerment, which would lead to a solution
in which more women depend less on men for economic survival. Another
pillar of intervention, and the most effective and visible so far, is legal
recourse.

Among the laws that have made a difference is the Domestic Violence Act,
which has provided much needed ammunition for women in distress. The
statistics for protection orders in domestic violence cases indicate that
more and more women are approaching the courts for relief. This is an
indicator of the effectiveness of publicity campaigns such as the 16 Days
of Activism: No Violence Against Women and Children campaign.

A high proportion of orders applied for are granted, and the success rate
has been 83% during the past four years. This, in my view, indicates that
the great majority of applications for protection orders are legitimate. No
official statistics are as yet available for 2004, but most courts have
indicated a general increase of protection orders being required and
granted.

The pending Sexual Offences Bill, currently before this House, will have
its own positive impact. It will broaden the definition of sexual violence
and help ensure that heavy sentences are applied to perpetrators of
violence and abuse. Already progress is visible in this area. Fifty-two
sexual offences courts have been established thus far, and they have proven
to be effective.

The Maintenance Act is another critical intervention. It provides a level
of independence for mothers, as it ensures continued financial support for
the children if they decide to act against abusive fathers.

We are also aware of the concerns of the public that some officials in the
police service and courts may not as yet be in tune with the new ethos, and
that they are unco-operative when victims approach them for assistance,
viewing domestic violence as a family matter. We are taking the issue of
training seriously in order to change attitudes, and in this regard we are
pleased that we have the support of the nongovernmental sector.

Ngithanda ukugcizelela ukuthi, njengohulumeni, ngeke siyibekezelele le
ndaba yokuhlukunyezwa komama nezintombi ngabesilisa, abanye babo kube
kungabayeni namasoka. Sithi komama nezintombi, abangesabi ukuphumela obala,
babike emaphoyiseni uma behlukunyezwa noma beshaywa. Lo hulumeni wentando
yeningi unemithetho ebavikelayo futhi abangayisebenzisa.

Sinxusa omakhelwane nemiphakathi yonke ukuthi le nkinga bangayithathi
njengeyabantu ababili abathandanayo kuphela, kodwa bayithathe njengenkinga
yomphakathi wonke. Bangasiza ngokubiza amaphoyisa, bangazibi nje benze
sengathi abezwa noma ababoni kube konakala. Kuyasijabulisa-ke ukuthi
kwezinye izindawo sekuyenzeka lokhu.

Sicela amadoda awungenele lo mkhankaso wokulwa nale nkinga ukuze acacise
ukuthi akusiwona onke amadoda ahlukumeza abantu besifazane. Lokho
kuyokwenza ukuthi nabawenzayo lo mkhuba bawuyeke. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[I want to emphasise that as the government, we are not going to tolerate
abuse against women and young girls. Some of these perpetrators are their
husbands and boyfriends. We are encouraging women and young girls that they
should not fear to come forward and report to the police when they are
abused or assaulted. This democratic government has laws that can protect
them, and to which they can seek recourse.

We urge our neighbours and all communities not to treat this problem as an
isolated issue between two lovers only, but to treat it as a problem for
the entire community. Communities can assist by calling the police, and
should not turn a blind eye as if they did not hear or see while things
were getting worse. We appreciate it that in other communities this is
being practised.

We invite men to join this campaign of fighting this problem in order to
show that it is not every man that abuses women. That would make those who
commit this kind act stop it.]

Also forming part of the 16 Days campaign is the protection of children
from all forms of abuse and neglect. When South Africa ratified the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1996, it joined the nations of the
world and committed itself to creating a world conducive to children.

Our young democracy has done exceptionally well in terms of highlighting
and promoting the rights of children. The rights, development, survival,
care and protection of children have shifted from being a personal or
charitable concern, to occupying priority space on the national political
agenda. This has been supported by widespread legislative and policy
reform, including the ratification of various international policy
instruments. These include the Constitution, with its Bill of Rights; the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of Children; the Child Justice
Bill; the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child; the policy on the
transformation of the child and youth care system; the Child Care Act, to
be replaced by new comprehensive child care legislation; the Convention on
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour; the White Paper on
Early Childhood Development and the Optional Protocol on Child Trafficking.

We have an obligation to ensure that all children get the best possible
start in life. In particular we must ensure that children enjoy the right
to be heard, the right to have good health care, the right to go to school
and learn, the right to be loved and protected from harm, and the right to
belong - even when they look different, for example in terms of complexion,
disability or other differences.

As we have said in the Freedom Charter: “There shall be peace and
security”, and as we entrenched this in the Bill of Rights of our
Constitution, all of us have an obligation to work to achieve the goal of
safety and security for women and children. We urge men and boys, in
particular, to become active in the campaign 16 Days of Activism: No
Violence Against Women and Children, so that we do not entrench a stigma
that South African men are among the worst abusers in the world.

The majority of men are protective of their families and loved ones, and
this is what we must seek to highlight and promote during this campaign in
order to isolate the perpetrators of these despicable crimes against women
and children. I also trust that hon members will become actively involved
in this campaign, particularly in their constituencies. We all have a
responsibility to act. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkskz C I LUDWABE: Sekela-Mhlalingaphambili, Sekela-Mongameli welizwe
namalungu onke ale Ndlu, namhlanje ndima apha phambi kwenu ukuza kuthetha
ngomkhuba ombi wokuxhatshazwa kwamakhosikazi kwakunye nabantwana.

Ukuxhatshazwa kwamakhosikazi kunye nabantwana ndinokuthi kufikelele
kwinqanaba eliphezulu kweli lizwe jikelele, nto leyo eyenza ukuba
siphulukane nelungelo lokuba sithi sinalo ihlumelo eliza kuba ziinkokeli
zangomso. Ndifuna ukuzekelisa ngesi siganeko sokuxhaxhwa kwamakhosikazi
amane kuCentane, eMpuma Koloni, kufuphi nalapho ndisuka khona nesivele
kumabonakude phezolo.

Njengoko kulo nyaka umiyo sisithi sibhiyozela iminyaka elishumi yenkululeko
kawonke-wonke, umbuso wentando yesininzi, kumele ze kutyhilwe ikhasi
elitsha ukwenzela ukuba uliwe uncothulwe neengcambu lo mkhuba mbi
wokuxhatshazwa koomama nabantwana.

Kufuneka ukuba urhulumente akhe okanye avule amaziko aliqela kangangoko
apho kunokuthi kufundiswe amakhosikazi, abantwana kunye nabo
bachaphazelekayo ngoxhaphazo, nalapho bangathi balulekwe de imeko yabo ibe
ibuyela esiqhelweni.

Okunye okubalulekileyo kukuba abantu bethu bafundiswe ukungawatyesheli
amasiko nezithethe zabo, nto leyo ekufuneka ibe ngumphako eliza kuthi iSebe
lezeMfundo liwusebenzise njengesikhokelo xa kuqulunqwa inkqubo yemfundo.

Abantwana bethu kufuneka bakufunde besekumabanga aphantsi oku ukuze babe
nemibono eqaqambileyo ngekamva labo kwaye bayazi imeko yokuxhatshazwa
neyobuhle. Kufuneka singawalibali amagorhakazi ethu omzabalazo afana
noomama uFrancis Matomela, uLillian Ngoyi, uRay Alexander, uElder Vani,
umama uJibiliza, umama uDorothy Zihlangu nabanye abaninzi ababesilwela le
nkululeko siyixhamlayo namhlanje. Ngothando bazidina bajongana naye wonke
umntwana, nokuba ngokabani, nokuba ngowoluphi na uhlanga. Bona babengazange
bakhethe abantu, bathi lo unesimilo esimnyama, lo unesimhlophe, koko
babebaqeqesha ngokufanayo bonke. La maqhawekazi sithetha ngawo apha ngawo
asivulele neli thuba lokuba sibe namhlanje sihleli kule ndawo.

Akakho umntu ongalibala okukhe kwenzeka kwiminyaka edlulileyo,
ukudlwengulwa komntwana uTshepang, owayeneenyanga ezilithoba kuphela
ezelwe. Loo nto yakhathaza umzi wonke waseMzantsi Afrika. Abantwana bethu
kufuneka sibabonise uthando ukuze nabo bazibone bengabantu ababalulekileyo
ekuhlaleni yaye beyinxalenye yokuhlala. Isithethi sakwaNtu sithi, “Umntwana
wam ngowakho; umntwana wakho ngowam”.

Ndicinga ukuba lithuba lokuba sisebenze ngoku. Lithuba lokuba siwulwe lo
mkhuba wokuhlaliswa kabuhlungu ngumntu omhlambelayo, umntu othi
uyakuthanda.

Kananjalo simele ukuba siqulunqe iindlela eziza kukhokela ukwakhiwa
kwamaziko okufundisa abantwana bethu ubugcisa; siqulunqe iindlela ezithile
zokusebenza nabantwana ekuhlaleni; sizame ukulwa ukuthengiswa komsebenzi
kubantwana abangaphantsi kweminyaka eyamkelekileyo yokuphangela. Naleyo
into ifuna thina boonozala.

Ootata ngabantu bemfazwe. Abakhathalele mama bengakhathalele naloo mntwana.
Ukukhathalela nje ngalo mzuzu esahleli nawe esithi uyakuthanda. Xa sele
engasakuthandi ubona ngemikhwa yakhe. Abahlali kufuneka bathabathe
inxaxheba kuko konke oku kukhankanyiweyo apha ngentla. Kufuneka kubekho
isikhokelo sokuqulunqwa komqulu wamalungelo abantwana.

Ukuxhatshazwa kwamakhosikazi kuba ziindidi ngeendidi. Ufumanisa ukuba
abanye baxhatshazwa ngokwesondo okanye ngokuphathwa gadalala,
ngokudlwengulwa, ngokubethwa okanye ngokosulelwa ngentsholongwane ngabom,
nangezinye iindlela.

Lo mba wobundlobongela unakho ukuchaphazela uqoqosho lwesizwe. Ndicela
ukuba abantu bayeke ukudlwengula iintsana. Omnye udlwengula usana lwakhe
olusandul’ ukuzalwa. Konke oku yinto entsha kumzi wakwaNtu. Akuzange kwaba
nje. Thina bantu bazala abantwana kufuneka siphakame siwubhinqe ube
mfutshane, ootata khe beme ecaleni, ibe sithi abathatha inxaxheba
yokujongana nezi zikhalazo. Oomama bamanye amazwe nabo kufuneka bazi ukuba
ngabo abazisa umntu kweli lizwe, akukho tata uzala mntwana. Ukuba
siyiyekile le ndima sakubonakala njengamagwala. Amaqhawe ethu awazange
ayiyekele into enje ngale.

Ngaloo mazwi bazali, ndithi masiphakame. Malibe linye makhosikazi!
Igama lamakhosikazi!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO:    Malibongwe!

Nkskz C I LUDWABE: Malibongwe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Igama lamakhosikazi!

Nkskz C I LUDWABE: Wathint’ amakhosikazi!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Wathint’ imbokotho!

Nkskz C I LUDWABE: Wathint’ imbokotho!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Wathint’ amakhosikazi!

Nkskz C I LUDWABE: Enkosi, Mhlalingaphambili. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation
of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs C I LUDWABE:  Deputy Chairperson, Deputy President of the country and
all other members of the House, today I am standing here in front of you to
speak about the bad habit of abuse of women and children.

The abuse of women and children, according to me, has reached a high level
in this country generally, and this alone results in us losing the right to
say that we have offspring or progeny that will be the leaders of tomorrow.

I want to give an example of an incident in which four women were axed at
Centane in the Eastern Province, near where I come from, as was shown live
on television last night.

As we are saying, this year we celebrate 10 years of freedom for all, a
government of majority rule, and we are supposed to turn over a new leaf in
order to fight and destroy the roots of this evil of the abuse of women and
children.

The government must build or open as many centres as possible at which
women and children, as well all others affected by abuse, can be trained
and at which they can also be rehabilitated until their conditions return
to normality.

Another point of importance is that our people should be taught not to
neglect their traditions and customs, and that fact should be an issue
which the Department of Education will use as a guideline when designing
the way forward in education.

Our children should learn this whilst they are still in the lower grades so
that they can have bright visions about their future, whilst at the same
time making them aware of the fact of abuse and of beauty.  We must not
forget our heroines of the struggle, like mothers Francis Matomela, Lilian
Ngoyi, Ray Alexander, Elder Vani, mother Jibiliza, mother Dorothy Zihlangu
and many others who fought for this freedom we enjoy today.

With love they made sacrifices and looked after all children irrespective
of whose child it was and regardless of its race or origin.  They never
classified people, they never said the one was of black character, and the
other of white.  They trained or treated them all equally.  These heroines
we speak about here gave rise to this occasion that caused us to be
gathered together here today.

No one could forget what occurred some years ago, namely the rape of the
child called Tshepang, who had been born only nine months previously.  That
thing disturbed the whole community of South Africa. We must show our
children love so that they should also see themselves as important people
in the community and see themselves as part of the community.  One
community speaker once said, “My child is your child, your child is my
child”.

I think it is now time for us to work.  It’s time to fight this evil of
being tortured, ill-treated by a person for whom you wash, a person who
says he loves you.

At the same time we are supposed to devise ways which will lead to the
building of centres to teach our children technology, and to devise certain
ways of working with the children in the community, trying to fight
corruption in respect of jobs being given to children who are under the
prescribed age to be employed.

Fathers are people of war. They do not care for a mother, and neither do
they care for a child.  Such a man only cares for you the moment he is with
you whilst saying he loves you.  When he no longer loves you, you see this
by his actions.  The residents must take cognisance of all that has been
mentioned above.  There must be a guideline in compiling a document about
the rights of children.

The abuse of women occurs in different ways.  You find some being sexually
abused, and others being violently raped or assaulted or abused by the
transmission of AIDS purposely and by various other means.  This issue of
violence might affect the economy of the nation.  I ask the people to stop
raping babies.  One man raped his own recently born baby.  All this is
something new to the African nation.  It was never like this before.

We people who give birth to children are supposed to rise up and show our
anger. Fathers should stand aside; it should be we who shoulder the burden
to address the complaints.  Mothers of other countries must also know that
it is they who bring a person into this world; there is no father who gives
birth to a baby.  If we leave this issue, we shall appear as cowards.  Our
pioneers or champions have never left a thing like this.

By these words, parents, I say, let us stand up. Let women be of one voice:
The name of women!

HON MEMBERS: Let it be praised!

Mrs C I LUDWABE: Let it be praised!

HON MEMBERS: The name of women!

Mrs C I LUDWABE: You struck women!

HON MEMBERS: You struck a rock!

Mrs C I LUDWABE: You struck a rock!

HON MEMBERS: You struck women!

Mrs C I LUDWABE: Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, I would like to take this opportunity to deal
frankly with the relationship between gender inequality, the abuse of women
and children and HIV/Aids; because if we are going to combat HIV/Aids with
any success, we need to look reality squarely in the eye. The reality is
that many women and children in South Africa do not have absolute control
over their bodies or their sex lives. Many lack the economic and social
power to say no and when they do they lack the physical power to enforce
their choice.

A woman I know once told me plainly that she simply was not in a position
to insist that her husband use a condom during sex, even though she knew
for a fact that he had a number of other sexual partners. She rationalised
her situation by saying that even if she were HIV positive, she could still
go on living for 10 years. She was 27 at the time.

So, we need to recognise, understand and confront the fact that the
struggle for gender equality and the campaign against HIV/Aids are
inextricably linked. We will never succeed in our efforts to test and treat
people living with HIV/Aids unless we change attitudes towards women. For,
among other things, HIV/Aids in South Africa today is a manifestation of
gender inequality.

The fact is that we live in a patriarchal society, a society in which the
formal rights of women and children are not underscored by universal
respect for their autonomy, dignity and worth. That is why the President
was wrong to attack Kathleen Cravero and Charlene Smith, and accuse them of
racism, as he did in ANC Today some weeks ago. [Interjections.] His
comments damaged the cause of gender equality and the campaign against rape
and sexual violence. The fact is that rape is indeed pervasive in our
society.

A survey of 300 000 South African children, published in the latest edition
of the British Medical Journal, found that a quarter of them believed that
girls enjoy rape. A study by the Medical Research Council found that 15% of
men reported having raped or having attempted to rape their wife or
girlfriend in the 10 years prior to the study. There are a wide variety of
other figures that confirm these findings.

Just last week the Deputy Minister of Health was reported saying that the
Department of Health is in possession of information, which shows an
alarming number of girls between 2 and 12 years of age who are HIV-
positive, even though they were not born with the virus. The implication,
it was reported, is that these girls may have contracted the virus as a
result of sexual violence.

The first step in overcoming a problem is to acknowledge it. The President
needs to show us, when he opens the campaign this year, that he fully
comprehends the reality of abuse, sexual violence and rape in our country.

I need to say frankly that the DA is astonished and appalled at the fact
that one of the messages the government has chosen for this campaign is
actually an ANC election slogan. It exhorts us to unite in a people’s
contract.

Now, I think this says something about the ANC’s attitude to democracy and
diversity. Why does the ANC feel the need to divide where it should try to
unite? [Interjections.] Why, on this issue of all issues, where we could
stand together as one country and nation, does the ANC feel the need to
assert its limitless desire for hegemony?

I am glad that the Deputy President brought up the Freedom Charter earlier,
because the ANC needs to understand that it does not own South Africa.
[Interjections.] South Africa, it should remember, “belongs to all who live
in it”. [Interjections.] I think the members on this side of the House will
recognise the document from which those words are drawn. [Interjections.]
They can shout as much as they like. I think the reason they shout so loud
is because they know that what I am saying is true. [Interjections.]

If you want South Africa to unite, don’t impose yourself on other people.
[Interjections.] Don’t disrespect the millions of people in South Africa
who did not vote for the ANC. We would like to work and stand together to
combat the abuse of women and children in South Africa. [Interjections.]
Why does the ANC need to turn it into a partisan issue when it could be non-
partisan? I think it is a mistake and I think that people who think about
it carefully will agree that it is a mistake.

I wish to conclude with a statement about children. Children are individual
human beings, equal in dignity and worth, even if they lack the capacity to
completely direct their own lives. Children are not simply extensions of
their parents. They are not owned objects. They do not exist simply for the
purposes of adults. They have purposes of their own. They have legitimate
needs and desires and opinions. Children have a right; they have a right to
respect.

I would like to associate myself with the comments of the previous speaker
in this regard, because I think we agree on that. I would encourage parents
in our country to think very carefully about what they teach their
children. We need to be careful about the way in which children are
disciplined, and that this discipline does not teach them that violence is
an acceptable way to get what you want or impose your will on others.

I myself do not believe it is right to beat children. I recognise and
accept that others disagree, sometimes very strongly, and I know that this
is a controversial subject, but for that very reason it needs to be
discussed openly. Such a discussion can only lead to improvement in our
sensitivity towards the need of children in our country. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Chairperson, Sixteen Days of Activism! Women are
the foundation of the world. They are the centre from which goodwill and
kindness flows in the world. The strong walls of our nation have been built
from their virtues, wisdom and courageous efforts. They are the pillars of
continuity, which have kept our world from falling apart since the
beginning of time until the present day.

For centuries they have carried the burdens of the world, making life more
bearable for all of us. Each and everyday, women give the gift of life.
They raise world-class leaders and are responsible for an endless
cultivation of love, peace and understanding.

Despite the priceless contribution that women have made in the world, they
have countless times been victims of humiliating abuse. Their tears of
sorrow have stained the earth that we walk on, while their cries of pain
and distress because of maltreatment and misery still echo late in the
night.

This abuse against women can be viewed as being symbolic of deep-rooted
power structures within communities, which still seek to keep women within
the confines of suppression and dependency. Despite democratic developments
in South Africa, many women are still held back by these hidden power
structures that are deeply embedded in societal cultures and norms.

Today, 10 years into our democracy, children are also victims of violent
crimes and life-shattering abuses. Media reports always bring to our
attention the severity of these violent crimes that are committed against
our children, and highlight the heartless and deep-seated brutality of
these crimes. These reports normally reveal the anguish and the torment
suffered by the children of our nation, while simultaneously revealing a
severe societal ill that is currently gripping our nation with an iron
fist.

Violence and abuse against women and children do not only affect the
immediate families where they occur. They affect society in its entirety
due to the fact that they entrench an evil syndrome of degradation that is
eroding our society’s already depleted moral fibre.

It has to be understood and acknowledged that with the HIV-pandemic on our
doorstep, the lives and wellbeing of women and children are gravely at
risk. The HIV-infection rate is therefore also escalated by these powers
and control patterns of maltreatment.

Therefore, on the basis of the principles of democracy, it is our duty to
ensure that the status of women and children is improved in order to ensure
that they can fully enjoy their rights as free citizens of this country.
Dealing with this problem requires unity of purpose from all corners of
this country.

It is our duty, as representatives of the people of South Africa, to drive
this process by actively engaging with our people at community level and
initiating partnerships that will lead to the survival and recognition of
the rights of women and children in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr J BICI: Madam Chairperson, Deputy President, hon members, at the outset
allow me to salute Deputy Minister Gillwald for driving this initiative
with commitment and enthusiasm.

Deputy Minister, you have created an initiative that grows a little bigger
every year, steadily spreading the message that violence against women and
children is an intolerable attack on our freedom as a nation. We can only
hope that we will see the day, not far from now, when we can raise a toast
to the hon Deputy Minister and celebrate because we no longer need to
campaign against this scourge.

Let us prove to the world that the South African miracle did not end on 27
April 1994, but that it continues. In the meantime, however, we must be
vigilant. The campaign also depends on men reaching out to their peers and
saying, “We will not tolerate violence against women and children.” There
is no excuse and no justification for such acts, full stop. No ifs, no
buts, no maybes.

In terms of Parliament, there is not only a political majority in this
House, but also a gender majority. As democrats, it is our duty to play a
leadership role to demonstrate that this isn’t a so-called women’s issue,
but a human issue. We must reach across the political and gender divide and
forge a united front opposing violence against women and children. We can
start by fully supporting the campaign that the hon Deputy Minister has
managed so effectively.

Ukugqiba manenekazi namanene,kwabo bathe banegalelo, kwabo bathe bayixhasa
le nkqubo, sibamba ngazibini. Sithi ngxatsho ke, sithi ukwanda kwaliwa
ngumthakathi. sithi nangamso, yanga imisebenzi yenu ingazala amaduna
namathokazi. Enkosi. [Kuyaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, to those who participated, who
supported this programme, we say thank you. Well done. I wish you all the
best. We thank you, and wish you the best in all that you do. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: South Africa is reported to have the highest statistics on
gender-based violence in the world for a country not at war, and all of us
are repulsed by the reports of babies as young as three years old being
raped.

The ID feels that a nation which does not protect its women and children
does not deserve to be called a nation. We simply have to do more to end
this violence.

Legislative reforms are under way to address the inefficiencies in the
criminal justice system, but these reforms have taken far too long. It is
also not only legislation that needs to be reformed, but the attitude of
society and the way in which this problem is handled.

The justice system in South Africa is often cold and insensitive to the
plight of women who are trapped in this cycle of violence. Perpetrators are
often let out on cheap bail, only to come back and torment the same women
again. In court, women are forced to sit next to their abusers in a room,
allowing them to be harassed and intimidated all over again.

We can and we must do better than this. There needs to be a total onslaught
against perpetrators who exercise violence against women and children.
Activism must start in the homes, since this is where the abuse occurs.

We need to break the silence around this issue and empower women and
children with knowledge of their sexual rights. Communities must also not
protect their family members who are guilty of women and child abuse, but
report them to the police. Women need to be economically empowered so that
they do not become dependent on an abusive relationship.

The ID would also argue for greater support for women in the form of more
subsidised shelters and safe houses. A dedicated fund for vulnerable victim
services must be set up which can be funded from the proceeds of asset
seizures of organised crime. Also, all survivors of rape must be tested for
HIV/Aids and emergency antiretroviral treatment must be made available to
them.

Ultimately, though, there is a need to shift mindsets away from the culture
of violence and create communities where people trust and respect each
other and feel confident in reporting violent incidents, knowing that the
perpetrators will be arrested and prosecuted, and where children will no
longer see violence as normal in our society.

The responsibility for eradicating violence against women lies not only
with government, but also with communities in the entire South African
society. The ID is ready to play its part in eradicating this scourge from
our society, and I hope all the members can join us in that. Thank you.


Mr L S GABELA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Deputy President and  members  of
Parliament,  16  Days  of  Activism:  No  Violence  Against  Women   is   an
international campaign centred around awareness of violence  against  women.
The spate of violence against children in our country has necessitated  that
our focus be extended to  include  children,  particularly  the  girl-child.
Today our struggle has entered a new epoch, having defeated  the  system  of
racism.

Youth must proceed to  occupy  the  front  rank  in  the  struggle  for  the
reconstruction and development of our  country  to  defeat  of  poverty  and
underdevelopment. In a bid to create a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic  and
prosperous society, South Africa’s problems will not have been addressed  as
enshrined in South Africa’s Constitution if the problems faced by women  are
not fully addressed. Maybe in simple terms, simple mathematics insists  that
women alone form the majority of our population. Therefore, you will not  be
able to address the problems of the country if the problems  that  face  the
majority are not fully addressed.

During the year of the volunteer for  reconstruction  and  development,  our
country’s youth responded enthusiastically to the call,  together  with  the
rest of our people, to volunteer for reconstruction and  development.  Today
we  certainly  cannot  doubt  that  our  youth  fully  accept  the   immense
responsibility placed upon them to work alongside  the  government  and  all
South Africans to make a meaningful impact in the fight  against  women  and
child abuse. As a generation destined to  build  a  firm  foundation  for  a
better life for all, young people must play an  active  role  in  the  fight
against crimes committed against women and  children.  Young  people  cannot
stand by when revolutionary advancements thus  far  are  deliberately  being
rendered meaningless to society. There  should,  from  now  on,  be  greater
awareness within communities with regard to women  and  child  abuse-related
issues. Let us mobilise society to address the  problems  of  abuse  against
women  and  children.  Young  people   must   take   upon   themselves   the
responsibility to engage both young and  old  men  in  the  discourse  about
combating domestic violence, in particular, wherever it is a red herring.

As we embrace African values,  we  need  to  discourage  so-called  cultural
stereotypes and practices that . . . perpetuate the subjugation of women  to
the supremacy of men, here including sexual  relations.  Only  then  can  we
overcome  domestic  violence  and  abuse  of  women  and   children.   These
stereotypes are encouraging the backwardness that will deprive  young  women
of the opportunity to empower themselves towards being  competitive  in  the
labour market.

Evaluations of the family exist, saying that  women  have  always  been  the
core of the family. It is an unnatural thing that women are still,  in  this
day and age, victims of abuse to the degree that  they  are  today.  Towards
the end of the  time  when  people  lived  separate  lives  in  a  state  of
matriarchy in human development, women were the heads of families.  And  yet
men were only hunting barbarians. [Laughter.] Men only dominated the  family
because they had economic power. They could hunt, and they  could  run  fast
and so on. It is not that  they  were  in  charge  of  families.  In  recent
history, one can refer to the role of Queen Modjadji.

uMkabayi kaJama neNgcugce abenqaba ukuthi amadoda amadala aneminyaka engama-
60 aganwe yizingane ezincane nje ezisanda kuthomba. Bathi abayingeni leyo
nto. [ Mkabayi, Jama’s daughter and “the Ngcugce” were the ones who
rejected the notion that old men aged 60 should marry young girls who have
just entered puberty. They said that they were not prepared to entertain
such a practice.]

This all speaks to a positive contribution by women in  our  history.  Human
rights are not men’s rights. Women are included. [Interjections.]

Mfundisi, angizwanga ukuthi uthini. [ Mfundisi, I did not hear what you
said.]

The availability of women to their male friends for dates or at  centres  of
entertainment should not make men see or hear what had not  been  said  only
because they want to hear it from the female  folk.  If  young  women  enjoy
themselves,  and  sometimes  to  the  extreme,  which  may  include  getting
intoxicated sometimes, this should not be used to  their  disadvantage.  Let
men respect women and take women at their word. Men need not read  into  the
actions of women what women have not articulated  verbally,  and  this  goes
for young people in  rural  areas,  urban  areas  and  those  young  men  at
tertiary institutions in particular. I am saying  in  tertiary  institutions
in particular, because this is where date rapes  mostly  take  place.  Young
women must be treated as fellow students and be protected, as  they  deserve
to be. The contrary must not be encouraged.  Hon  Chairperson,  I  speak  on
these issues with some degree of authority as a father of  10  young  girls.
[Interjections.]

Kunezinto-ke okufanele sikhulume ngazo maqondana nokuthi kumele ziyekwe
ikakhulukazi ngoba azakhi, futhi aziqukethe iqiniso elihambisana
nosikompilo. Umuntu wesilisa akungathi uma ngabe umuntu wesifazane
engakasho waphumela obala ukuthi uthini ngodaba lwabo yena bese ebona
ukuthi kungenzeka mhlawumbe ukuthi lo wesifazane yingoba nakhu egcwele
amahloni, ngaleyo ndlela akakwazi ukuthi akusho lokho okufanele. Lowo
wesilisa bese ebona ukuthi, “Hhayi, mina angithathe izinyathelo ngokomzimba
ukuze ngimlekelele lo muntu sihlangane lapho kufanele ukuthi sificane
khona”. Bese kulokhu kuthiwa-ke, hhayi, kakade “Action speaks louder than
words”. Ayikho leyo ndaba. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows)

[There are practices that we need to talk about and that we need to resolve
to stop, because they are not constructive, they are not fair and they are
lacking in terms of social welfare. Men should stop assuming that if a
woman does not come up with a final answer, then it means that that woman
is shy and thereby means consent. Then the man will decide to help this
woman by arranging a place where they can meet. When a woman honours the
appointment, it is assumed that she wanted it. They even say, “Actions
speak louder than words”. There is no such thing.]

A date is a date and it must be limited to that. No means  no,  and  nothing
else but no.

To young women in particular, I want to say:

Asiyiyeke futhi le nto yokuthi uma ngabe umuntu wesilisa ehlukumeza umuntu
wesifazane, emshaya, bese abantu bekhohlisana bethi, “Hhayi kusho ukuthi
udlala uthando. Ukuthi nje uxakwe yisikhwele”. Ayikho into enjalo. Umuntu
okuhlukumezayo kufanele ukwazi ukuthi umbike kwabomthetho ukuze aboshwe
ngoba kusuke kuwukuhlukunyezwa lokho. Awukho umuzi owakhiwa ngenduku;
alukho futhi uthando oluqiniswa ngenduku. Kunezigameko-ke eziningi
ezenzakalayo okufanele ziqedwe. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[We should also refrain from the general belief that when a man abuses and
assaults a woman it is because he loves her, and he is jealous. That is not
true. If a person abuses you, report that person to the police so that he
can be arrested. Assault is not an instrument to build a family, nor can
assault strengthen love. There are so many incidents of violence which
should be stopped.]

I wish to call on young people to join the ANC Youth League,  as  guided  by
its congress on the activities  it  is  engaged  in,  in  encouraging  young
people to take part in  activism  against  the  abuse  of  young  women  and
children.

In conclusion, I wish to address hon Coetzee and hon Greyling.  Chairperson,
you will forgive me, this is my maiden speech and I happen  to  divert  from
the Westminster traditions. The problem we have  is  that  people  read  the
wrong books and stand up here proudly and articulate things that are  wrong.
What the British journal as referred to by hon Coetzee talks  about  is  the
situation of South Africa, but it does not talk about the situation  of  the
UK. South Africa, hon Greyling, is not  leading  in  matters  of  women  and
child abuse. If I could refer you to a South African journal survey of 2003-
04, you will find that America is leading with actual numbers  of  about  81
442, South Africa is next, followed by France, and the UK is last.  I  thank
you. Read the correct books. Thank you very much.

An HON MEMBER: Is the hon member prepared to take a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Member,  it  is  your  maiden  speech;
however, would you like to take a question?

Mr L S GABELA: Chairperson, I am not prepared to  take  a  question.  I  can
give the hon member a copy of my speech.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Madam Chair, hon Deputy President, hon members, the 16 Days
of Activism campaign, which commences on the 25th of this month, shows
government’s commitment to building a caring society; a society that very
clearly sends a message that it rejects violence against women and
children. Recent research by Amnesty International has found that in South
Africa, on average, 147 women are raped per day, and it is estimated that
every six days a woman is killed either by her spouse or her life partner.

Violence affects all South Africans, but in my view it affects women most
severely. What is particularly disturbing is to know that the majority of
the violent incidents in this country, which happen against women and
children, happen in the family home itself, and that the perpetrators are,
mostly, known by the victims. In other words, it is the people that they
trust who are doing these things to them.

Although all of us as South Africans share the commitment to building a
nonracist and nonsexist society, until the day that all women feel safe in
their homes, at their places of work, at their schools, and in society at
large, South Africa will, unfortunately, remain an unequal society. The
purpose of the 16 Days of Activism campaign is to generate increased levels
of awareness of the unacceptability of violence against women and children.
It seeks to raise funds for NGOs, who do valuable work in our communities
by providing shelter and support to the victims and survivors of domestic
abuse.

The campaign also further actively seeks to engage with men about combating
violence in our homes and in our communities. In its commitment to fighting
violence against women and children, government will continue to form
strategic partnerships, because this is not something that government can
tackle on its own. It needs to form, and will continue to form, strategic
partnerships with civil society, business, organised labour, faith-based
organisations, and other sectoral partners, to help empower survivors and
victims of abuse and to sensitise them with regard to their rights.

The campaign should not be seen in isolation. It is part of a bigger
government initiative and part of the bigger picture. If one looks at the
bigger picture, it is clear that government is continuously looking at new
legislation to put on the table, to further protect and promote the rights
of women and children. Bills like the Child Justice Bill, the Sexual
Offences Bill, the Children’s Bill, and the Compulsory HIV Testing of
Alleged Sexual Offenders Bill, will go a long way in creating the caring
society that we all want to achieve. I thank you.[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson and hon Deputy President, the ACDP supports
the call for action against the abuse of women and children, but feels that
more should be done than just demonstrating again for 16 days and nights.
We need a sustained onslaught against this abuse in our legislation and
justice systems. Many in our communities do not heed the calls to refrain
from violence, because our national broadcaster promotes programmes that
break down traditional family values, and desensitises our communities to
violence.

The public needs more programmes that will promote decency and respect for
women than those that undermine them. South Africa has a dubious reputation
of being the child pornography and child prostitution capital of the world,
with a vibrant child sex tourism trade. Paedophiles and child sex offenders
are still getting off with light sentences in our justice system, with some
judges even sighting incest or familial sexual abuse as less traumatic than
abuse perpetrated by a stranger, and therefore deserving of a lesser
sentence. We find this unacceptable.

According to the South African Law Reform Commission report, South Africa
is one of the main countries being used as a destination for victims of
human trafficking. They also point out that police and prosecutors are not
sufficiently trained to deal with human trafficking. The ACDP therefore
calls on government to have intensive training for our police and
prosecutors, to ensure that sexual offenders get maximum penalties when
their cases appear before the courts.

In closing, we call on all women who are victims of rape, violence, or
sexual abuse, not to allow the unfortunate experiences to keep them from
reaching their maximum potential. In spite of what may have happened to
them, their value has not diminished and their contribution in the building
of a strong nation is indispensable. We thank those who are already nation
builders, and we want to honour them for their contribution, regardless of
their painful experiences.

May those who are not victims of abuse stand alongside those victims who
are battling with emotional scars and urge them on. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, modern society demands that
all people, regardless of their gender and age, should be treated with love
and respect, as they are all created in the image of God. No one has to
play master over others, but unfortunately there are people who suffer at
the hands of some. Women and children are the most vulnerable. There are
many instances in which we learn of, and see, women being brutally
assaulted.

Cases that come to mind are those of Leigh Matthews, a former student of
Bond University, and Constable Rasuge of Hammanskraal. These are not the
only ones, but this shows that Robert Burns’ words, “Man’s inhumanity to
man, makes countless thousands mourn”, will always be here to haunt us.

It is regrettable that in spite of the stringent legislation, the Domestic
Violence Act, such bestial conduct persists. What makes it more lamentable
is that the National Commissioner of Police is on record as saying that the
Act is not enforceable. We call on all men of substance to accept that
women are roses and men are the fences around them.

Men should feel proud if they render a service to protect women. Our
parents of yore have always maintained that a woman has to be treated with
the greatest respect. That is why when a young man ties the knot they would
sing the song:

O mo tshware hantle ke galase e a thubeha. [Treat her with great care, she
is as brittle as a glass.]

If most women suffer at the hands of men, children are the worst, as they
are subjected to inhuman treatment from both men and women. There is almost
no day that goes by without a report to the effect that some innocent baby
has been abandoned in a refuse bin, or even a pit latrine, let alone those
abandoned in an open field. Women are committing all these atrocious acts.

We need to call on society at large to take to heart the United Nations’
declaration, which states that mankind owes a child the best it has to
give. As adults, we have a duty and a responsibility towards children.
Pastor Tinyiko Nyathi, who has taken it upon himself to raise awareness
about child abuse, has to be commended and emulated.

The latest South African survey of the South African Institute of Race
Relations reports that since 1994 to 2003 there has been a 56,3% increase
in reported child abuse cases in this country. The only province that
showed a decrease over this period is the Eastern Cape. In provinces such
as the Free State, Mpumalanga, North West and Northern Cape, child abuse
cases rose by 100% during the period under review. In the Northern Cape it
stood at 171,9%. What about South Africa? Why do we wreck the future
nation? It may please us to know that children are the most valuable
natural resource.

In conclusion, we in the UCDP look forward to the day when people convicted
of sexual offences against children will be entered on a special paedophile
register that will be accessible to the general public so that naming them
may shame them. I thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chair, during the campaign 16 Days of Activism: Unite
Against Woman and Child Abuse, we must reflect on the state of our nation
and recall the many layers of violence being experienced by women and girls
in this country. Physical violence, rape, domestic violence and child abuse
are too many manifestations of violence against women and girls. There is
emotional violence; verbal abuse; degrading and offensive comments,
including from strangers on the street; the threat of physical violence in
and out of the home; and the offensive media imagery which degrades women.
There is also economic violence, which is manifested in social, structural
and systematic arrangements.

The Free Trade Areas being negotiated through Economic Partnership
Agreements and the World Trade Organisation resulted in women working in
poor working conditions. Because these conditions are not regulated and do
not comply with domestic labour legislation, women work long hours, get
poor pay, get poor benefits, including maternity leave.

Women have given birth in factories and on farms. They are exposed to the
risk of miscarriage owing to exposure to harmful pesticides, experience a
high risk of delivering children who have chronic or health conditions such
as asthma and lung disease, and have the stress of working under very
insecure and precarious conditions.

The privatisation of education closes the opportunities for low-income
families to access education. This means that parents have to choose which
child to invest in, with the boy-child usually taking preference over his
sisters. This results in our girl-children starting life at a disadvantage
educationally, professionally, economically, etc, with the likelihood of
being forced into low-paid work owing to limited educational
qualifications. That is why the PAC insists on free education, especially
for the poor.

Economic violence should also be examined. With regard to the protection of
assets one must guard against the practice of family inheritance, which
leaves the widow and her children destitute and socially stigmatised.

The separation of families to seek work is a continuing social problem as
women go to factories, farms and kitchens to seek work, leaving their
children and husbands behind. This results in the abuse of children by the
relatives the children are left with. We must fight all forms of violence
against women and children. I thank you. Izwelethu![Our country!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Interjections.] Igama lamakhosikazi!
[Name of women!] [Interjections.] Thank you, Madam Chair, Deputy President.
To the hon Gabela I say: Congratulations on a maiden speech well done.
[Applause.]

It is very nice to know and hear from the hon Coetzee of the DA that South
Africa belongs to all who live in it. Yes, it does, but only since 1994 and
not before. Thanks to the ANC government for giving South Africa to all who
live in it. [Applause.]

Coming back to my speech, the 16 Days of Activism campaign is approximately
10 years old and is supported globally. Taking into consideration the
seriousness of violence against women, this campaign is supported one
hundred percent by the MF.

Violence against women and children is a major concern, and a concerted
effort to stamp it out has been embarked upon. The 16 days of activism is a
sure way of creating greater awareness of gender-based violence, which is a
serious contravention of human rights. This fight against violence against
women should be seen as part of a global effort, and this campaign is our
means of linking to this global fight.

A number of events have been set from 25 November to 10 December, and it is
hoped that everyone will make an effort to partake in these events to equip
us with the tools to combat gender violence and to voice our support to
stamp it out.

Women have suffered in all spheres of life: at home, at work, in
communities, from discrimination, from unfair labour practices, from abuse,
and not only have they been abused but they have also been used. We women
have tolerated enough. We say: “Enough is enough”. The abuse of women and
children must stop; not tomorrow, not today, but now. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Ms P TSHWETE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Deputy President, hon Ministers,
Deputy Ministers and members, as we celebrate 10 years of democracy we
should, as women, be very proud to say that women in South Africa are
protected from all forms of abuse. The legislation that is in place has
given women back their dignity and brought democracy to our homes. Be that
as it may, we still experience these abuses.

The President of the ANC Women’s League, Nosiviwe Mapisa–Nqakula, said when
she was the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs at the opening of IKhaya
leThemba centre for victims of domestic violence in March 2004, and I
quote:

      Even as we celebrate the maturity of our Women’s Charter, we are aware
      that many women are still experiencing domestic abuse and public
      violence every day. We are alive to the many socio-economic factors
      that contribute to the perpetuation of these violent crimes against
      women and children.

This is a reality that many women across the world live with, even in some
of our most advanced democracies. However, I must acknowledge some of the
positive steps that have been taken that lead us in the direction of hope
here in South Africa.

Why should we, as the ANC-led government, take violence against women and
children seriously? It is because it is internationally recognised as a
major human rights violation. In recognition of this, the UN General
Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against
Women and also appointed South Africa as a Special Rapporteur on Violence
Against Women in 1994. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, Cedaw, to which South Africa is a signatory,
noted in 1992 that gender discrimination includes gender violence.

In 1997, an interdepartmental team of people began to work together to draw
up a document that became known as the uniform guidelines for dealing with
rape and other sexual offences. Since then, there have been many other
interventions by the state to combat gender-based violence and abuse. In
1998, the first SADC conference on violence against women was held in
Durban, and it adopted a declaration that remains the yardstick of gender-
based violence issues in most, if not all, SADC countries.

The Domestic Violence Act of 1998, which provides South Africa with its
first legal definition of violence, includes physical abuse. . .

. . . ukubethwa koomama, mhlawumbi bengenzanga nto; ukuzithathela isondo.
Unalo ilungelo lokuthi hayi. Kanti nokuba utshatile, kufuneka kubekho
uvumelwano kwinto yonke; ukuxhatshazwa ngokwasemphefumlweni nasengqondweni,
nezinye iindlela-ndlela.

Sihlalo, masiyibulele inxaxheba ethatyathwe ngurhulumente ophetheyo
ngokuthi awanike amalungelo amakhosikazi, awafundise ukuze azi xa
exhatshazwa.

Ndifuna ukuthi gqaba gqaba ndicacise mhlophe ukuba asingoomama bodwa
abaxhatshazwayo. Uninzi lootata aluthethi. Aluthandi kuthetha. Uye ubone
ngezimbo kwabanye. Mhlawumbi indoda ingangathandi ukugoduka xa ivela
emsebenzini, isuke ithande ukugoduka ebusuku sele kulelwe ekhaya. Enye
isela kakhulu.

Nalapha koomama kubakho abayamkelayo into yokubethwa beyenza ngathi lisiko
kuba becenga umendo. Boomama nootata, thethani xa kukho ezi ngxaki.
Urhulumente uzibonile yena iingxaki ezibangela ukuba oomama nootata babe
ngamaxhoba.
Ngaba enye yazo kukungabi nazindlu ezibizwa ngabo, nto eyenza ukuba umntu
axolele ukubethwa? Yiyo loo nto kubalulekile ukuba oomama babe nelungelo
lokufumana izindlu.

Yintoni ekufanele siyenze thina malungu ePalamente? Kufuneka siqokelele
amaqela oomama kwiindawo esihlala kuzo. Umama uZanele Mbeki sele wasiqalela
ngokuthi ahlanganise amakhosikazi eAfrika iphela. Wayibona ukuba le
asingxaki yoMzantsi Afrika kuphela koko yeyeAfrika iphela. Masilande
ekhondweni, makhosikazi. Masizithathe nezootata iingxaki ngoba nabo
bayadlwengulwa ngoomama. [Uwele-wele.]

Ulutsha luneengxaki nangaphezu kwethu bazali. Ukudutyulwa kwabo
ngabalingane ngomnye wemizekelo. Kambe ndiyafuna ukubuyela kule ngxaki
yootata. Ootata abakhoyo ngabantu abantloni. Abathandi ukuthetha xa
bedlwengulwe ngoomama. Thina ke singoomama sithetha phandle. Kanti ke
bootata sifuna nize ngaphambili. Musani ukuthula. Thethani ukuze sinincede.
[Kwahlekwa.]

Phaya ekuhlaleni sinengxaki xa kufuneka sithethe nootata singoomama.
Umzekelo, ukuba ndinokuqokelela ootata bangathi kukho into etyhulu apha
kum. Xa ufuna ukwenjenjalo kufuneka ufune omnye utata oza kuqokelela abanye
ootata asabele iingxaki zabo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)


[. . . the unreasonable beating of women, sex without consent, together
with emotional and psychological abuse. Women have a right to say no. Even
in marriage there must be agreement in everything.

Speaker, let us be grateful to the ANC-led government for making women
aware of their rights.

I briefly want to highlight that it is not women alone who are abused, but
men as well. Men are silent about the abuses they endure. Their plight will
be shown by their bad behaviour, for example coming home late or drinking
liquor heavily.

There are women who allow suffering as a result of abuse because they say
that it is part of the culture in African marriages. People must talk about
these occurrences. The government has recognised some reasons for the abuse
of women and men.

Might it be the lack of ownership of houses that makes victims subservient?
This is the reason why women must have the right to own houses. What must
be the duty of members of Parliament? We must gather women together and let
them be told about their rights. Let us follow on Mrs Zanele Mbeki’s
initiative of gathering African women because she saw the abuse of women on
the African continent as a problem. Men’s problems must be looked at, as
they suffer abuse as well. [Interjections.]

Youth is in a greater predicament than parents. Their partners take their
lives.

I would like to emphasise the issue of men as victims of abuse. They tend
to be quiet about their sufferings. Contrary to men, women are vocal.
[Laughter.]

In our communities being a woman and summoning men to a meeting is a
problem because they will never come and will label a woman as not being
stable. In order to get men’s attention as women you must ask other men.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Order! Hon member, are you rising
on point of order?


Mnu M B SKOSANA: Cha, bengithanda ukubuza nje… [Mr M B SKOSANA: No, I just
wish to put a question . . .]


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Hon member, you have to ask the
Chair whether the speaker who is at the podium will take a question.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Would you take a question?

Nksz P TSHWETE:  Ewe, ndiyabawela ukuwuthatha. [Kwahlekwa.] [Ms P TSHWETE:
Yes, I am tempted to take a question [Laughter.]]


Mnu M B SKOSANA: Ngazile ukuthi uzowuthatha ngoba siyazana. [Kwahlekwa.]
Bengifuna ukubuza nje ukuthi yini udadewethu uma ethi “obaba” angabheki
ngale kodwa abheke ngapha ngakithi? [Uhleko.] Manje angazi-ke noma
mhlawumbe uqondise kithina yini. [Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)


[Mr M B SIKOSANA: I knew that you would take it because we know each other.
[Laughter.] I just wanted to ask why my sister looks in our direction, and
not the other direction, when she says ‘‘fathers’’. [Laughter.] And now I
do not know whether she is referring to us. [Laughter.]]

Nksz P TSHWETE: Hayi ndicela uxolo, lungu elihloniphekileyo. Ndibone ngathi
uninzi lootata lukweli cala, hayi kweliya. Andiyazi ke le yokwazana.
Mhlawumbi kuya kufuneka ukuba khe ityetyiswe. [Kwahlekwa.]

Xa ndigqibezela, maqabane, ndifuna ukuthi masikhuthaze urhulumente ukuba
akhe iindawo zokunceda abantu bethu kwiindawo esihlala kuzo. Ewe,
urhulumente uzamile, kodwa ke la maxhoba awanazindawo, ngakumbi phaya
ezilalini. Sifikelela njani koomama ezilalini? Siyazi ukuba imithetho
imiselwe yaze yaphunyezwa. Masiboneni ukuba xa sifikile kubantu esinyulelwe
bona siza kuyigqithisa njani le miyalezo sithetha ngayo apha.

Okokugqibela, ndifuna ukuncoma amakhosikazi oMzantsi Afrika, ngakumbi
awasebenza ukususela ku-1994, nawenza ukuba kubekho le mithetho. Kambe
kukho into awayiphosayo nendifuna ukuyibongoza, yokuba kufuneka sikhuthaze
amadoda ukuba abachaze abantwana bawo phambi kokuba asweleke, ngoba
kubuhlungu ukubona emngcwabeni umntwana womntu ehleli phaya ngasemva abe
esazi ukuba nguyise lo ibe inkosikazi yaloo tata ibingakhange ixelelwe
ngale nyewe. Luxhaphazo lwabantwana olo. Kuyenzeka ukuba utata ahlale
ejijeka yinto yokuba enabantwana ngaphandle komtshato yaye engazi ukuba uza
kubondla ngantoni. Siyacela ke ukuba aba tata mababachaze abantwana babo
phambi kokulishiya eli limiweyo, bangasixakekisi bakubhubha. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Ndithe xa ndiyiphakamisa le nyewe, kwathiwa abantu baza kucinga ukuba
nditsho kowam. Kanti hayi, anditsho kowam.

Makhosikazi, niyidlalile indima yenu ukususela ngo-1994, mandinincome.
Nasuka naya kukhusela uAmina Lawal kuxhaphazo. Ninawo amandla okuqokelela
ilizwekazi leAfrika lonke. Namhlanje iingxaki zeAfrika ziphela
zisingathelwa eMzantsi Afrika. Phambili maqobokazana! Siyayibona imisebenzi
yenu! Siyabulela. Kambe sithi yiyani nasezilalini. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: I ask for pardon, hon member. At a glance I saw that most of
the men were seated this side. I do not understand the issue of knowing
each other. I would appreciate it if you could expatiate on that.
[Laughter.]

In conclusion, comrades, we must encourage government to build support
centres for victims of abuse in our communities. Government has tried its
best, but there is still a lack of centres in the rural areas. Let us work
hard to implement legislation and maintain our constituencies.

Finally, I want to show a sense of appreciation to the women of South
Africa and more especially those who were in government since 1994 and
helped in the making of legislation. Nevertheless, there is an issue that
has been overlooked, and that is the issue of children born out of wedlock.
Men must be encouraged to disclose the issue of these children to their
wives before they die.  It becomes sad for children to attend funerals
without being known by the wives, and that is child abuse. [Applause.]

When I raised this matter, it was said that people might think that I was
referring to my marriage. I am not.

Women have played their role since 1994, and they must be appreciated. They
went to fight for Amina Lawal against abuse. They have the power to put
together the whole of the African continent. Today, the African continent’s
concerns are held in South Africa. Forward, women! We recognise your
efforts. But we say, visit the rural areas as well. [Applause.]]

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Hon Deputy Chair, comrade
Deputy President and hon colleagues, I was going to say that every year,
the 16 Days of Activism campaign offers South Africans from all walks of
life an opportunity to do the one thing that we as South Africans do very
well; that is working together to find solutions to common problems.

It is unfortunate that the hon Coetzee’s input has soured the mood
somewhat. His impulse to score political points at any cost is regrettable.
He clearly does not understand that this campaign transcends politics,
religion, culture and all the other differences that define our society.

The campaign documentation that the hon Coetzee referred to elicits the
support of all the members of this House. It is not in the slightest bit
prescriptive but rather encourages the supporters of the campaign to find
creative ways to encourage greater awareness and to promote a national
resistance to women and child abuse. He has the nerve to accuse the ANC of
being divisive. The member has detracted from the spirit of this occasion.
It is a real shame on the member, a shame on his party and a shame on his
ilk.

The Department of Correctional Services, as government’s leading
department, has been tasked by the Presidency to co-ordinate the national
campaign. This implies the delivery of a campaign with an increasingly
broader reach than in all preceding years. The success of our previous
campaigns has been attributed to the formation of strategic partnerships
between government, society, business and a variety of other valued
sectoral partners, all united by a common cause to eradicate the abuse of
women and children.

Over the past months, our department has been working with the Presidency,
the Moral Regeneration Movement and other sectoral partners, to develop a
national calendar of events that we hope will resonate throughout an even
broader South African community, across the urban and rural divide.

Such a wide range of activities has been organised by role players that one
simply cannot be excused from finding, at least, one way to participate in
this process. This year’s calendar of events reflects the diversity of the
audiences to which we must speak. It ranges from workshops in community
centres at assorted venues to an imbizo with the traditional leaders,
hosted by the Limpopo province.

So too, we have tried to use technology to bridge the digital divide by
engaging urban and rural women across the SADC region, to our cyber
dialogues project. Gender Links, supported by the GCIS, Correctional
Services and strategic partners in the private sector will run daily chat
room sessions with communication nodes across the SADC region.

It is an ambitious project and, already, facilitators have been trained to
engage their respective communities and to formulate the inputs that will
be made to a panel of experts on a daily basis for the duration of the 16
days. The Johannesburg metro, under the stewardship of executive mayor, the
hon A Masondo, has provided enthusiastic support for this project.

In addition to other regional facilitators, Gender Links has also trained
Gauteng-based councillors for this purpose. The councillors will bring
their ward-based inputs to the cyber dialogues, each one of them
contributing to the richness and depth of the discussion.

The question is often asked: what can I do to support this programme? It is
for this reason that we always try to provide an interactive element in our
campaign, in which government’s programme is used to raise funds for NGOs
working with victims and survivors of violence.

Our Postcard Pledge campaign provides an opportunity for the general public
to make a real difference, just by signing the no violence campaign. The
South African Post Office has produced 800 000 pledge postcards that will
become available in 500 post offices around the country from 17 November;
that’s next Wednesday. Members of the public can sign the pledges and place
the postcards in the specifically designated boxes provided for this
purpose at the participating post offices.

To sweeten the deal, Transnet has sponsored R1 per signature for the 250
000 signatures collected. This money will be distributed via the Foundation
for Human Rights to NGOs working with victims of violence. The signed
postcards will be collected and displayed on a huge wall of solidarity at
the cyber dialogue venue at the civic centre.

The daily growth of this wall will be monitored by the press as the
anticipated commitment to the pledge develops and the participation of the
public swells. As members of Parliament, you can arrange pledge ceremonies
with your local post office in your community, when you return home for
constituency work.

To mark the advent of the campaign, we are delighted to hear from the
Deputy President that President Mbeki has agreed to deliver the keynote
address at our launch ceremony in Port Elizabeth on 25 November. Here, I
must thank the Premier of the Eastern Cape, who has placed a considerable
capacity of her office at the disposal of the team that is organising the
event.

Both this event and the closing ceremony planned for Mitchells Plain on 10
December in Cape Town have been characterised by close co-operation between
the three spheres of government. I would like to thank, particularly, the
executive mayors of Cape Town and Port Elizabeth for their unreserved co-
operation.

In our effort to popularise the message of no violence, we have identified
men and boys as singularly important partners in this campaign. It is both
unhelpful and, I might add, inaccurate to cast men as the constant
perpetrators and perpetual enemies of women and children. It also alienates
those many good men who are committed to peace and non-violence.

This campaign will make every effort to convince men and boys of the
essential positive role that they have to play in putting an end to this
scourge. The formation of NGOs and professional organisations dedicated to
ensuring that men and boys become proactive partners in the elimination of
gender-based violence is a welcome and growing trend.

The challenge for us as South Africans is how to take this campaign beyond
its 16 days and to make sure that ours is a national effort to combat
violence for 365 days each year.

I would agree with one of the hon members’ inputs that the best place to
start is at home. In this, the international year of the family, we should
all convey the message through our own behaviour that peace begins in the
home. During these coming 16 days of activism, we should take stock of our
individual commitments to ending domestic violence, in terms of the way
that we raise our sons and daughters and in the way in which we relate to
one another in our homes. It is at home that the children learn the value
of respect and dignity. They also learn and develop ideas by observing us,
their parents, and in the way in which society views and treats its women.

To commemorate the year of the family, the Department of Housing will be
building 16 houses for 16 women in 16 days, using the sweat equity of
prison inmates who have committed to giving back to the communities from
which they came. [Applause.]

Another constituency that is being drawn into the campaign is our
mineworkers. In a unique participation effort between the Department of
Minerals and Energy, the National Union of Mine Workers and the Chamber of
Mines, an event has been arranged in Rustenburg to draw that constituency
into engaging with the issues of women and child abuse.

It is important that this campaign is driven on the basis of partnership
and collaboration. Together, we must expose more people to the vicious and
debilitating effect of violence, not only on women and children but also on
whole societies. Our effort each year must convince more people to take a
stand and to become proactive agents of change and partners in the
elimination of all forms of gender-based and child directed violence.

Apart from the obvious moral imperatives for supporting this campaign, we
must understand that this is a development issue. The existence or even the
threat of high levels of violence in any society has a direct and negative
impact on that society’s ability to develop and grow.

The prevalence of gender-based and child directed violence is one of the
most pernicious forms of discrimination, because it impacts directly and
negatively on the ability of children to realise their universal human
right to development. To acknowledge the intersection between the
vulnerability to violence and disability, the Department of Sports and
Recreation, the Durban city metro and the KwaZulu-Natal province have
collaborated to produce a series of events that will demonstrate the
achievements of disabled sports women and men in the fields of physical
endeavour.

Following, as it will, on the Presidency’s national event in Limpopo on 3
December, these events clearly demonstrate our government’s commitment to
mainstreaming the rights of the disabled into the national agenda. So too,
the Department of Health’s national event in Cape Town on 1 December will
focus on the heightened risk of people living with HIV and Aids to violence
and discrimination.

Our closing ceremony will take place at Mitchells Plain on 10 December. The
hon Deputy President along with Premier Rasool and several cabinet members
will bring this year’s campaign to a close. The MEC of Safety and Liaison
in the Western Cape, Mr Leonard Ramatlakane, has rallied the provincial
role-players in a concerted effort to ensure the delivery of an event that
embraces the whole community.

The event will remind us that women’s rights are human rights and that our
society will never be truly free until we’ve achieved the full emancipation
of women and institutionalised their equal participation in all aspects of
life, in the home, in the community and in the workplace.

In the packages that you have received today, you will find a pledge
postcard. Please sign it and put it into the red post boxes in the Old
Assembly lobby. You will also find a white ribbon, the international symbol
of solidarity for no violence against women. Please wear your ribbons for
the full duration of the campaign. By wearing it, you’d be saying I care,
I’m a nation builder, I’m a peacemaker and a proud South African. Thank
you, very much. [Applause.]

  THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSTITUENCY WORK IN A PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, hon Deputy President and
hon members, for 92 years the ANC has been the torchbearer of majority
democratic rule in our country. Humanity inherited from ancient Greece the
meaning of democracy, namely democratic majority rule. The ANC’s vision to
build a better life for all is underpinned by its strategic perspective to
build a united, nonracial, democratic, nonsexist and prosperous South
Africa wherein participation in decision-making involves all people,
particularly the poor.

The content of our democracy was forged in the crucible of struggle against
the forces of imperialism, colonialism and apartheid in our country. In the
course of our struggle, we enlisted the active support and involvement of
millions of our people into a mighty army of liberation. Our compatriots
organised in the UDF, civics, Cosatu and other contingents of mass
formations were in reality a form of participatory democracy. At the centre
of those struggles was the quest and desire for a form of government
premised on the values and norms of participatory democracy so aptly
articulated in the Freedom Charter when it says, “the people shall govern”.

Participatory democracy is about the involvement of the people in
determining their destiny. The processes leading to the adoption of the
Freedom Charter have profound lessons for all public representatives when
considering the approach to constituency work. In order for people to
govern effectively, they need to be informed about the programmes, policies
and the legislative framework that regulate and govern their lives, day-to-
day activities and business. It is in this context that we submit that
public representatives should be like the olden day volunteers who
conducted door-to-door campaigns to provide the people with the opportunity
to define the kind of country and world they wanted to live in.

This fundamental lesson of the Freedom Charter is that South Africans
designed and crafted their future. Our democratic Constitution embraces the
aspirations of the Freedom Charter and provides a framework for their
progressive realisation. Our Constitution embodies a justifiable Bill of
Rights and institutions that support constitutional democracy.

The ANC has transformed the institution of Parliament into a Parliament of
the people. Our people have spoken loud and clear in three successive
elections. The development of our country is shaped by our concrete
historical circumstances. What this means is that universal lessons on
democracy must be indigenised in the material conditions of South Africa.
Furthermore, the ANC has reinvented indigenous forms of African democracy,
such as izimbizo, in the material conditions of the 21st  century. Izimbizo
are a powerful platform of accountability and transparency. Izimbizo afford
constituencies the opportunity to give feedback on the implementation of
government programmes. On the other hand, government representatives get
the opportunity to listen to the views of their constituencies.

The fact that the Presidency, Ministers, Premiers, members of Parliament,
members of provincial legislatures, councillors and government officials
jointly address izimbizo necessarily make these a qualitatively higher form
of participatory democracy. Izimbizo, as a form of participatory democracy,
are an integral part of the African Renaissance movement.

By adopting the Reconstruction and Development Programme, the ANC
buttressed participatory democracy as a way of life in the reconstruction
and development of postapartheid South Africa. Thus, in 1994, in capturing
the letter and spirit of the RDP we said that our people, with their
aspirations and collective determination, are our most important resource.
The RDP is focussed on our people’s most immediate needs and it relies, in
turn, on their energies to drive the process of meeting these needs.

Regardless of race or sex, or whether they are rural or urban, rich or
poor, the people of South Africa must together shape their own future.
Development is not about the delivery of goods to a passive citizenry. It
is about active involvement and growing empowerment. In taking this
approach we are building on the many forums, peace structures and
negotiations that our people are involved in throughout the land.

In the context of the RDP, how do we understand constituency work? Central
to the notion which says “the people shall govern” is the symbiotic
relationship between the vanguard and the people; and in the case of
parliamentary work, it is the symbiotic relationship between the people’s
representatives and their constituencies. The ANC’s conceptualisation of
constituency work locates the ANC as a revolutionary movement at the head
of a patriotic effort to build a people’s contract, to create work and to
fight poverty.

Increasingly, constituency work should, and will, occupy centre stage in
the work of the legislatures. Necessarily, as we pursue the objectives of
solidifying the people’s contract, the challenge of strengthening the
participative interaction between Parliament and the people becomes the
fulcrum of parliamentary activities. The task of participatory democracy is
active involvement of the people in matters of governance.

Constituency work transcends party political partisanship. The partisanship
we embrace as the ANC is a people-driven process of empowerment and
delivery of services to the poorest of our people, both as guarantor of a
future and a moral imperative that defines our spirit of ubuntu. This
perspective is non-negotiable. Essentially, we are saying that constituency
work should enable legislators to interact with diverse stakeholders.

The purpose of constituency work is to foster nation-building and citizen
participation in the broad effort of reconstruction and development.
Placing the people at the centre of development is the essence of Batho
Pele and is Africa’s contribution to the notion of democracy. This new
approach to parliamentary democracy requires a mindset shift. Indeed, it
requires a radical break with traditional notions of restricting citizen
participation to periodic elections. Participatory democracy regards
citizens as partners in the totality of the development effort. Parliament,
as the cradle of democracy, has a responsibility to challenge institutions
that buttress constitutional democracy to follow suit and to locate at the
centre of their activities the people’s interests as well as their active
participation.

The media need to reflect, understand and define their role in the context
of fostering a people-driven development. We are arguing that it is not
essentially market forces that determine our destiny on the issues of
democracy. On the contrary, we suggest that the benefits of human culture
must be harnessed to give effect to the assertion that the people shall
govern.

In our view, the new approach to constituency work affords Parliament
immeasurable possibilities to unleash the energies of our people in the
reconstruction and development agenda. The achievement of this patriotic
duty will enhance nation-building, and contribute to the African
Renaissance and the new world order.

I have limited time at my disposal, but there are other important issues
that we needed to reflect on. The level of resource support for members to
carry out their constituency work seems quite inadequate. The very same
capacity of constituency offices seems to be limited. The mode of operation
of parliamentary constituency offices needs overhauling. These offices
close exactly at a time when the very clientele they intend to serve are
either at work or at home. We need a suitable arrangement for constituency
offices that is consistent with our kind of democracy. Our constituency
office system seems to be based on the magisterial district boundary
constituency approach that is completely inadequate to reach our people
properly.

Regarding broadcasting issues, I am still amazed as to why almost all
constituency offices do not have digital satellite television to enable
constituents at that level to engage with Parliament fully and not only be
limited to the half slots provided by the SABC.

All in all, we need to have a new model of constituency work that we need
to collectively reshape. At its centre must be the ability to communicate
the programmes we are engaged in and involve people in decision-making. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr T D LEE: Mnr die Voorsitter, mnr die Adjunkpresident, dames en here,
dit is voorwaar ironies dat ons vandag oor kiesafdelingwerk praat terwyl
ons Grondwet nie eintlik voorsiening maak vir kiesafdelings nie. Miskien is
dit in ‘n mate erkenning daarvan dat ons kiesstelsel nie ten volle aan die
vereistes van ons land voldoen nie.

Die DA glo dat die beste manier van verteenwoordiging op parlementêre vlak
- nasionaal, sowel as provinsiaal - geskoei moet wees op die model wat tans
op die plaaslike regeringsvlak van toepassing is, met ander woorde, ‘n
kombinasie van ‘n kiesafdeling- of wykstelsel en ‘n proporsionele
lysstelsel.

Die proporsionele lysstelsel is baie inklusief van aard en verseker dat
elke stem tel, al het ‘n party nie beduidende steun nie. Die
kiesafdelingstelsel, op sy beurt, gee die kieser die geleentheid om direk
vir ‘n kandidaat te stem wat, volgens sy of haar oordeel, die beste na die
kiesers se belange sal omsien.

Ons moet onthou dat die deursnit-kieser nie ‘n baie hoë dunk van politici
het nie. Luister, Manie, die deursnit-kieser het nie ‘n baie hoë dunk van
politici nie. Hulle dink dat ons bra oneerlik, onproduktief en hopeloos
oorbetaald is. In sekere mate het ons net onsself vir dié beeld te blameer,
terwyl ons huidige kiesstelsel, waar niemand eintlik vir ‘n gebied
verantwoordelik gehou kan word nie, ook van die skuld moet dra.

Ongeag die kiesstelsel moet ons te alle tye ons verkiesingsbeloftes nakom.
Luister, Manie, as ons dit nie doen nie, verloor die kiesers nie net
vertroue in en respek vir die politici nie, maar voel hulle ook dat die
stelsel hulle in die steek laat. In so ‘n geval kan die kiesers òf apaties
word, òf oorgaan tot geweld en protes - en ons weet wat in die Vrystaat
gebeur het, wat alreeds op ‘n paar ander plekke in ons land gebeur het. Ons
moet onthou dat daar baie behoeftige mense in ons land is. Vir hierdie
mense is hul openbare verteenwoordigers hul laaste toevlug en hoop. Ons mag
hulle nie versaak nie, Manie.

Die DA neem hierdie verantwoordelikheid, genome dienslewering, baie ernstig
op. So ernstig dat ons van alle DA-openbare verteenwoordigers, dit wil sê
LP’s, LPW’s, sowel as raadslede, verwag om ‘n prestasie-ooreenkoms, ‘n
“performance”-kontrak, te onderteken en hulle te onderwerp aan ‘n streng
gedragskode. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr T  D LEE: Mr Chairman, Mr Deputy President, ladies and gentlemen, it is
indeed ironic that we talk of constituency work today whilst our
Constitution does not even cater for constituencies. Perhaps this is an
acknowledgement, to a certain degree, that our electoral system does not
fully comply with the requirements of our country.

The DA believes that the best method of representation at the parliamentary
level, nationally as well as provincially, must be fashioned on the model
that is currently applicable at the local government level, in other words,
a combination of a constituency or ward system, as well as a proportional
list system.

The proportional list system is of a very inclusive nature and ensures that
each vote counts, even though a party has no significant support. The
constituency system, on the other hand, provides the voter with the
opportunity to vote directly for a candidate who, in his or her judgement,
will best look after the interests of the voters.

We must remember that the average voter does not have a very high regard
for politicians. Listen, Manie, the average voter does not have a very high
regard for politicians; they regard us as being dishonest, unproductive and
hopelessly overpaid. To a certain degree we have only ourselves to blame
for this image, whilst our present electoral system, where nobody can
actually be held responsible for an area, should also shoulder some of the
blame.

Notwithstanding the electoral system, we have to honour our electoral
promises at all times. Listen, Manie, if we do not do this, the electorate
will not only lose faith in and respect for politicians, but will also feel
that the system has left them in the lurch. In this case, the electorate
could either become apathetic or resort to violence - and we know what
happened in the Free State, as has happened in a few other places in our
country. We must remember that there are a lot of poor people in our
country. To these people, their public representatives are their last
resort and hope.

The DA takes this responsibility, service delivery, very seriously. So
seriously that we expect all DA representatives, in other words, MPs, MPCs,
as well as councillors, to sign a performance agreement, a performance
contract, and to subject themselves to a strict code of conduct.]

The DA requires its public representatives to maintain the highest
standards of ethical behaviour, and any incidence of corruption, fraud,
improper inducement, nepotism, dishonesty or similar offence on the part of
any public representative will lead to disciplinary action. We implore, and
I challenge, the ANC to say and do the same.

The DA is determined and committed to serve its voters and indeed all the
people of this country, whether it is in Parliament, the legislatures, city
councils or the constituencies. I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K M ZONDI: Chairperson, constituency work is usually taken for granted,
and it is a given in many established democracies throughout the world. It
is taken for granted because members of Parliament, in a representative
democracy, directly represent the people who elected them.

South Africa is also a democracy in which both our National Assembly and
provincial legislatures are elected according to a party list system. This
system has its own advantages and disadvantages. The greatest advantage of
our electoral system is that it ensures representation of the smallest of
parties, which otherwise would not be represented in our Parliament or
provincial legislatures if we had a first-past-the-post electoral system.

The rationale underlying our electoral system is to strengthen multiparty
democracy and to accommodate the diverse range of voices of constituencies.
The drawback of the system is that it does not allocate a member to a
particular geographical area. The electorate elects a party, rather than a
specific individual.

When we arrived here in 1994 we soon realised that something had to be done
to keep Parliament in direct contact with the electorate. Due to the
absence of a constituency element in our electoral system political parties
were implored to allocate members to specific geographical areas. It is
generally agreed that it is a matter of vital importance for members of
Parliament to perform constituency work in order to ensure that the
people’s aspirations and concerns are heard in Parliament. It was for this
reason that Parliament made resources available to enable members to do
their constituency work.

It is of course debatable whether resources for constituency work are
enough. Whilst there are resources for members to travel to and within
their constituencies, it is far from clear if they are sufficient for those
that lie in areas that are, in terms of infrastructure, difficult to
traverse. One therefore wonders if consideration can be given to
rearranging the parliamentary programme so that there is enough time for
MPs to spend time in their allocated constituencies.

Parliamentarians could, for example, sit for six solid months, from
February to June, and for the rest of the year undertake constituency work.
Alternatively, Parliament could sit for three months at a time and then
allocate a full month for constituency work on an ongoing basis. This is
especially important if Parliament is to make a significant contribution to
our developmental state and to enhance participatory democracy.

The Van Zyl Slabbert task team recommended a mixed electoral system, with a
quorum of members who would be directly elected and then topped up with a
list system, to ensure proportionality. This is so that every vote counts.
This report unfortunately appears to have fallen by the wayside.
Interestingly, the late Lord Roy Jenkins recommended such a system in
Britain, the so-called additional member system, when he chaired the
Jenkins Commission, established by Prime Minister Tony Blair in 1998.

Understandably, ruling parties with large majorities are often content to
leave the status quo as it is. I think this is short-sighted. The IFP
believes the time has come to craft an electoral system that retains the
best elements of proportional representation. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time
expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, constituency work has been identified as an important obligation
for every member of Parliament. Consequently it has been elevated, as a
prominent feature of the parliamentary programme, to formally create the
time for members to visit their constituencies. Funding is specifically
provided to ensure that members can operate offices in their
constituencies.

The Constitution of South Africa specifically calls for participatory
democracy. This therefore means that we must create a system that allows
citizens to participate in a democracy on a far wider scale than merely
turning up every five years to cast their votes. It is for this reason that
public participation in parliamentary committees is enshrined in our
Constitution, and why the media are allowed to freely report on the
proceedings of this institution.

We must recognise that even these measures are not sufficient to foster a
true participatory democracy. That is why constituency work is important.
Most citizens do not have the luxury of time and resources to travel to
this institution and participate in our proceedings. Therefore, we must go
to them and create mechanisms through which they can access their public
representatives.

Undoubtedly, we are expected to perform many duties as parliamentarians,
but we cannot shirk constituency work. There are constituency offices
across party lines, which have become an integral part of the communities
in which they operate. These constituency offices are a first port of call
for people who struggle to access or understand basic government services,
such as ID and social grant applications.

These offices also assist those people who have, for various reasons,
become disillusioned with the notoriously slow and often uncaring
bureaucracies of certain government departments and institutions. Often,
reports of gross administrative injustices are brought to these offices
where the relevant member can approach the responsible Minister and have
the matter resolved. I thank you, hon Chair. [Time expired.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, members of Parliament are most likely to
represent constituents’ interests when, firstly, they know precisely where
their constituents are; secondly, they interact with them frequently;
thirdly, their political future depends on gaining and keeping their seats
in Parliament; and lastly, they find a balance between parliamentary work
and conversing with their constituents.

While some leaders speak in the abstract about the people, legislatures in
a functioning democracy usually see constituents as people from whom they
can learn how government policies are working and whose support they value.
Members of Parliament with strong ties to constituents are more likely to
think about policies in terms of how they affect the people they represent.

The question of how well government is working is answered by how well
their constituents fare under government policies. The commitment to the
electorate is vastly different between a list-based MP and a constituency-
based MP. List members place less emphasis on constituency work in the
absence of a direct constituency link. This is because the electoral fate
depends more on securing a high position on the party list than securing a
vote from their constituents.

MPs will have an easier time representing and interacting with their
constituents when they have the necessary resources. We need more
resources. The ID believes that Parliament should review the funding
formula for the constituency allowance so that it is fair and reasonable.
There is also no need to wait for the law to be changed to service
constituencies. We can start in the meantime, while we wait for the law.

I want to agree with the hon Musa Zondi that the parliamentary programme
must be changed so that we have 50% parliamentary work and spend 50% of our
time in our constituencies, in order to come back here and represent and
formulate policies according to the needs. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MADUMISE: Chairperson, hon members, the most visible demonstration
of the linkage between an elected representative and his or her
constituency in modern democracies is the manner in which he or she engages
in constituency work with the electorate. Between elections this can be
regarded as the glue that holds democracy together.

The nature and strength of the linkage between public representatives and
citizens is a key foundation upon which effective, enduring, and stable
democratic regimes are built. In taking this opportunity today to discuss
this critical issue, let us keep in mind the search for a practical answer
to the question as to how best our elected representatives can reflect the
interests of our citizens in a manner that is both just and fair.

The focus for democracy is anything but certain as we look to the twenty-
first century. Today we are faced with a new set of democracy challenges,
perhaps greater than those of our recent past. The task is no longer to
make the world safe for democracy, as Woodrow Wilson proclaimed almost a
century ago, but rather to safeguard our essential democratic values. This
shift is reflected in the current literature, which, upon review, brings to
mind Rousseau’s saying, which goes: “Liberty is a food easy to eat, but
hard to digest.”

As we celebrate our advance towards a better life for our people, we do so
conscious of the fact that our strength should continue to reside in our
mass character. Therefore the involvement of the masses should be at the
centre of our strategy to consolidate and advance the gains we have made so
far. Our oversight practices should reflect this. In carrying out our
oversight function, we must continue to ensure and strengthen the
involvement of all the sectoral formations among the motive forces.

Social dialogue and partnership with civil society was a pillar of the
liberation struggle in South Africa. It is instructive for us to see the
importance of nongovernmental agencies in formulating and shaping their own
future. Trade unions joined forces with civil society, and this partnership
set a clear agenda for democracy in the country. Constituency work,
therefore, should not be contextualised outside of the means that defeated
apartheid. Instead we should consolidate a strong fold of partnerships with
civil society in order to understand the real challenges of our people as
we continue to liberate this country.

We should remember that civil organisations cultivate the programmes that
focus on the grassroots and are strongly biased towards the poor in the
process of fighting and pushing the frontiers of poverty, and with a vision
to build a vibrant democratic order. At the heart of these partnerships
there should be campaigns and instruments to render the apartheid machinery
ineffective.

Socio-economic conditions in the country must be such that the regime is
well-balanced. As members of Parliament we have the responsibility to
ensure that the programmes in our communities are within the ambit of
government policy, that government is supporting these initiatives, and
that such initiatives are well-publicised and effective.

Oversight and constituency work are important legislative tools available
to us as MPs to make sure that we are fulfilling our commitment to a better
life by addressing the inequities created over centuries of colonial
domination. In discussing our approach to oversight and constituency work,
we need to make sure that in its content and form it is capable of
consolidating and advancing the democratic gains we have made.

Constituency work is a must in any democratic society. Describing a good
constituency member is difficult; it’s perplexing and confusing to define.
Many of us are called on to play a multitude of roles within a
constituency, as welfare officers, development facilitators, postmen,
powerful friends, benefactors, safety valves, listeners, redressers of
wrongs and even teachers. In the end, it is the constituents themselves who
ultimately decide the roles that we as elected representatives must play.
Yet it is a decision that can only be exercised on the basis of an elected
representative who has established a visible and tangible presence in a
community.

No constituency system, no matter how well-designed, can meaningfully be
implemented without the presence of the elected representative in the life
of the constituency. No system, no matter how ingenious or sophisticated,
can replace or substitute the effective involvement of an elected
representative in the lives of the community. The question we should,
therefore, be asking is: Which constituency system would be most likely to
ensure that elected representatives take seriously all the roles they must
play in the life of a community? Technology does not comprise of the
Internet only, but also of media technology such as radio, fax and TV.

There is a lack of infrastructure and massive logistics are needed to
maintain and sustain technological connectivity as a basis of information
for our constituency offices. As members of Parliament we must be able to
download important information from our networks and provide it to our
constituency offices. In provinces where 70% to 80% of the population live
in rural areas where there is a lack of basic infrastructure such as
telephones and electricity, how can this technology be applied? It then
becomes our responsibility as public representatives and servants of our
people, in the fight to make a better life for all, to ensure that we
provide relevant information through the meetings that we hold with our
constituencies, even through local radio stations and by word of mouth.

The door-to-door campaign should be continuous. However, it should be
better structured. Even in the few major cities where Internet cafes have
sprung up in their dozens, going online is still a costly venture. The
emphasis of a new approach to constituency work should be on direct
interaction with our people through the continuation of our election
strategy of door-to-door campaigning.

The key objective of such a campaign must be to mobilise the whole
constituency, irrespective of political affiliation, around the ANC’s
programme of transformation and also to deal with the challenges I have
mentioned above, with respect to the utilisation of information versus the
scarce resources.

To do so, our constituency offices must have a programme that clearly
speaks to the needs of the majority of the people in the constituency. The
ANC’s programme of action forms the basis of all our constituency offices’
programmes.

South Africans are united by one quality that overshadows all others: they
are “can-do” people. They defied the doomsday predictions of 1994 and came
up with a historic political solution that astonished the world. Now they
are working together to achieve refreshing and different socio-economic
solutions, which will again be an inspiration to the world.

I am sure that you are well aware of the fact that there have, recently,
been increasing calls for change to the constituency system for public
representatives in South Africa and these have come from political parties,
civil society and the media.

Let me be the first to remind my political opponents - such as the DA,
here, and the media - that they do not have sole monopoly of these calls
for change and that the ANC is not unaware of or insensitive to the issue
of its obligation to its constituency.

Our key priority as members of Parliament and members of the ANC is to
develop a programme of action on oversight and constituency work that will
contribute towards the implementation of our national objectives.

In developing such a programme of action, we must constantly remind
ourselves that the legacy of inequality, which has been built up over many
centuries, cannot be eradicated in a short time. I want to remind you of
former President Nelson Mandela’s last speech to Parliament in which he
indicated the need to change to a more constituency-based approach in
consolidating the democratic gains that have been made in South Africa
since 1994. The former President’s statement should come as no surprise as
this has been, and still is, very much a subject of concern in the ongoing
debate within the ANC as to how we can best represent and serve the
interests of our people.

Also, more recently as an expression of this concern, you will note that a
greater commitment has been made in the legislative programmes for elected
members to engage in longer periods of constituency work after stiffer
penalties have been lavished on those who saw fit not to engage in any form
of meaningful constituency work.

Regarding these calls for change to our current system of proportional
representation, I would like to say that this House is the opportune place
for all of us present here, irrespective of our differences and strongly
held viewpoints, to reflect critically not only on where we find ourselves
now, but also on the potential consequences and implications that these
calls for change hold for our democracy.

It is our duty to align our constituency work with the broad strategic
framework of the ANC. The area where this principle has to find broad
expression is in our oversight and constituency work. Underpinning the
programmes of our constituency offices should be an effective co-ordinating
system that links the constituency office with ward committees, branch
councillors, MPs, MPLs, community development workers and our allied
organisations.

In his article on the growth of the constituency role of the MP in British
politics Norton writes, and I quote:

      The relationship between members of Parliament and their
      constituencies is subject to no formal rules. There is no official job
      description. What constituents appear to expect of their MPs and what
      the MPs have done over the years, in response to the demands or
      perceived needs of the constituency, have varied.


However, this should not be read in terms that indicate that any exercise
in engaging in constituency work by elected representatives is doomed to
end in chaotic and abject failure. It has been documented in the media that
many South African MPs, in spite of the absence of clear guidelines, have
had to discover juristically, through trial and error, what makes a good
constituency member. We need to constantly review the manner in which we
have been doing things to ensure that as a movement we have a strategic
response to the challenges of the next 5 years and 2014. Amandla! [Power!]

HON MEMBERS: Awethu! [Ours!] Applause.]

Adv A H GAUM: Chairperson, the visible participation of MPs in constituency
work is crucial to revitalise a link between communities and Parliament.
Many South Africans do not know whom their representatives are and are, as
a result, not adequately represented. Our challenge is to establish a very
real working relationship between the electorate and the elected.

Parliament needs to empower and encourage communities to hold the MPs
accountable. This can, inter alia, be done by providing the names and
details of MPs who have been assigned to constituency areas to the local
media, local associations and institutions and also by making more funds
available to ensure that people are introduced to their MPs.

The hon Lee argues that the introduction of elements of a constituency-
based system will end the shortcomings regarding accountability. But this
could lead to most constituency MPs coming from two or three parties
exclusively and it could draw an undesirable distinction between two
classes of MPs, namely constituency MPs and the others. More than any
electoral system,  could guarantee accountability, Parliament, its members
and political parties have to establish a culture of accountability and
promote visible constituency work.

The hon Dr Pallo Jordan indicated correctly that political parties have an
important role in this regard. He says MPs are accountable to parties,
which in turn are accountable to the electorate. Therefore, all parties
must put mechanisms in place to hold MPs accountable and to ensure an
active constituency presence.

Dr Frene Ginwala says accountability between the electorate and political
parties can be enhanced by establishing more effective constituency
offices. However, parties cannot be expected to do this on their own, and
MPs cannot become as effective as they should be if better financial
support is not provided, as also referred to by the hon Chief Whip.

We should take a serious look at the resources available to MPs. In many
other democracies MPs have a much better support base and this means a
better quality of service in terms of constituency work and parliamentary
performance. Effective constituency work can make a substantial
contribution to facilitate public involvement so that the challenges of
transformation and development in South Africa can be met and the needs of
our people addressed.

If communities perceive their MPs as distant, absent beings without an
interest in their wellbeing, our democracy will no doubt run into trouble.
MPs must be seen as active participants in their local communities to
strengthen participatory democracy. If this is realised we will indeed
succeed in bringing Parliament closer to the people and in giving meaning
to the peoples contract the hon Chief Whip referred to. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, constituency work has become a cardinal part of
a parliamentarian’s work. In our modern democratic society with its swift
and accurate communication tools at our finger tips, especially e-mail and
the universal use of the cellphone in South Africa, it is very easy for our
constituents to articulate their views on political issues on a regular
basis.

What do we mean by a participatory democratic society? We know it does not
mean that the constituent has the right to vote once every five years, and
we know it entails a much more ongoing dynamic process. Our former Speaker,
Dr Ginwala, once wrote in the foreword to A People’s Government - The
People’s Voice, that democracy requires that citizens should be
continuously engaged in governance through interaction with those who make
decisions - our constituents. Marking a ballot and dropping it into a
ballot box once every five years is an important element of democracy, but
it is only one step in the process of building a society that generally
serves the interests of all its people. Those who are elected to make
policy and laws on behalf of the people are required to fulfil their
mandate in continuous consultation and dialogue with the citizens on whose
behalf they act. That is constituency work.

Suzanne de Villiers, who also writes in the same publication that was
produced by the Parliamentary Support Programme, says that unlike direct
democracy it does not imply that every decision taken by government must
first be subjected to a public referendum. Nor, however, does it mean that
the right and responsibility for political decision-making is relinquished
to a collective of elected representatives. Participatory democracy is a
form of representative democracy in which citizens are actively involved in
the
decision-making processes of government.

And this, colleagues, is why we as public representatives have constituency
offices. We must be able, through these offices, to bring Parliament and
government closer to the people. We have a responsibility to keep our
constituencies informed about the most important decisions taken by
government and to remain a channel between the people and Parliament. Our
constituents must know, amongst other things, how democracy works, how
Parliament functions, how laws are passed and which laws are passed, the
importance of the national budget and how that budget impacts on their
daily lives. All these matters we as MPs must take to our constituents.

In closing, if we want to remain the voice of the people, we must know the
heartbeat of the people. Colleagues, when Parliament rises tomorrow let us
return to our constituencies to serve them. I thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chair, as members of Parliament - no matter which
political party a politician comes from - we are expected to play an active
role in the development of local communities. There is a debate amongst our
people at grass-roots level, which centres around the electoral system and
the role of MPs outside Parliament. There is no doubt that the issues
raised interrogate the role of MPs in the affairs of local communities and
their accountability.

We know for a fact that MPs get to Parliament via a party list and
consequently are accountable to their parties. But in reality MPs should be
accountable to the communities they serve as they are viewed as elected
representatives. Their expectations do, in a way, overlook party membership
and is developmental in approach. It is within this context that
parliamentarians should approach their constituency work with one thing in
mind and that is that our people, irrespective of party affiliation,
deserve to be served.

Constituency work is the pillar of participatory democracy. It enables and
empowers communities to exercise their rights through a mandate given to
the parliamentarians. It simply means that we have to do our work with
diligence and not treat such breaks from Parliament as paid holidays to run
our private affairs.

It is also alleged that since the MPs come to Parliament via parliamentary
lists and get deployed in constituencies where they are not known it limits
their interaction with such communities. [Time expired.] Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Chairperson, comrades and hon members, the PAC welcomes
this debate, as it will hopefully demystify a few things. There are those
out there who think that constituency periods mean holidays, and there are
those around here who, limited by empiricist perspectives, think that
because of our proportional representation system there is no linkage or
accountability to the popular masses.

Our country has been a democracy for the past decade, and there has been a
dramatic shift in the relationship between the people and institutions of
state. Transparency, accountability and participation have been the guiding
principles which have given society a platform and a voice.

The changes that have been effected at this institution of Parliament have
indeed transformed it into a people’s Parliament. It has been transformed
from a frozen, cold and anti-people institution to a warm and accessible
people’s Parliament. Such transformation was necessary and objective and is
by no means complete. The vision of building an effective people’s
Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the people can only be
realised if Parliament debates and resolve issues that arise from the
people, and pass legislation that responds to their needs.

The revolutionary Maoist line has taught us that our line must always arise
from the masses and be informed by their needs. This is only possible if we
interact with them and create platforms and infrastructure for them to air
their views. The views of the people and our observations should by and
large form the content of our work here. From the people, back to the
people - that is the correct Maoist line.

The PAC therefore looks forward to a situation where, with less legislation
to pass, more time could be spent on oversight and constituency work.
Constituency work gives parliamentarians an opportunity to check the impact
and effectiveness of the laws that we pass. It also gives people an
opportunity through popular forums to continuously mandate their
representatives to indeed be their delegated placeholders. Such an approach
enhances the democratic system qualitatively.

We look forward to a situation where motions passed and topics debated here
arise from our experience in doing constituency work. This House must be
able to direct government departments to take particular measures arising
out of our debates, informed by our constituency work experiences and
observations. This would enhance our democratic system beyond mere
bourgeois parliamentarianism.

Constituency work must not be merely about going to the people and
informing them about what is unfolding in Parliament. It is more about how
we take their input forward to inform our work in the legislative chambers.
For those of us who come from the liberation movement tradition, mass work
is a norm. However, there are challenges of capacity that need to be
addressed in terms of resource allocation, especially for those of us whose
geographic constituencies are so vast that they are barely manageable.

Our quest is for a people’s democracy that is a participatory one, and we
believe that constituency work properly done and given its space in our
legislative work can go a long way in enhancing the participatory character
of our democracy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, we were all voted into authority by persons who
have confidence in us representing their wants and needs. These needs and
wants are being met through our dedication and commitment to address the
issues and challenges of South Africa.

It is through our constituency work that we become aware of our challenges
and the issues to be addressed. Furthermore, we are able to approach these
challenges with hands-on techniques, as we allow for a platform where MPs
and the community can interact. This not only gives the community the
assurance of our commitment to serving them, but also reassures us that we
are on the right track.

This interaction further facilitates a confidence in the citizenry that we
are a government for the people, by the people, and allows for inputs on
strategies and concerns to be incorporated in national proceedings,
policies and legislation.

I couldn’t agree more with the hon Patricia De Lille when she said we must
spend 50% of our time in our constituencies. To implement and discharge our
constituency work to the fullest, more time is required.

The MF feels that Parliament should have a relook at its programme in
respect of portfolio committee meetings and sitting days in Parliament and,
if possible, allow members of Parliament to spend more time in their
constituencies. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Deputy Chairperson, for the past ten years our country
has been in the process of creating a political, social and economic
framework around which development and participation, especially by the
poor, can take place. Azapo understands that the reason for this is to
enable the poor and the vulnerable in our society to participate in
changing their environment and their status in society for the better. At
the same time, it is to enable society as a whole to deal with poverty.

Furthermore, Azapo believes that central to the enhancement of a meaningful
and better life for the poor is the eradication of poverty at all corners
of our country. In Azapo’s terms constituency work and activities should be
linked to the developmental strategy that should lead to equitable growth
in the personal and collective capacities of the poor, and not merely as a
means to access government services. We are saying this because we have
noticed a tendency to regard constituency work and activities as a means to
gain votes and support. For as long as this remains the focus of our
constituency work, the talk about integrated development and the
improvement of the lives of the poor is meaningless.

This requires public representatives to change their mindset and begin to
see constituency work as a collective effort by representatives of all
parties to enhance the lives of the poor in our society. To this end, Azapo
urges Parliament to increase resources and time to enable public
representatives to perform their functions maximally.

The role of Parliament and parties is also very crucial in that they act as
facilitators to make resources available in such a way that the resources
are directed at changing the material circumstances of the poor.

Constituency work therefore should put the poor at centre stage, with the
priority being the ongoing struggle to improve their circumstances. The
success of constituency work can only be judged by the way in which it is
capable of transforming the material conditions of the poor and the
vulnerable of our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Chairperson, while representative democracy implies the
election of representatives to legislatures where they represent the
interests of the constituencies, participatory democracy extends this to
include the participation of civil society in government. This may be done
directly through public hearings or through the voices of elected members
of legislatures. In the latter case, it implies that members of Parliament
must consult with and represent individuals and organisations within their
areas of responsibility in the constituencies allocated to them by their
respective parties. In this way, citizens obtain a voice in Parliament.

The responsibilities of MPs are divided between their work in Parliament as
legislators and their work in constituencies. Within the constituencies
they have a very important oversight function and form the link between
government and the people.

Members of Parliament can be expected to deal with many issues, from
assisting members of the public with their applications and enquiries
regarding pensions, passports and child grants to visiting police stations,
hospitals and schools as part of their oversight function.

It is bad for multiparty democracy when public representatives are refused
access to state institutions, as is often the case in South Africa.
Opposition MPs are often refused access to institutions such as schools and
hospitals. Some civil servants have even been instructed not to corporate
with MPs or the public. This makes oversight and accountability impossible
and defeats the purpose of both participatory and representative democracy.
If public representatives are denied access to information in this manner,
then one can understand the frustration of ordinary citizens.

Participatory democracy should not be a concept, but a way of life. It
should be a way of decentralising democracy. But, as such, it is in direct
conflict with the ANC’s policy of democratic centralism. Democracy is meant
to supply legitimate mechanisms through the system of public representation
to deal with problems at grass-roots level. It is when this mechanism is
ignored that mayors, MECs, Ministers and the President require bodyguards.

Until the ANC shifts its policy from elite participation to mass
participation, the August Revolution that began in Intabazwe in Harrismith
and spread to other towns will escalate. These events could have been
prevented if MECs and Ministers took the trouble of reading and reacting to
letters from both public representatives and the public.

The ANC government will not be able to muzzle the people by muzzling their
democratically elected representatives. We will not allow the Parliament of
all the people to become the parliament of a power hungry President. I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, hon members, next
week Parliament will rise until January next year. A long period has been
set aside for constituency work. In this debate the Chief Whip and the hon
member Madumise have outlined the philosophical approach of the ANC to
constituency work and the role of public representatives. They have spoken
at length about the notion that the people will govern, of participatory
democracy and of people-centred and people-driven development. I am not
going to elaborate further on those themes.

It is heartening that most members of this House who have spoken have
demonstrated that there is a clear consensus amongst all members of the
need and the importance of constituency work. In discussing the vision and
mission of Parliament, all parties showed that they are in agreement on
certain basic values. All parties are agreed that we must have a people’s
Parliament to transform an entire society, establishing a society based on
democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights; a
Parliament of freely elected representatives, building on a foundation of a
democratic and open society.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, won’t you please take
your seat?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, we would like to know if the hon member would take a
question.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, at the end of my
speech, if there is time. [Interjections.]

At Parliament are freely elected representatives building on the foundation
of a democratic and open society based on the will of the people and their
participation and access to Parliament. This is a people’s Parliament -
educating, informing and involving the people of South Africa in its
processes and acting as a voice of the people; a people’s Parliament co-
operating with other spheres of government as it deepens and entrenches our
democratic values; a people’s Parliament, working with continental and
international bodies to create a new democratic and participatory world
order. . .  [Interjections.] . . . a people’s Parliament passing good laws
and scrutinising and overseeing executive action as it moves to improve the
quality of life of the people of South Africa, building a united,
democratic South Africa; a people’s Parliament creating a better life for
all.

That is what we discussed in our deliberations about the vision and mission
of Parliament, and I think there is broad consensus on these broad
underlying ideals. There might be differences around the wording, and those
we are busy discussing. But if we take that as the point of departure for
our Parliament, then clearly it is showing that a lot more emphasis needs
to be placed on the oversight and accountability role of Parliament.

Within that we need to see constituency work as a key component, and that
must then be reflected in a number of ways in which Parliament functions,
or tries to live out this vision and mission. It must be reflected, first
and foremost in the allocation of resources. At the moment, each member
gets approximately R7 500 a month to run a constituency office.
[Interjections.] Clearly that cannot be sufficient if we are serious about
real constituency work.

Members must be provided with the resources to open and establish proper
offices, in the case of some vast rural constituencies perhaps more than
one office. Those offices need to be staffed appropriately, both
administratively and politically, in order to allow members to reach out
actively to the constituencies that they serve, to capture the issues that
those constituencies have raised and to follow-up and make sure that those
issues are attended to. Resources are needed to ensure that those offices
have the necessary technological tools, be it Internet, be it access to
something like DStv.

The problem at the moment is that much of the coverage in the media of
Parliament’s work is around this plenary, and about the one and a half
hours a day that are broadcast on the public broadcaster. For the rest,
people can’t see directly what goes on in committees, and they can’t see
the full debates in this House. Can we not equip our offices to provide
people with the technological means to enable constituencies to see
Parliament in action? [Interjections.]

We need to look at the integration of Parliament’s work. Our questions, our
committees, our debates must draw from the constituency work that we as
members do. The programme of Parliament -  and I think a number of speakers
have referred to this - must be structured in such a way that it allows
members sufficient time to do constituency work, but also for the
integration of our constituency work with other aspects of our
parliamentary work. [Interjections.]

We need to look at not only the resources that go directly to members to
run constituency offices, but we also need to look at other aspects of the
resources given to members of Parliament. The travel facilities provided to
members are woefully inadequate, especially in the case of those members
who are deployed to vast rural areas. [Applause.] I think that is also
something that needs to be looked at.

We also need to pay more attention to how we make that aspect of the vision
and mission statement at Parliament that talks about co-operative
governance a reality. I think the experience of many members of this House
is that the most pressing constituency issues that we come across are local
government related issues, and we need to find ways in which we can make it
possible for MPs, MPLs and councillors to work together much more closely
in an integrated fashion.

In the course of this debate, which has generally been a very good and a
very positive debate, there must always unfortunately be a little
discordant note. The first one is, in his input the hon Lee talked about
lack of delivery on the part of the ANC, on the part of government.
[Interjections.] Now, when we debate, we must be serious with each other
here. The fact of the matter is that the electorate has given the DA a
number of chances in a number of areas in the country. What have they done
with those chances? They have squandered them all, without fail.
[Interjections.]

If you look at where the DA has been in power, you are looking at an area
where there is a lack of transformation, a lack of delivery. That is why
they have been voted out. [Applause.] They have been voted out in every
area where the electorate has given them a chance. [Interjections.] Now
really, we must be serious when we come and debate with each other here.
[Interjections.]

Secondly, another issue has been raised. I think it is an important issue
that we need to take seriously and debate seriously, but we must also not
bring the debate here in a twisted way, and that is the debate around our
electoral system.

We can’t make a direct or simplistic correlation that says: a constituency-
based electoral system equals good constituency work; a proportional
representation system equals bad constituency work. [Interjections.] That
is simplistic and unrealistic. I think when we engage in that important
debate we need to do so with a lot more sophistication and seriousness.
[Interjections.]

Lastly, the point that the hon Jankielsohn raised . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I regret, hon member, your time has
expired.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I regret it as well,
because I would have wanted to tell Mr Jankielsohn a thing or two.
[Applause.] But lastly, I want to wish all members a very productive
constituency period. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, we move that the
amendments be adopted.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, the DA would like to
address the House in respect of this matter.

Declarations of vote:
Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, the DA would like to make a declaration. Last
time I spoke on this subject I made the point that there should have been a
debate on this Amendment Bill. I made the same point at the portfolio
committee meeting on Tuesday. I cannot understand why the ANC does not wish
to have a debate. I cannot understand what the ANC is afraid of in respect
of a debate. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, on a point of order: To
the best of my knowledge it was agreed in the Programme Committee that this
matter would be coming to the House on the basis of no debate taking place.
[Interjections.] So, I am quite surprised as to where this declaration now
comes from.

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, I do not understand what the ANC is afraid of in
respect of a debate. [Interjections.] Even those of us who are pro-choice
are not afraid of a debate, and I am not sure if the ANC is . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, on point of order: This
whole thing is unstructured now. For how long is this member going to
speak?

Mr R COETZEE: Three minutes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, are any other parties allowed
to speak on the matter? Let’s have a structured approach to this, so that
we understand.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Certainly, hon member, can I tell you
what I see as the way we should proceed? There is an opportunity for a
declaration. The normal procedure is that there are three minutes for a
declaration. If there are any other parties who wish to make a declaration
I will allow them to do so. Thank you. Please proceed.

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, so, I have said before that there should have
been a debate, and I am saying again that there should be a debate.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, honestly, on a
point of order: We can’t have that. We can’t come together in meetings as
all parties and decide that we are not going to debate an issue, and then a
party stands up here and accuses us of trying to suppress debate.
[Interjections.] If they wanted a debate, they should have said so in the
Programme Committee and we could have considered it. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I understand that there
was a request for a debate, but that it was agreed not to have it. However,
my understanding is that a declaration is not a debate, and therefore I
will proceed on the basis of the advice from the Table, which is that I can
take declarations if they occur. Thank you. Please proceed.

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, in fact, at the portfolio committee meeting on
Tuesday I argued very strongly for a debate. The matter went through a vote
and the ANC voted against a debate and the DA voted in favour of a debate.
In fact, that whole debate happened at the portfolio committee meeting on
Tuesday. [Interjections.]

The DA has a clear position on this kind of matter. We believe on matters
of conscience our members need to exercise their individual right to vote
in a way that their conscience dictates, and that, therefore, is the way in
which the DA will vote on this matter. I must repeat, however, that we are
very concerned, even those of us who are pro-choice, that aspects of this
legislation are impossible to implement, and that it is particularly
dangerous to allow nurses to perform abortions in a context where there is
an enormous shortage of nurses.

According to the Minister of Health, over 20 000 posts for nurses are
vacant. The quality of training is also not always appropriate; in fact,
almost all the people in the DA caucus are particularly concerned that that
aspect of this legislation is not implementable and will potentially cause
harm to pregnant women.

The DA will call for a division on the subject so that our members may
exercise their right to vote in a way that their conscience dictates. Thank
you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Are there any other parties that wish
to make a declaration?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP does not object to the content of the
amendment proposed by the NCOP, but we object to the fact that this
cosmetic amendment does not effectively address the concerns raised by the
health professionals and the public during national hearings.

During the deliberations on the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
Amendment Bill last month, the ACDP proposed amendments that would minimise
the negative impact of the Bill, including a clause that would protect
health professionals who chose not to participate in abortion on grounds of
religion, conscience and belief from undue pressure and discriminatory
practices. The proposals were rejected and the Bill was passed. Provinces
then followed suit, refusing to hear the public on the matter.

Mr A MLANGENI: Madam Chair, on a point of order: The member is very fond of
addressing us in this Parliament on the question of abortion. I do not know
where she gets that. [Interjections.] What we are discussing here is the
termination of pregnancy, not abortion. Every time she speaks up she talks
of abortion. Can she please correct herself? [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, provinces then followed suit, refusing to hear the
public on the matter, and returned the Bill with minor amendments, as
referred to by the department as technical.

The Deputy Health Minister claims that a vote for the ANC is a vote for
abortion, and MPs vigorously applaud. Yet, contrary to the ANC’s claims
South African women . . .

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, the point of order by
uBaba Mlangeni is correct, because the input of this member is irrelevant
to the subject under consideration. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, it is a question of
vocabulary, a choice of words. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chair, fortunately I am in the House. On a
point of order: Is this member allowed to mislead the public, because she
has totally misquoted me. Can I say what I said? I said: A large majority
of women who have voted for the ANC . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, may I say that I do not
think that is a point of order. I think there must be another opportunity
where you can make this point. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: But am I not allowed . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, a point of order is not
an opportunity to make a speech.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Yes, but she is misquoting me.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, correct me if I am
wrong, but I believe that the Rules do make provision for a member to give
a personal explanation, and I think that should cover what the Deputy
Minister . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I agree with that
interpretation. However, I intend giving back to the hon Minister when the
ANC wants to make a declaration. Thank you. May we proceed with the debate
please?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam, no, no, no. You cannot suggest
that the Minister must take the ANC’s time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I beg you pardon, hon member. I can
mostly decidedly make such a decision.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, you will give her her
own time, not ANC time, please. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I will decide that at the end of this
discussion. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Chair, on a point of order: I just want to call
your attention to the protection of our speaker. It appears that many
frivolous points of order, which are not actually points of order, are
raised. [Interjections.] We ask you to please reward our member in terms of
time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I will decide on the
time. That is not a point of order. Thank you.

Mr P A C HENDRICKSE: Madam Chair, on a point of order: This debate is with
regard to the question of choice, not with regard to the question of
termination or abortion. It is about choice, and the member is misleading
the House when she says that the ANC is for abortion. Being for choice is
not being for abortion. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, hon member, I have heard
that. I am not going to prescribe to her what vocabulary she should use.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, it is clear that the ANC does not want the public to
believe that choice on termination of pregnancy is abortion, but when you
see a dead baby, you see a dead baby. [Interjections.] When you see pieces
of a baby, you see pieces of a baby.

The Democratic Nurses Organisation of South Africa, Denosa, has criticised
the Bill, and is concerned that if government continues to force nurses who
have a conscientious objection to participate in abortions, they will
refuse to comply and face the consequences or vote by leaving the public
sector. The present equality court case is an example of that.

The rights of health workers are being further compromised daily, as women
who have been induced to abort come into facilities bleeding, and nurses
who choose not to participate have no option but to do so. There is also a
shortage. As was said earlier, 31% of nursing posts cannot be filled, and
this has increased the workload on nurses drastically.

In terms of the Bill more health facilities have been designated to do
abortions, yet no additional nurses or doctors have been provided to do the
job. This will fall to the backs of those nurses who are already
overburdened.

The ACDP could not vote for this problematic Amendment Bill before, and as
nothing has changed we cannot vote for it now. We stand by our opinion that
it should have been scrapped, and again call for a review of the principal
Act. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, I do not want to disturb
any speaker, but on a matter of procedure: By her own admission, when the
committee sat the matter of a debate was raised. It is an important
precedent that you are creating. I am addressing you on that. The committee
that the Speaker has delegated powers to has looked at this matter and has
taken a decision. It might have been a split decision, but it was a
decision of that committee.
The decision of that committee was conveyed to a legitimate structure of
this House, the Programming Committee, and it has been agreed that there
would be no debate on the matter. However, you are allowing a debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I have noted your point.
I am not aware that we cannot have declarations despite the fact that
people have agreed not to have a debate. Therefore, I would like to know:
Are there any other parties that wish to make a declaration? Does the ANC
want to make a declaration? [Applause.]

Hon member, please, before you start, may I just explain? [Interjections.]
No, Ma’am I am not. Regarding the question of being misquoted: An
explanation during the debate is allowed only when a material part of a
member’s speech has been misquoted or misunderstood, but such member shall
not be permitted to introduce any new matter and no debate shall be allowed
upon such an explanation.

However, I do want to give you the opportunity. The ANC can choose whom
they wish to make a declaration. Hon Minister, if you wish to do so, you
have the opportunity now, otherwise the member at the Chair can proceed.
Thank you. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, on a point of
order: I think there are issues at stake here that are very different. The
Rules allow for parties to make declarations on a matter that is being
decided by the House, and we have identified someone who will do that.

Secondly, under a totally different rule there is provision for a member to
make an explanation, and I think those two things should not be conflated.
Our members should make the declaration on what the party’s position will
be on the issue before the House. The member who is being misquoted should,
separately from that, have the opportunity to clarify that matter.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): I think that the explanation I have
given covers that. It should be a material part of a members’ speech, which
it has not in being in this case. Therefore, can we please proceed with the
declaration by the ANC? Thank you.

Mr L V J NGCULU: Thank you, very much. Hon Deputy Minister of Health, and
hon members, in the debate we just had on the 16 Days of Activism, somebody
indicated that the DA and its statement on the matter was a disgrace not
only to the party, but also to the ideals
which they stand for. Indeed, what we are discussing today further confirms
the embarrassment that the DA continues to be to the women members of the
DA and to the women members of the ACDP.

The critical matter under discussion is the question regarding the choice
of termination, and the amendments thereof. The matter that we are actually
discussing in this area was a small amendment. It was only a sentence which
said, we should only add, “not contemplated in terms of section 3(1)b”.
That was all it was saying. Nothing else was actually in the amendments.
What we are saying by stealth and crook is that the people are presenting
some of the old debates around the very same concept of the issue that we
are discussing.

And what is important for us . . . [Interjections.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon member, could you please take
your seat. I hope it is a point of order.

Mr L M GREEN: Is it parliamentary for the member to say that some of the
members – and thus referring to the speakers who spoke before -  introduced
the debate by means of stealth and crookedness? Will you allow that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): I will allow it in the context in
which it was said. Thank you.

Mr L V J NGCULU: Because the context, hon Green, is very clear. The
amendment says, not contemplated in terms of a section. That is all it
says. And you and your party would like to bring in that very concept of
the debate. For the record, the South African Survey 2003-2004 says that
285 316 women, since the ANC came to power, have taken the lead on the
question of the termination of pregnancy: more than a quarter of a million
people - more than, perhaps, the people who voted for you. Those are the
women who have taken this initiative.

Who are you today, to come and tell those 285 316 women that they are not
allowed to do these things? They have done it legally. And that legality
was provided for because we, in the ANC, are ever loyal to the plight of
the women, in particular to the poor women. We have stated some years ago
when this debate came into being that the termination of pregnancy, not
just the choice, was allowed for white women. There was no noise from the
opposition benches.

We, as the ANC, are saying that the women of South Africa, black and white,
must be given a choice to determine what is best for their own health, for
their own future, and for their own children. That is all we are saying.
And when they decide on that choice, all the ANC is saying is that the
conditions under which this has to be undertaken, must fit within the
standards of health, the legal limits of our country, and they must be safe
for the women of South Africa. That is why we shall not shirk this
responsibility. We have a responsibility to the women of our country. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Order! Hon members, could we
have some order, please. Could we continue? Thank you very much. Are there
any objections to this Bill?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, the DA objects to it
on a formal basis to enable us to move to a division, so that members can
vote either for or against or abstain. So, for that purpose, we object.

Mr L M GREEN: Could you also note the ACDP’s objection.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Thank you. Does the DA want their
objection recorded?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: When you put the question, I am going to
call for a division.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, can you note that
exactly when you provoke the ANC like this, you get slaughtered like a
chicken. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon members, may we please continue,
please. Hon members, we cannot continue the debate like this. This is not a
screaming match; it is a debate. Please, can we continue? I now put the
question. Those in favour will say Aye, and those against No. Thank you. I
have recorded one objection. We will look at it, and there is a request for
a division. A division having being called, the bells will be rung for five
minutes.

Question put: That the Bill be passed.

Division demanded.

The House divided.

    AYES-174: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Baloyi, M R; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P;
    Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Botha, N G W; Carrim, Y I; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-
    Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H;
    Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Fihla, N B; Fubbs, J L; Gabela,
    L S; Gcwabaza, N E; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede,
    D M; Gumede, M M; Hendrickse, P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
    Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J;
    Kekana, C D; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
    Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K;
    Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
    Luthuli, A N; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madlala-
    Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N;
    Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F;
    Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela,
    M J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Martins, B A D;
    Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J;
    Mashile, B L; Masithela, N H; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N
    F; Matlala, M H; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D;
    Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N;
    Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mokoena, A
    D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Montsitsi, S D; Morobi, D M; Morwamoche, K
    W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A;
    Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S; Nel,
    A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo,
    E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P;
    Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
    Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D;
    Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Phadagi,
    M G; Phala, M J; Radebe, B A; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele,
    T D H; Rwexana, S P; Schneemann, G D; Sefularo, M; September, C C;
    Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
    Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
    M; Stephens, M; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J;
    Tshwete, P; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vundisa, S S;
    Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


    NOES-21: Bhengu, M J; Chang, E S; Dudley, C; Durr, K D S; Green, L M;
    Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Kohler-Barnard, D; Lee, T D; Likotsi, M
    T; Mdlalose, M M; Ngema, M V; Ngiba, B C; Opperman, S E; Sibuyana, M W;
    Smuts, M; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M; Selfe, J; Semple, J A;
    Seremane, W J; Vezi, T E; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D;
    Waters, M; Zikalala, C N Z.


    ABSTAIN-12: Blanché, J P I; Dhlamini, B W; Gibson, D H M;  Godi,  N  T;
    Henderson, R K; Lowe, C M; Morgan, G R;  Mpontshane,  A  M;  Selfe,  J;
    Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Vezi, T E.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, hon members. Hon member.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: It is. . .
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, may I tell you that I
have been informed that during this period the House is not in session, and
we do not have to take points of orders, and I think we have had quite
enough of them today, so can we please . . . [Interjections.] This only
holds true for the following five minutes. Thank you. Now you may proceed,
five minutes have passed.

Mr L M GREEN: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Firstly, is it in order for
members of Parliament to toyi-toyi in Parliament; and secondly, will you
allow us, when we are happy, to sing hymns and choruses in Parliament?
[Laughter.] Because, this is actually what is happening.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA) : Hon member, I do not think that is a
point of order, but certainly in the five minutes while we were waiting for
members to join us I have no objection to them toyi-toying. If you wish to
sing hymns in that time that would be fine too. [Laughter.] Are you rising
on a point of order?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes, Madam. You see, precisely that
thing . . .

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Please, don’t point your finger.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: He is trying to say to the nation and
the House that toyi-toyi is some or other thing. I find that insulting, and
I request that member to withdraw.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, there are one or
two of our members in that corner whose votes have not been recorded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Thank you, we will see to it that it
is recorded.

Bill accordingly passed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Before we adjourn, I wish to ask
members to please note that proceedings of the House will start at 09:00
tomorrow morning, and not at 10:00. That concludes the business for the
day, and the House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 18:01.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:


1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004] -
         Act No 21 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 8
         November 2004).

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 11 November 2004:


         (i)     Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D -
              2003] (National Assembly - sec 76)

3.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp [W 21 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Adjustments
         Appropriation Bill [B 21 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77).


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Amendment to the exemptions made in Government Notice No R1596
         published in Government Gazette No 24176 dated 20 December 2003,
         under section 74 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001
         (Act No 38 of 2001).

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the second reporting exemption in
         terms of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
         2001).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1156 published in Government Gazette No
         26866 dated 14 October 2004: Setting out particulars of areas
         demarcated by municipalities of Johannesburg and Cape Town, which
         shall constitute urban development zones, in terms of the Income
         Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Defence


     (a)    Southern African Development Community (SADC) Mutual Defence
         Pact ("the Pact"), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC) Mutual Defence Pact ("the Pact").

     (c)    United Nations Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
         of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflicts,
         tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act
         No 108 of 1996).

     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum to the United Nations Optional Protocol
         to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of
         Children in Armed Conflicts.

3.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Government Notice No R880 published in Government Gazette No 26601
     dated 23 July 2004: Magistrates' Courts: Amendment of the Rules of the
     Court, in terms of the Rules Board for Courts of Law, 1985 (Act No 107
     of 1985).

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker

     Report of the Delegation to the 111th Interparliamentary Union (IPU)
     Conference in Geneva.



CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert 1111IPU.DOC



2.    The Speaker

     Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 2(4) of the Judges'
     Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act No 47 of
     2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
     Constitutional Court Judges and Judges annually, with effect from 1
     April 2004, for approval by Parliament.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert two scanned pages (only available from PDF)

3.    The Speaker

     Draft notice and schedule in terms of section 12(3) of the Magistrates
     Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at which salaries
     are payable to magistrates annually, with effect from 1 April 2004, for
     approval by Parliament.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - Insert four scanned pages (only available from PDF)




COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members' Interests on
     Allegations of non-disclosure by Members of Parliament, dated 8
     November 2004:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - 1111ethi.DOC

National Assembly:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC1111

