---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-09-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:05.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers and meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the Council –

   (i)      notes with alarm that a very disturbing and serious situation
          has developed whereby members of the judiciary are being targeted
          for attacks and intimidation by criminals;


   (ii)     further notes that if this situation is not addressed and given
          the serious attention that it deserves, it could escalate and
          result in our judges and magistrates increasingly being targeted
          by these criminals,


   (iii)    acknowledges that there is a need to provide members of the
          judiciary with the protection and security that they need in
          order to perform their duties without fear or intimidation; and


   (iv)     urges the relevant governmental departments and stakeholders to
          work together to find a solution to this problem.


Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, I am not sure whether you will rule me out of
order, but I just wanted to check from a procedural point of view whether
it is acceptable for an hon member to mislead the House, based on the
motion that has just been read.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Setona, we will look into the matter and
respond accordingly.

Mr T S SETONA: Chairperson, the Department of Justice has gone public that
all the allegations and sensational reporting in the media on the alleged
threat to judicial officers is misplaced. The member still comes here and
delivers a notice of motion creating the effect that he is speaking on
behalf of the department and says that they are under siege. That is why I
am rising on a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Could we refrain from debating the matter, hon
members. Can we respond to the matter, as I have indicated earlier on.

                     THE VISION AND LEGACY OF STEVE BIKO

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -


   (1)      notes that 27 years ago, yesterday, one of South Africa's
        greatest political icons, Steve Biko was brutally removed from
        society by the old regime's security police;


   (2)      further notes that -


        (a)      Steve Biko, the father of the Black Consciousness
              Movement, was a source of infinite inspiration to the
              downtrodden masses of South Africa; and


        (b)      by preaching that black was beautiful, Steve Biko exhorted
              the oppressed to be proud of their colour and to walk with
              their heads held high and not to make any apologies to anyone
              for their blackness;


   (3)      acknowledges that this philosophy of pride in oneself injected
        a new sense of urgency among the victims of apartheid and struggle
        activists to determine the pace of the struggle for freedom from
        persecution, not according to the terms of the oppressor, but
        according to their own terms; and


     4) bows its head in tribute to the vision and legacy of the great
        Steve Bantu Biko.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  SWIMMING POOL AT NTUZUMA AND MUNICIPAL BUILDING IN MKHUZE, KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Sihlalo, ngiphakamisa lesi siphakamiso ngaphandle
kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi uMkhandlu -


   (1)      uyawuncoma umsebenzi owenziwe nguMasipala waseThekwini, wokwakha
         idamu lokubhukuda elihle kangaka eNtuzuma, KwaZulu-Natali;


   (2)      uyakuphawula ukuthi lelidamu lokubhukuda lizosetshenziselwa
         ukufundisa umphakathi ukubhukuda, ikakhulukazi intsha, okuyinto
         ezonciphisa izingozi zokuminza ngenxa yokungakwazi ukubhukuda;


   (3)      futhi umangaliswa ubuhle besakhiwo esisha sikaMasipala
         waseMkhanyakude eMkhuze, KwaZulu-Natali;


   (4)      uyakuqonda ukuthi lo Masipala waseMkhanyakude waqala phansi kwa
         "a", akukho sakhiwo asithola sikhona;


   (5)      ngakho-ke, uyawuncoma umsebenzi owenziwe yilaba bomasipala
         ababili, uthi kubo: Phambili ngomsebenzi omuhle.
(Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chair, I move without notice:


   That the Council -


   (1)      commends the work that has been done by eThekwini Municipality,
         that of building such a beautiful swimming pool at Ntuzuma,
         KwaZulu-Natal;
   (2)      notes that this swimming pool will be used to train the
         community, particularly the youth, to swim, thus minimising the
         dangers of drowning due to an inability to swim;


   (3)      further expresses its admiration of the new building of the
         Mkhanyakude Municipality in Mkhuze, KwaZulu-Natal;


   (4)      is aware that the Mkhanyakude Municipality started from scratch
         without any building whatsoever; and


   (5)      therefore commends the work that has been done by these two
         municipalities and requests them to continue with the good work.]

 Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                          THE DEATH OF BEYERS NAUDÉ


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr V V Z WINDVOëL: Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council –


  (1) notes with profound sadness the death of ``Oom Bey’’, Dr Beyers Naudé,
        who passed away in the early morning hours of 7 September this
        year;


  (2) further notes that it was in his engagement in the struggle for social
        justice that one begins to see the deep-furrowed glance of a
        committed preacher who became the leader of the people;


  (3) notes and acknowledges the humiliation, vilification and persecution
        ``Oom Bey’’ had to suffer as a result of his consistent battles for
        the recognition of the common dignity and humanity of all South
        Africans;


  (4) further notes that Dr Naudé leaves behind a legacy of dedicated
        service to our rainbow nation that will inspire future generations
        to continue working for the deepening of our democracy, based on
        his conceptual and practical framework for rethinking leadership
        strategies for this new season of struggle and possibilities; and


  (5) conveys our sincerest condolences to the entire family, friends and
        the entire church community.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          RACISM AT HOLIDAY RESORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D J BOTHA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council -


  (1) notes with disgust that a little child of colour was asked to
        prematurely leave the premises of a private holiday resort,
        Lekkerrus, in Mookgopong (formerly Naboomspruit) in Limpopo over
        the weekend;


  (2) further notes that the child was under the custody of the Cockran
        family who were registered members of this private resort;


  (3) is outraged that such practices still occur after 10 years of
        democracy; and


  (4) observes that the conduct of the Lekkerrus resort violates section
        9(4) of the Constitution which states that no person may unfairly
        discriminate directly or indirectly against anyone on one or more
        grounds, including race, gender, pregnancy, age, disability,
        religion, culture, language and birth.
 Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                   EVICTION OF FARM WORKERS IN NORTH WEST


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council –


  (1) notes with concern our discovery as a provincial delegation during the
        provincial week that –


        (a)      at Rustenburg, the platinum town, eight farmworker
              families had been evicted by the farm owner for unknown
              reasons, which were however rejected by the court;


        (b)      that the said families are presently accommodated in three
              tents within the road enclosure; and


        (c)      that although the court had ruled for their reinstatement
              to their work on the farm, it is practically impossible to
              return, as the farm owner had demolished their mud houses and
              had disposed of their roofing material; and

  (2) condemns this incident in the strongest possible terms and calls on
        the local municipality and the Minister of Labour to assist them in
        their unbearable predicament.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                         SUCCESSFUL PROVINCIAL WEEK


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M N OLIPHANT: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council-

  (1) notes that the National Council of Provinces has had a very successful
        provincial week from 6 to 10 September;


  (2) acknowledges the immense contribution which our provincial week has
        made in strengthening co-operative governance and intergovernmental
        relations across the various spheres of government; and


  (3) expresses its appreciation to all those who have made this week a
        resounding success.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        DEATH OF RAY ALEXANDER SIMONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M P THEMBA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council-

  (1) notes with a profound sense of loss the passing away of Ray Alexander
        Simons, a stalwart of the African National Congress, the South
        African Communist Party and the trade union movement;


  (2) further notes that Comrade Ray was involved in the liberation struggle
        from an early age, and remained committed throughout her life to the
        liberation of the South African people from all forms of oppression;

  (3) joins all South Africans in paying tribute to this remarkable,
        dedicated and selfless champion of the working class and outstanding
        fighter for the rights of women; and

  (4) extends its heartfelt condolences to her family, friends, comrades and
        colleagues.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                        FREEDOM OF PRESS CONTRAVENED


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council-


  (1) regrets the action taken by an official of the Council to attempt to
        prevent a newspaper printing allegations about certain members;
        believes that such unauthorised action brings the Council into
        disrepute by-


        (a) giving the appearance of a cover-up action;


        (b) contravening the spirit of freedom of the press;
             And


        (c) having a neutral official engaging in political action; and
              therefore resolves to-


              (a)      censure the official who took this action;


              (b)      ensure that he pays the full legal costs that
                    arose from this action; and reinforce the division
                    between the interests of the institution of Parliament
                    and the political parties represented in that
                    institution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is there any objection? Yes, the motion has
been objected to. In the light of the objection the motion may not be
proceeded with.


                    ANTICORRUPTION MEASURES TAKEN BY ANC


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council-

  (1) acknowledges that the ANC has consistently advocated a principled
        stand against corruption within the public service;


  (2) commends the numerous anticorruption measures pioneered by the ANC-led
        government, including strict internal monitoring systems in our
        various provincial departments to practically deal with the
        challenges posed by corrupt Public Service officials;


  (3) notes that the benefit of these tough measures was again recently
        demonstrated with the arrest of a senior official in the Limpopo
        health department on charges relating to the fraudulent use of
        social grants;


  (4) commends the provincial health department for their swift action; and


  (5) calls on communities to be vigilant and to utilise the mechanisms
        created by government to expose officals who seek to enrich
        themselves at the expense of the poor.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                          COMPANIES AMENDMENT BILL


                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr G MKONO: Thank you, Chairperson, it is with a sense of occasion that I
speak as a member of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs
on the amendments to a very special and crucial piece of legislation. The
original Companies Act was passed in 1973. The Companies Amendment Bill
currently before this House has the following objectives: to prevent a
sequestrated person to serve as directors of companies and to protect a
bona fide holder of demutualised share certificates against a rectification
order by a court of law. The Bill deals with the circumstances under which
persons are disqualified from serving as directors of companies. The
amendment seeks to expand those circumstances and to authorise the
Registrar of Companies to keep a register of persons disqualified as
directors. The Bill seeks to make the disqualified persons and any director
or officer of the company who knew, or who could reasonably be expected to
know of the disqualification, jointly reliable for the debts of the
department incurred during the disqualified person’s tenure as director.
The amendments also seek to broaden the offence, where a disqualified
person is appointed, or acts as a director of a company. In terms of the
Bill, a director or officer of the company who knew or who could reasonably
be expected to know of the disqualification will also be guilty of an
offence. In addition, the Bill also deals with the securities that are
transferable without a written instrument and not evidenced by a
certificate. The Bill does not allow the courts to remove the name of a
person from the relevant register, unless the name was fraudulently and
illegally entered. The Bill before this House addresses key concerns
relating to corporate governance. The Bill promotes investor confidence in
the domestic economy. Since broader reforms of corporate laws will take
some time to develop, the provision of the Companies Amendment Bill
requires immediate attention and review by members of this House. The
select committee therefore endorses the amended Companies Act and calls on
all NCOP members to support this section 75 Bill. This amending Bill is
referred back to the National Assembly for approval and adoption of the
NCOP’s amendments. With these few remarks, I thank you, Chairperson.
Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question: That the Bill, subject to the proposed amendments, be agreed to.
In accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow political parties to make
their declaration of vote, if they so wish. There are none. We shall now
proceed to voting on the question.

Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in accordance with section
75 of the Constitution.




         DECISIONS OF 1999 BEIJING CONGRESS – UNIVERSAL POSTAL UNION


                (Consideration of Report of Select Committee)

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Thank you, Chairperson. In terms of section 231(2) of the
Constitution, Parliament is required to ratify the final Acts and decisions
of the Universal Postal Union plenipotentiary conferences, including the
final Acts of the last congress of 1999. The Universal Postal Union is an
intergovernmental organisation and a specialised agency of the United
Nations. It was founded in 1874 to encourage collaboration and development
within the international postal sector. South Africa was admitted in 1994
and has been active ever since. The council is a permanent body of the
Universal Postal Union and assists in the modernisation of postal services.
It also deals with legal, regulatory and legislative issues, as well as
operational, economic and commercial aspects of international postal
services.

The council meets every five years, though there is a proposal to meet
every four years. Between congresses, the council must ensure continuity.
In terms of article 30, paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Universal
Postal Union, which was concluded in Vienna on 10 July 1964, the
plenipotentiaries of its member states held a congress in Beijing in 1999.
Here the following amendments were adopted, subject to ratification:
Article 22 - to ensure that the general regulations are binding on all
member states; Article 25 – to make provision for the people responsible
for the signature authentication, ratification and approval of Acts adopted
by the Union; Article 27 – to give member countries the right to accede to
any additional protocols and other Acts of the Union at any time; Article
29 – to give member countries the right to present proposals concerning the
Acts of the Universal Postal Union, either to congress or between
congresses.

The general regulations of the UPU have also been drawn up in order to
ensure the application of the constitution and the proper functioning of
the UPU. These regulations stipulate that only countries that are members
of the UPU have the right to vote.

In order for South Africa to have voting rights and to participate fully in
the UPU activities of the next congress in Beijing, it must have ratified
the decisions of the 1999 congress in Beijing. The Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development has scrutinised the final acts and decisions
of the 1999 Beijing congress and have found no conflict with the domestic
law. The Department of Foreign Affairs has scrutinised it too and advised
South Africa to sign both the constitution and the conventions of the UPU.
The decisions of 1999 regulate matters, which were previously not provided
for in the constitution and convention of the UPU. It serves to facilitate
the organisation and the improvement of postal services in an acceptable
manner for the benefit of all member states.

As the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises we ask the House
to adopt and ratify the final Acts and Decisions of the 1999 Universal
Postal Union Beijing Congress. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question: That the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. Are all delegation heads present? In accordance with Rule 71 I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make their declaration of vote, if
they so wish. None. We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall
do so in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please
indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against, or abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE : Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Steun. [Support.]

The CHAIPERSON OF THE NCOP: All provinces have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:00.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         THURSDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
     (FFC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 159-2004].

2.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Sector Education
     and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 42-2004].

3.    The Minister of Defence

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Department of Defence for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements of Vote 22 - Defence for 2003-2004 [RP 137-2004].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 103-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
         and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 82-2004].

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
         Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
         Institutions for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 139-2004].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
         Foundation of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         109-2004].


                          FRIDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     The Fifth Economic and Social Rights Report of the South African Human
     Rights Commission for 2002-2003.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
         Resources Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 112-
         2004].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 29
     August 2004 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
     informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South African
     National Defence Force:

     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE
     SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE FOR PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF THE PRESIDENT
     OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA DURING AN OFFICIAL VISIT TO THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
     authorised the employment of the South African National Defence Force
     (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), for
     service in co-operation with the South African Police Service for
     protection of the President of the Republic of South Africa during an
     official visit to the DRC on 30 and 31 August 2004.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 19(3) of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of thirty-six (36) members will be employed for service in co-
     operation with the South African Police Service as from 29 August to 1
     September 2004.

     The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the deployment
     of personnel to the joint operation is R150 000,00 which will be paid
     out of the SANDF's Special Forces Brigade budget. Transport and
     accommodation costs will be borne by the South African Police Service.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Assembly
     and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the notice of
     the National Council of Provinces.

     Regards

     SIGNED
     T M MBEKI


                          MONDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Securities Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 26684 of 18 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         7 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Rwanda on the Waiver of Visa
         Requirements for holders of Diplomatic and Official/Service
         Passports, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (b)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         Rwanda, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

2.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial Aid
     Scheme (NSFAS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 172-2004].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 31 August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports the
         Bill with a proposed amendment, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 5


         1. On page 4, in line 32, to omit "in the `Arrangement of
              sections' opposite section 401, and".

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
     the Decisions of 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union, dated
     31 August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Decisions
         of 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union, referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Decisions.

     Report to be considered.


                          TUESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         7 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

              NOTE:
              The Portfolio Committee on Finance has been instructed by the
              Speaker in terms of National Assembly Rule 249(3)(c) to
              consult the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council:


     (1)    Bill, as amended, passed by National Assembly on 7 September
         2004 and transmitted for consideration of National Assembly's
         amendments:


         (i)     National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill [B 62D
              - 2003] (National Council of Provinces - sec 76)

         The amended Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs for a report and recommendations on the
         National Assembly's amendments.



TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator (NNR)
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 113-2004].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
         Town for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 104-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker and Ncome
         Museums for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                         WEDNESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government
     for the year ended 30 June 2003 [RP 123-2004].

2.    The Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Bala Farms (Pty) Ltd 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004 [RP 166-2004].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Diplomacy, Intelligence,
         Defence and Trade Education and Training Authority (DIDTETA) for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 43-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
         Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 83-2004].

4.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.


                         THURSDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 26709 of 24
              August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         10 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 9 September 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66B - 2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 76)

         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
         Services of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report of the South African Geographical Names Council for 2002-2003
     [RP 203-2003].


                          FRIDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2004


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards Board for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 73-2004].


                          MONDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 September 2004 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (ii)Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 –
             2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (iii)Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004]
             (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (iv)Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 September 2004 in terms
         of Joint Rule 161, classified the following Bills as money Bills:


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77)

         (ii)Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Maatskappye [W 10 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Companies
         Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Recommendation No 192 concerning Safety and Health in
         Agriculture, adopted by the International Labour Conference at its
         Eighty-Ninth Session, Geneva, 21 June 2001, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Recommendation No 193 concerning the Promotion of Co-operatives,
         adopted by the International Labour Conference at its Ninetieth
         Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

     (c)    Recommendation No 194 concerning the List of Occupational
         Diseases and the recording and notification of occupational
         accidents and diseases, adopted by the International Labour
         Conference at its Ninetieth Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (d)    Convention No 185 revising the Seafarers' Identity Documents
         Convention, 1958, adopted by the International Labour Conference
         at its Ninety-First Session, Geneva, 19 June 2003, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


                         TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 14 September 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
              Amendment Bill [B 2B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal
              Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income.

         (c)     Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income.



     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration for consideration and report:


         (a)     United Nations Convention against Corruption, tabled in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the United Nations Convention
              against Corruption.


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on
         Economic Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
              Qualifications Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 53-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 40-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
              Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 41-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverage
              Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 46-2004].

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
              Retail Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 62-2004].

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
              Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
              Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 54-
              2004].

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 45-2004].


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
              Accounting Services Sector Education and Training Authority
              (FASSET) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 38-
              2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 39-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 50-2004].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 47-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sector Education
              and Training Authority for Secondary Agriculture for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 58-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Primary Agriculture
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 155-2004].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
              Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
              Training Authority (MAPPP) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information
              Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies
              Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 49-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 126-2004].


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and
              Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              61-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 42-2004].


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 44-2004].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on
         Social Services:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 48-2004].


     (10)The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises, the Select Committee on Local Government
         and Administration and to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government, Water and
         Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 51-2004].


     (11)The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises and to the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
         Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 55-2004].


     (12)The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
         and Public Enterprises, the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs and to the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 60-2004].


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Telkom SA Limited for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 160-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 129-2004].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 98-2004].

4.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
     Authority (SAQA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 111-2004].


