---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 01 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-09-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:07.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

      UNEMPLOYMENT IN NORTH WEST AND INVESTMENT IN MAFIKENG INDUSTRIAL
                              DEVELOPMENT ZONE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Chair, members, I move without notice:


  That the Council –


  (1) recognises that unemployment remains a key challenge in the North
        West;


  (2) acknowledges that the provincial government of the North West has
        already implemented a number of projects aimed at exploiting the
        economic potential of the province in order to create jobs and fight
        poverty;


  (3) notes in this regard the plans by the North West provincial government
        to invest R200 million in the Mafikeng industrial development zone;
        and


  (4) welcomes this investment as further proof of the ANC-led provincial
        government’s commitment to foster sustainable development in rural
        towns where unemployment and poverty are prevalent.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                    ABSENCE OF DA MEMBERS FROM THE HOUSE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council takes note that there is only one member of the
  Democratic Alliance present while the others are supposedly licking their
  wounds in anticipation of the defection period.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




            TRENDS IN INTERGOVERNMENTAL FINANCES: 2000-01-2006-07


                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. Hon
members, thank you for this opportunity this afternoon. I know that the
convening of this discussion here this afternoon required special care and
attention, but I think as we deal with the subject matter at hand the
importance of this meeting and the importance of the timing of this
discussion will be self-evident.

Members of the NCOP play an invaluable role in protecting the interests of
provinces and local government. We in the National Treasury are of the view
that we are indeed allies of the NCOP in this endeavour. It is to this end,
and not to meet any constitutional or statutory obligations, that we sought
to publish an Intergovernmental Fiscal Review from time to time.

Now, when we first published it the issues were new. A methodology did not
exist. But towards the end of the second Parliament the NCOP became quite
adept at using either the full Intergovernmental Fiscal Review or a trends
document that we produced from time to time very much as part of their
work. Members of the NCOP saw themselves as activists in this regard and
undertook, here within the context of the NCOP and also in their engagement
with standing committees in all legislatures, to promote the use of this
document and, more importantly, equipped members of Parliament and the
legislatures in the use of these documents.

This year we have opted not to produce a full Intergovernmental Fiscal
Review. We have limited the publication this time, essentially as an update
on the last Intergovernmental Fiscal Review that we published. This is the
document. I’m advised reliably that it is in the pigeonholes of
distinguished members of the NCOP, but I don’t actually see the document on
the desks. So I hope that we aren’t talking past each other on the issue.

I’m saying that it is an abbreviated document; it’s not a full
Intergovernmental Fiscal Review. It’s an important tool for members of the
NCOP. We’ve tried to keep it as short as we possibly can.
The review document itself is now down 152 pages, and there are annexures
of 147 pages of tables. So notwithstanding our best endeavours, we still
produced a document of 300 pages. But I believe that the information that
it contains is exceedingly valuable to every member of the NCOP.

We are tabling it here because we believe fundamentally that the NCOP has a
critical oversight role to play in monitoring government expenditure, given
the size of our transfers to provincial and local governments. In the
current fiscal year, for example, we transfer 61,8% of the available
resource of R316 billion, if you exclude the contingency reserve of R2,5
billion. So 61,8% of what we have available we transfer to these two
spheres of government.

There is no other institution other than the NCOP capable of observing the
trends in spending, primarily because the provinces are incapable of
raising their own revenues, and we need to supplement local government
through both conditional grants as well as an equitable share.

An amount of R181,1 billion, or 57,3%, of what we have available now is
made available to the provinces, and the remaining R14,2 billion to local
government. These divisions are, of course, effected through the Division
of Revenue Act. A number of members of the NCOP arrived after the Division
of Revenue Act was debated in this House quite extensively during the
period February and early March, and it needed to be passed here before it
was sent elsewhere. That is the power, the mandate, the authority to
transfer resources from nationally raised revenues to other spheres of
government. So, because the NCOP is as involved in the process of
determining the contents of the Division of Revenue Act, it therefore needs
to be involved in the oversight function in respect of the spending at
hand.

I want to start by giving an example of why this document is important for
parliamentary accountability. I want to use, as an example, the Education
budget. The national Department of Education has a budget this year of
R11,3 billion, but of that amount that it has available only R443 million
would be what it spends on its own functions. The rest would be transferred
to universities, to the National Financial Student Assistance Scheme, and a
number of other projects and programmes that the Department of Education is
responsible for.

In contrast to that amount of R443 million out of a total of R11,3 billion,
the nine provincial education departments have budgeted and will spend, we
hope, R64,8 billion this year. We hope it will be R64,8 and not R68,4, but
that is what they have budgeted – R64,8 billion.

The question that arises is whether Parliament should not focus on the
consolidated budget so that we understand what happens in the context of
education in South Africa. The consolidated budget would then give us an
amount of R76,1 billion. But in order to do that and in order to ensure
that we have an understanding of what is happening in the context of
education, somebody has to provide leadership, somebody has to pull
together the Select Committee on Education in this House, the standing
committees on education in the nine Houses, and perhaps also the Portfolio
Committee on Education in the House next door and begin to engage with us.
This is because the amount that we are looking at, the amount of R76,1
billion, is indeed a substantial amount of money. And, unless
parliamentarians engage in the process and continually ask what the money
buys, we are looking at the wrong place.

We will never know what the money buys unless you have ongoing
parliamentary reviews of expenditure. Those parliamentary reviews, I think,
need to take an approach perhaps more creative than we have had before.
Unless this NCOP can look at this matter also with the provincial
legislatures, you don’t have a snowball’s hope of trying to understand what
is actually happening in Education, or indeed whether the oversight
function of Parliament as a collective is aligned to the task at hand. This
is because you can’t abstract education in the North West province from
education in the Northern Cape. You are not going to deal with life like
that. We need a consolidated view. And I’m sure that the Minister and
Deputy Minister of Education – especially the Deputy Minister who used to
sit in this chair over here – would want to be part of that kind of review.

Now, for the first time, we have a document that equips the NCOP to take
some leadership, take some responsibility, to engage with the numbers, the
trends, and invite into partnership, as a critical part of the oversight
function, the nine provincial legislatures. The Trends in Intergovernmental
Finances, which we table today, provides information on the 2004 provincial
budgets and also on the 2003-04 municipal budgets. The reason we are
lagging a bit with the municipal budgets is that their fiscal year this
year for the last time runs from July to June, and not from April to March
like the rest of us.

As we bring in the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, as
we align the Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks in municipalities, we will
be able to produce this document so that all members of Parliament will be
able to see at a glance exactly what the trends are and be able to live up
to the oversight responsibility.

The trend-line document also accounts for public expenditures over the last
three financial years – starting in the year which ended on 31 March 2001
to the year which ended on 31 March 2004. The trend is there, and from that
trend we then need to be able to project forward and engage with issues of
content and quality.

The document spells out in more detail spending plans for the nine
provinces and the 284 local governments, taking the focus on service
delivery one step forward and enabling users to compare provincial and
municipal service delivery standards and achievements. I stand here
confident that the NCOP will facilitate the participation of every
provincial legislature and the municipal councils in the accountability
processes by spreading the information in this document as widely as
possible.

The 2004 provincial budgets consolidated in this document represent a real
expression of co-operative governance. They reflect strong alignment to
national priorities articulated in the 2004 Budget Review. Provinces, as I
said, are budgeting R186,7 billion for their budgets in this year, of which
R152,9 billion, or 82%, is budgeted for the three social services in
Education, Health and Social Development.

What we would like to invite members also to look at is if you say the 82%
goes with those three social functions, what indeed are the trends? Then
you will find that the one that is growing the fastest is Social
Development, and, in fact, even faster than that growth is a part of it
called social security transfers. But as that grows, it’s squeezing out
Education and Health.

As members of the NCOP explore the detail of those kinds of numbers, a
series of questions must arise because it is in dealing with those kinds of
questions that, I’d like to submit, members of the NCOP can live out their
oversight function. It’s there. I said that we see ourselves as allies of
the NCOP in the context of that oversight function, and all that we do here
is to present the information in a way that would facilitate the exercise
of that very important parliamentary responsibility.

Local governments for last year spent about R86 billion, including capital
expenditure of R16,7 billion. I think that at the end of an examination
that it would be useful to hear from members of the NCOP whether that R16,7
billion is a fair reflection of the demand for capital expenditure or
whether it’s low on capex. If it is low on capex, what might local
authorities be spending more of their resources on and what does that say
to us about the future of all of us and democracy in this country?

Now, if we look at that number of R86 billion spent by the local
authorities, it is important to recognise that within that, six metros
alone spent about 59% of the total. So, you leave 278 local authorities
with 40%. What does that say to us? This document allows us to compare the
different spheres and different functions of government.

One of the important trends to look at, from a delivery perspective, is to
ensure that we maximise the budgets for the delivery of services by
reducing the cost of personnel, which we now call compensation on
employees. Such a trend has been the case in provinces where the downward
trend in personnel started more than three years ago, and is set to
continue over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework - the current one runs
until 31 March 2007 - resulting in a further decline in the share of
personnel from R57,7 billion in the fiscal year 2000-01, the first year for
which we publish tables in this document, to 44,5% in 2006-07. What we can
save on personnel clearly needs to be made available to render first-level
services to the bulk of our people.

This will release more resources for delivery, with non-personnel
expenditure expected to rise to over 55% over the same period. This is in
stark contrast to local government, where its share of personnel
expenditure has been increasing rapidly and is now at 43% of its operating
budget if the bulk purchases of water and electricity are excluded from the
operating budget. This means it will even be harder for the local sphere to
deliver, if it does not prioritise containing its personnel expenditure.

At some time somebody, certainly the President, or somebody else is going
to ask every member here, including members of other parties, please to
explain what their contribution has been to delivering on the people’s
contract. That is an answer to the question of whether you’ve lived out
your oversight function, because if delivering on the people’s contract is
impossible in the present fiscal arrangements, then the President would
want to hear what the proposals are for change. That is the response to the
information contained in here. So, this is not some airy-fairy Manuel and
Momo madness; this goes to the heart of the responsibilities of Parliament
and the NCOP, in particular, as the guardian of provincial and local
government interests, to live out the Constitution and the mandate that the
electorate has given this government.

Income support continues to be one of our weapons for fighting poverty in
the short term. One of government’s greatest achievements is the increase
in the number of social grant beneficiaries, which increased from 2,9
million people in April 2000 to 7,9 million people in April this year. We
expect that beneficiary numbers will grow in excess of an estimated 20% per
year, but the total number is likely to reach an equilibrium point at
around 20% of the total population.

This will see budgeted total spending on social security grants rise from
R37,1 billion during the last fiscal year to R54,4 billion in 2006-07. I’m
a bit surprised that members are reading other things and are not
interested in this discussion. In fact, I’m not just surprised, I’m also
seriously offended by it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): I just want to make a
comment, Minister. Could members listen, because this is very important.
You know that you are moving out next week to your constituencies and that
is why you agreed to have the Minister present this, for you to use in your
constituency next week when you go there.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: The share of social development spending will rise
to 28% of provincial spending in 2006-07, raising social security
expenditure to over 3% of GDP. This is a trend that hon members must pay
attention to in future years if we want to ensure that we have sufficient
policy room to promote growth-generating policies. Issues contained in the
resolution about growth-generating policies in the North West province need
to find resonance all over, but if the provinces don’t have the resources
to do it, then the provinces would tend to be employers of people and the
managers of payment of social security grants, because we will not
contribute to job creation. This is part of the challenge that confronts us
here.

A particular concern is the rapid growth in disability beneficiaries, which
has doubled from 612 614 beneficiaries in April 2000 to 1,27 million in
April this year, resulting in disability spending rising from R4 billion to
R10,2 billion over the period. My humble submission is that we can’t afford
that rate of growth.

Looking at education: total education spending grows by 1,6% in real terms
– from R60,3 billion in the last fiscal year to R73,7 billion in the third
year, which is the year that ends on 31 March 2007. The highest growth is
in nonpersonnel, noncapital expenditure. This is what educators call
learner support materials; some of us are old enough to call this books and
other things in schools, but that is the growth that we are watching. That
grows from R5,2 billion to R7,8 billion over the period. These amounts,
however, exclude transfer payments. This is expected to help the education
sector allocate increasing amounts to learner support materials and
reinforce improvements in the quality of school education.

The document also deals with outputs in education. On the one hand, it
considers provincial performance in respect of matriculation pass rates. On
the other, it reviews provincial attainment in maths and science. So this
is not just about how many people we can put through with Biblical Studies
on the standard grade, but how we actually use the education system and the
money available to contribute to people who can readily be absorbed into
additional learning and therefore build a cadre of learners that will be
very different from what we have in South Africa at the moment.

Some of us are still trying to understand why Limpopo’s matric pass rates
in maths and science are much, much better than those of some of the
provinces that spend more per learner than Limpopo. Perhaps this says a lot
about the efficiency of education spending in that province. I’m not saying
this because the Governor of the Reserve Bank and the Director-General of
the National Treasury both come from Limpopo. [Interjections.]

The document also deals with health. Provincial health budgets are
projected to grow at 3,3% in real terms to R47,4 billion. Now, you will see
education growing only at 1,6%, much slower than the total growth in the
budget, and that health is also growing at only 3,3%. So there is that
mismatch that is going to be important for members of this NCOP to be
involved in trying to understand a bit better. The trends are not the same
in all nine provinces.

Improving health service delivery largely depends on having the right
skills in the right place. Implementation of the scarce skills strategy and
rural allowances, which commenced last year, is on track. Additional
resources over the next three years provide for the costs of hiring and
deploying personnel with scarce skills, such as doctors and pharmacists.

Quality health care also depends on adequate medicine and drug
availability. Over the next three years strong growth in nonpersonnel
spending in health should allow our hospitals and clinics to ensure
sufficient supplies of medicines, drugs and other medical necessities.
Health budgets also include a conditional grant of R3,5 billion to be spent
on HIV and Aids programmes over the next three years.

The issue about the right personnel in the right place is, to my mind, one
of the biggest challenges in the health system. A province such as the
Western Cape - and a city such as Cape Town - is very well populated with
medics. But go out to the rural provinces, go to the North West and see
whether you can find out how many pharmacists, how many occupational
therapists, how many physiotherapists there are in the health system. Why
aren’t they there? Gauteng and the Western Cape don’t face quite the same
kind of challenge, but if you go to KwaZulu-Natal you’ll find these high-
quality professionals at Nkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital. But you will not
find them in Mkandla.

It is in trying to understand these kinds of trends – the document gives
the distribution of health professionals per province – that we can, and
more importantly you as members of the NCOP can, engage with this issue
about the right skills in the right place. Unless members of Parliament are
asking these kinds of questions repeatedly, I think we will be missing the
ball.

Looking at the nonsocial services, provinces also budget for housing,
provincial roads, agriculture, economic affairs, the environment and
tourism, and other administrative functions. In some provinces there are
huge royal households, and they cost quite a bit of money. Other provinces
don’t have royalty, but all of those things have to be covered. Some
provinces such as the province where I’m deployed, the Northern Cape, is a
large province and so road maintenance is enormously expensive there. This
is not so in Gauteng where everything is compact. So these kinds of issues
impact quite directly on how the provinces allocate their resources.

Spending on nonsocial services functions, including housing, rises from
R31,2 billion last year to R33,7 billion in the third year, which comprises
about 18% of total provincial expenditure – included would-be industrial
development zones and a series of other things, such as Blue IQ in Gauteng.
Those kinds of things are all covered here. It is set to rise to R38,3
billion by 2006-07. Included in these amounts are funds earmarked for
housing delivery, sometimes not spent on that, and for the Expanded Public
Works Programme that we referred to in the Budget Speech in February.

Hon members will be pleased to know that in the first decade of democracy,
government spent about R27,6 billion on its housing programme. The
Department of Housing has funded over 1,6 million housing opportunities.
Notwithstanding this progress, some challenges still remain, as we also
need to create sustainable communities when we build houses.

With regard to local government services, members will note that the
information available for the local sphere is not as reliable as that for
the provinces. The implementation of the Local Government: Municipal
Finance Management Act this year should lay the basis for improving the
quality of this information over the next three years.

I have already referred to the challenge facing local government in
containing its personnel expenditure. It needs to do so to address the
substantial backlogs in the provision of drinking water, proper sanitation
and electricity for all our people. The 2001 Census reported a backlog of
11% and 41% in water and sanitation respectively, and a 34% backlog in
domestic electricity. The major backlog for both electricity and water is
in the rural areas – but we know that – where on-grid electricity and piped
water is not economical, and hence other types of supply mechanisms are
required. These tend to be a lot more expensive. This impacts negatively on
government’s call for the roll-out of free basic services as one of its
major policy initiatives.

A major challenge that local government has to meet is to ensure that its
finances remain sound as we restructure the distribution of electricity and
create the first regional electricity distributors or REDs. Ethekwini and
Cape Town will be the first REDs to be established.

The recently introduced municipal infrastructure grant will greatly assist
in reducing backlogs over a 10-year period. In total, R15 billion will be
available through the MIG over this Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, of
which R8,1 billion has been allocated to water and sanitation. It is our
hope that municipalities will rise to the challenge of generating jobs when
using these funds, in line with the Expanded Public Works Programme.

Let me conclude by reiterating the opportunity and the challenge that this
document poses for Parliament. I said earlier that it is not a
constitutional requirement; there is not a statutory requirement. It’s an
instrument that we try to place in the hands of members of Parliament. If
it can be done collectively out of the NCOP, democracy will be richer in
this country for it. But because there is no statutory obligation, hon
Ralane, perhaps there is no requirement that it actually be used at all.
The use of this document, I think, will depend on the amount of energy and
political will that obtains in this House. And, I think, we look to the
leadership of the House, both in the Chair and in the Whippery, to support
us in this endeavour.

If we are to take our commitment to deliver basic services seriously, every
relevant committee in both Houses of Parliament – and in the nine
provincial legislatures – should be interrogating the contents of this
document. So should every municipal council. I’m optimistic that every
relevant portfolio and select committee will convene hearings on each
relevant chapter, possibly joint hearings involving both committees here in
Parliament, together with the nine provincial committees. I’m saying that
we need a creative approach because the challenge of democracy is so much
stronger. The mandate that we received from our people on 14 April says to
us that we carry the hopes and aspirations of our people, and we may not
fail them. This is not the be-all and end-all, but I would like to submit
this document to the House as a contribution. Those who were at the
Gordon’s Bay course know that I spoke there about a toolbox. This is
another important part of that toolbox.

We’d like to say to you, Deputy Chair, and members of this House in all
committees that we will be available to assist. There may be issues in this
document that appear difficult. And if we can help facilitate the
understanding of members in groups on this document, we stand ready to do
so.

Finally, I want to express my sincerest appreciation to you and the
Chairperson, and also to the hon Ralane. This House was not meant to
convene this afternoon. You were persuaded that if we failed to use this
opportunity today, during a week of training before members returned to
constituencies, that we’d have to wait until October before this document
would be available. Now, by having the document, by engaging with the
provinces, we invite our colleagues and our comrades to explore this and at
least begin testing the waters, so that when we return after the
constituency period we can embark on a programme, or at least facilitate a
programme with a lot more energy and intensity out of the NCOP to improve
on the quality of oversight. I think we owe democracy at least that.

Thank you very much to you, Deputy Chair, and thanks to the hon members for
having listened to me this afternoon. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Minister, thank you
very much. That was not just inspiring, but I think we really have a tool
that we can use as we go and do our function in the constituencies.
Minister, you are quite correct; when the Chief Whip and the chairperson of
finance presented the matter to me we looked at the programme of the NCOP
and saw that we were not sitting today. But then we had to convene our
programming committee yesterday where all political parties were
represented. I wish to thank all political parties that unanimously agreed
that we grant you the opportunity to come to talk to them about this issue.
I wish to thank you for coming, and your Deputy Minister also who
communicated with me directly.

More importantly, Minister, let me also say that the chairperson of the
finance committee has committed himself that after this document has been
distributed to us or tabled in this House, there will be processes and a
programme set up to discuss with or engage other stakeholders with regard
to this document. I particularly, and the Chief Whip, would like that
process to unfold when you come back from the week of 6-10 September, the
provincial week. We will monitor that, and, as the Minster has said, the
staff of the National Treasury is available to assist. Please, let’s not
hesitate.

Minister, perhaps I should also let you know that I am not on the speakers’
list – I’m just giving myself time now to be on the speakers’ list. You
were the only one who was on the speakers’ list. [Laughter.]

I’d like to inform the Minister that we have developed what we call Vision
2009. We are happy to present a copy to National Treasury that explains
what we are going to do in terms of the oversight function from this year
until 2009. Whatever we recommend or put forward as recommendations to the
House, there will be engagement with the executive on all those issues,
particularly on the expenditures on the ground. Most of our time is not
going to be spent in the Council. Most of our time is going to be spent on
the ground doing work there and coming to report to the executive and to
the members of the Council in this House.

I’ll make a point of providing a copy of Vision 2009. In particular we are
concentrating on the Schedule 4 powers that we have – those concurrent
powers. We’ll be looking at the health matters, social welfare, social
development, education, agriculture and all those issues which are
contained in Schedule 4 of the Constitution.

Next week is our provincial week. We have targeted the municipalities. The
Minister has quite correctly said that we have to assist there. That is one
sphere of government that is closer to our people; that is tasked to
facilitate also delivery on the ground. We are targeting that next week. As
I adjourn this House all the members sitting here will be looking at how
they are going to do this. We’ve been to most provinces. I went to KwaZulu-
Natal personally last week. We had a workshop with all nine provincial
Speakers and Chief Whips to discuss how we were going to synchronise our
programmes so as to take them to the ground, because they have to be part
and parcel of our work in the municipalities. Salga has been involved as
well.

So all I can say to the Minister is that we mean business, and we will be
there. I’ve listened to you. If members of Parliament and particularly of
the NCOP don’t use that tool, we will be failing in doing our job. All the
time it was we who were saying that we didn’t have enough information to
engage with the issues on the ground. Now we have the information; now we
can ask questions; now we can go there and see what is happening and what
is not happening.

With these few words I would like to thank you all and thanks to all the
leadership for organising this short session for this afternoon, and thank
you, Minister, for the information.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 14:48.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS





                        FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST 2004-12-06



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


         (i)     Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 26704 of 20 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Water
         Affairs and Forestry of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 30 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Water Services Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister
         of Water Affairs and Forestry on 27 August 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance
         of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
         respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Democratic
         Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

     (c)    Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

2.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 44-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Accounting
         Services Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 38-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
         Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 54-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 40-2004].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
         Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 62-2004].
     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverage
         Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 46-2004].

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 60-2004].

     (h)    Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
         Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 55-2004].

     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 53-2004].

     (j)    Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government, Water
         and Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 51-2004].

     (k)    Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 48-2004].

     (l)    Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
         Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 41-2004].

     (m)    Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
         Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MAPPP) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (n)    Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
         Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 49-
         2004].

     (o)    Report and Financial Statements of the Primary Agriculture
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 155-2004].

     (p)    Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 61-
         2004].

     (q)    Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 47-2004].

     (r)    Report and Financial Statements of the Sector Education and
         Training Authority for Secondary Agriculture for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 58-2004].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Department of Science and
     Technology for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 145-2004].


                           MONDAY, 30 AUGUST 2004



TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Government Notice No 850 published in Government Gazette No
         26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of members and alternate
         members of the Public Accountants' and Auditors Board in terms of
         section 3(6) of the Public Accountants and Auditors Act, 1991 (Act
         No 80 of 1991).

     (b)    Government Notice No 860 published in Government Gazette No
         26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of member to the Amnesty
         Unit in terms of section 23 of the Exchange Control Amnesty and
         Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2003 (Act No 12 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Exemptions: Financial Intelligence
         Centre in terms of section 92 of the Public Finance Management
         Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (d)    Government Notice No 896 published in Government Gazette No
         26603 dated 30 July 2004: Cancellation of appointment of an
         authorised dealer in foreign exchange in terms of paragraph (3)(a)
         of the Exchange Control Regulations Government Notice No R1112 of
         1 December 1961 as amended: Regal Treasury Private Bank Limited in
         terms of the Currency and Exchanges Act, 1933 (Act No 9 of 1933).

     (e)    Government Notice No 853 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the commemorative R2 circulation coin in terms of
         section 19(1)(a) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act
         No 90 of 1989).

     (f)    Government Notice No 854 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the new R5 bi-metal circulation coin in terms of
         section 16(2) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No
         90 of 1989).

     (g)    Government Notice No 855 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: Amendment of schedule 2 section (b) of
         the South African Reserve Bank, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
         Inspectorate for 2003-2004 [RP 142-2004].

      (b)   Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear
      Energy Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
      of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute for Drug-
     Free Sport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 118-2004].

4.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
     Educators (SACE) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
     Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                           TUESDAY, 31 AUGUST 2004


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South Africa
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 114-2004]

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
     Development Bank (Land Bank) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 147-
     2004].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Department of
         Labour for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 64-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
         Fund (UIF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 65-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Commissioner
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 65-2004].

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Department of Water
         Affairs and Forestry for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 131-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
         Authority (TCTA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Government Notice No 897 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Mvoti to Mzimkulu Catchment Management Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 898 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Crocodile (West) - Marico Catchment Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 937 published in Government Gazette No
         26649 dated 13 August 2004: Release of parts of state forests
         which are no longer required for forestry in terms of the National
         Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (f)    Government Notice No 966 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Jan Fourieskraal
         Irrigation Board, Division of Calitzdorp, Province of the Western
         Cape, into the Jan Fourieskraal  Water User Association, Water
         Management Area Number 16, Province of the Western Cape, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 967 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Stompdrift-
         Kamanassie Irrigation Board, Division of Oudtshoorn and
         Calitzdorp, Western Cape Province, into the Stompdrift-Kamanassie
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 16, Western
         Cape Province, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (h)    Government Notice No 968 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Stellenbosch,
         Helderberg and Lower Eertse River Irrigation Boards, Division of
         Stellenbosch, Province of the Western Cape, into the Wineland
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 19, Province
         of the Western Cape in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (i)    Government Notice No 969 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Zanddrift
         Irrigation Board, Division of Robertson, Western Cape Province,
         into the Zanddrift Water User Association, Water Management Area
         Number 18, Western Cape Province in term of the National Water
         Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (j)    Government Notice No 970 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Establishment of the Vanrhynsdorp
         Water User Association, Division of Vanrhynsdorp, Province of the
         Western Cape, Water Management Area Number 18, Western Cape
         Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

     (k)    Government Notice No 971 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Lower Sundays
         River Irrigation Board, Magisterial Districts of Alexandria,
         Jansenville, Kirkwood, Port Elizabeth, Somerset East and
         Uitenhage, Eastern Cape Province, into the Lower Sundays River
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 12, Eastern
         Cape Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36
         of 1998).

     (l)    Government Notice No 985 published in Government Gazette No
         26698 dated 18 August 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Breede-Overberg Catchment Management Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (m)    General Notice No 1767 published in Government Gazette No 26704
         dated 20 August 2004: Invitation for written comments on the Water
         Services Amendment Bill, 2004.

5.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 136-2004].

6.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum of
         Bloemfontein for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 84-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
         Gallery for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
         Theatre for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Blind
         Workers Organisation for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
         Republics for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre of
         the Free State (PACOFS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

7.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
     Council (ELRC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 151-2004].

8.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                        WEDNESDAY, 01 SEPTEMBER 2004





TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research Council
     (ARC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 88-2004].

2.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
         Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 106-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of the Enery Sector Education and
     Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 45-2004].

4.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 - Government Communication
     and Information System for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 148-
     2004].

5.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 - Department of Education
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 144-2004].

6.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 - Department of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Parks for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

\National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Trends in Intergovernmental Finances: 2000/01-2006/7 [RP 152-2004].



