---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-08-24
---

TUESDAY, 24 AUGUST 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.


  CONGRATULATIONS TO SPRINGBOK RUGBY TEAM ON WINNING TRI-NATIONS TOURNAMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House -


   (1)      congratulates the players, coach and management of the Springbok
        rugby team on winning the tri-nations tournament by beating
        Australia 23-19 on Saturday, 21 August 2004;


   (2)      acknowledges the commitment and passion demonstrated by the
        players on the field throughout this year's tournament; and


   (3)      looks forward to a resurgence of  South  African  rugby  on  the
        world stage in the years ahead.

Agreed to.

   SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) TO CONDUCT SECOND READING DEBATE ON COMPANIES
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1) be suspended for the purposes of conducting the Second
   Reading debate on the Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2004] (National
   Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.


                             TRAVEL VOUCHER SAGA


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next item on the Order Paper is the subject for
discussion on the travel voucher saga. Before we get to . . .
[Interjections.]

You will have an opportunity to speak, hon member.  You can then say
anything you like.

Before this debate could take place, the Speaker had to consult the legal
services office in order to determine what the approach to this debate
should be, and to also look at the application of the sub judice rule. In
terms of Rule 67 of the National Assembly, no member shall refer to any
matter on which a judicial decision is pending. The sub judice rule is
applicable to any matter before the courts which has not yet been decided.
This rule applies to both civil and criminal law. Simply put, in order to
avoid prejudice one should not make pronouncements on matters that are
before the courts until they have been finalised.

Now, the legal services office identified two areas. The two matters on
which a judicial decision is pending are the following. The criminal
proceedings before the magistrate’s court are about travel agencies that
have been charged with fraud allegedly perpetrated against Parliament.
Because there is a judicial decision pending on this matter, it is covered
by this Rule 67 which I have just mentioned.

The second matter is about the liquidation proceedings before the High
Court. We requested the legal services office to find out about this matter
in relation to members.

The conclusion is that those are the two points that could be identified by
the legal services team of Parliament – the matter pertaining to the
magistrate’s court in which there is this case, and the matter on
liquidation.

It is very important, in fact, for us to have this debate. The matter was
raised several times with the Speaker. It was also raised several times in
the programming committee in which members of Parliament felt that it was
very important for us to report back to the electorate. Even if this matter
is still before the courts, it
is important for us to inform those people who have elected us as to what
is happening – and that goes for all of us in this House. This is because
their source of information at the moment is only what they read in the
newspapers.

So it was in that light that the presiding officers of both Houses of
Parliament felt that it was important for this debate to take place. We
hope and wish that this debate will be as informative as possible.

We have requested members to conduct themselves befittingly, so that the
South African people can understand what is happening, as that is
important. This is because we are talking about an institution that most
people have confidence in. It is within that context that we want to have
this debate today.

I’m saying this upfront so that if anybody, from any party, is stopped
whilst he or she is discussing this matter, it is because he or she is
touching on an area that is not ours to discuss. We are not the judiciary;
we are not a court of law. And in this debate we are also not going to
attempt to be a court of law, because there are courts and they will apply
their minds and then decide.

I think that in keeping with our reporting system - even at a time when we
receive a report from the courts - we should be able to come back to
Parliament when the whole matter is finalised and say that the matter is
now finalised and that this is where we are. So it is within that spirit
that we would like to see this debate taking place this afternoon. We hope
that at the end of this debate all of us will be better informed.

Most members indicated that they wanted this debate during open time,
because they have people at home who will be listening to them and watching
at some stage. I don’t want to take the limelight, because I’m not one of
the speakers in this debate, but I just had to give the context within
which we shall participate in this debate.

The SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members of the House and  members  of
the public, when I received the request  for  a  debate  on  the  misuse  of
parliamentary travel vouchers I decided that  it  would  indeed  present  an
opportunity for the House and the public to get information, some  of  which
has  not  been  given  before  or  which  has  been   badly   distorted   or
misunderstood so far.

This debate should be approached as a measure to account to our people,  who
are justifiably eager to know what has happened, what the issues  are,  what
Parliament’s position is on various questions, and what the future holds  on
these matters.

The travel vouchers given to all MPs are valid for travel by air, train  and
road. Travel for the purposes of approved committee  work  is  provided  for
separately. A document called Circular LO19/2001 exists  to  provide  checks
and balances to ensure that  travel  warrants  are  used  according  to  set
stipulations.

I am giving these details to indicate that we  do  have  systems  in  place,
which were introduced in 1999, as an attempt to improve on an earlier green-
form system. The critical questions raised by  the  probe,  which  has  been
going on for over a year now, is whether our systems are working well,  what
the weaknesses are, and how Parliament  must  improve  to  ensure  that  the
problems we have identified do not recur.

I want to dwell a bit more on the issue of problems in the systems,  because
if they did not exist we would not be  having  this  debate  today.  Dealing
with our own internal problems must therefore  be  a  key  outcome  of  this
whole  exercise.  This  is  something  to  which  we  make  an   unequivocal
commitment as presiding officers with the  responsibility  of  running  this
institution.

It is with this in  mind  that  the  Secretary  to  Parliament,  the  Deputy
Speaker  and  the  Deputy  Chairperson  of  the  NCOP  are  working   on   a
comprehensive relook at the LO19 document and at a  range  of  other  issues
that might not be provided for at present.

The earlier disciplinary cases of the years 2000 and 2001  exposed  some  of
the problems with the  travel  arrangements.  In  the  report  to  the  then
Speaker, from the disciplinary committee, the need to  tighten  the  systems
was highlighted as one of the key recommendations.

Bantu bakuthi, makhe ndithethe ngolwakuthi, ndichaze okokubana siyalivuyela
elithuba lokuba sithethe nani, njengabantu abasikhethayo nasizisa apha
kulepalamente. Ekubeni senive kakhulu ngalomba wengxaki esinazo nophando
olukhoyo, oluphanda urhwaphlilzo mayelana ne-travel vouchers zalapha
epalamente, ukutsho oko lamaphetshana esiwanikwayo xa sifika apha ukuze
sizokukwazi ukuhamba senze umsebenzi wethu, zi-travel vouchers ke ezo.
Sithi ke masichaze ukuba kwenzeke ni na, futhi ke sizame ukucacisa.
(Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)



[My people, I should use my language and explain that we are glad to be
offered this opportunity to talk with you, as people who elected and
brought us to this Parliament. After yYou have heard much about the
problems we have and about the investigations that are going on, such as
the investigation oninto the misuse of Parliamentary travel vouchers, that
is to say, those little coupons that are usually given to us when we come
here so that we can travel and do our job -, those are called travel
vounchers. So we thought we should explain and try to clarify.]

. . . izinto mhlawumbe ezinye zazo ezingabekekanga kahle uma nina nixoxelwa
le ndaba abamaphephandaba nomabonakude. Okokuqala nje, indaba yokuthi
kukhona okungahambi kahle lapha ePhalamende ngendlela esiphatha ngayo
izimali nezinye izinto ezifana nama-vouchers. Sekunesikhathi sikubonile
lokho. Nizokhumbula ukuthi kuke kwaba khona amacala athizeni akhomba abantu
abathize. Ngaleso sikhathi-ke, sasho ukuthi enye yezinto okufanele
siyenzile silapha ePhalamende ukuthi sibheke ukuthi siqhuba kanjani
,nokuthi uhlelo lwezimali esezinikiwe luhamba kahle. Siyavuma-ke sithi
kusobala ukuthi vele akuhambi kahle ngoba ngabe asiyixoxi le ndaba
namhlanje ukuba yonke le nto ibihamba kahle. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[. . . some of the things were not correctly stated, if you read them oin
newspapers and hear about them on television. We have noticed that things
are not going well in Parliament in terms of funds the administration of
funds and things like vouchers. You will remember that at one stage there
were charges against certain people. During that period we indicated that
in Parliament we have to look at how we administerrate allocated funds and
to ensure that such funds are used accordingly. We therefore admit that
things are not going well. Had it all been well, we wouldn’t be discussing
it today.]

Parliament started suspecting that something was going wrong at the  end  of
2002 when staff in the finance section realised that  a  member  whose  home
was in Vrede was supposedly repeatedly travelling to  Umtata.  At  the  same
time, records also had him driving to Vrede from Johannesburg.

When the member was questioned early in 2003,  it  transpired  that  he  had
never been to Umtata in his life. The travel agent, called Sure  ITC  Travel
(Pty) Ltd, was engaged by the finance staff with  the  aim  of  establishing
exactly what was happening. When ITC’s responses  were  unsatisfactory,  all
transactions with that company were checked and found to be  fraudulent.  It
was then, with the help of SA Airways, that a broader probe was done,  which
resulted in other travel agents being identified in  terms  of  which  there
had been irregular transactions between those  companies,  the  members  and
Parliament.

To come back to the investigation, the first thing  I  want  to  clarify  is
that  it  was  Parliament  that  instituted  this  probe.   [Applause.]   An
impression has been given to the public that Parliament  was  perhaps  found
with its pants or its skirt down, but  in  actual  fact  it  was  Parliament
which invited investigators from outside to come in and help probe  and  get
to the bottom of what was happening. [Applause.]

Ngakho-ke bantu  bakithi  siyachaza  lapha  ukuthi  akulona  iqiniso  ukuthi
kukhona   abantu   bangaphandle   abathola   ukuthi   kukhona    okonakalayo
ePhalamende, iPhalamende ngokwalo elathola ukuthi kukhona okungahambi  kahle
lapha ekhaya.  Kwaba  yithina  esicela  abanye  abantu  bangaphandle  ukuthi
bazosilekelela ukuze sithole ukuthi konakele  kuphi  na?  Nokuthi  sizokwazi
ukulungisa lapho okufanele silungise khona. (Translation of  Zulu  paragraph
follows.)

[It is therefore not true that people who  are  outside  Parliament  noticed
that things were not going  right  at  Parliament.  It  was  the  Parliament
itself that noticed that things were not right. We ourselves  requested  the
outsiders to assist us in finding as to where the problem  was  so  that  we
would be able to applymake corrections where needed.]

Forensic auditors PriceWaterhouseCoopers were contracted in May 2003 –  that
was  months  after  a  probe  was  done  by  our  own  parliamentary  staff.
Subsequently the commercial  crimes  unit  of  the  SA  Police  Service  was
brought on board in  July  2003  when  it  became  necessary  to  confiscate
documents from the offices of a number of travel  agents  who  had  not  co-
operated  when  approached.  Lastly,  the  National  Directorate  of  Public
Prosecutions was approached in February 2004  by  Parliament  to  assist  in
further investigations in order to expedite the whole probe.

After having engaged SA Airways, it transpired that  the  extent  of  damage
was serious indeed. As I  said  before,  we  engaged  PriceWaterhouseCoopers
earlier on precisely so that there could be an  outside  agency  that  could
look objectively at the matters rather than just leaving them to  ourselves.
It was then that Parliament withheld payments to  the  travel  agents  until
such time that we could establish how  much  was  owed  to  the  institution
itself and only then would we deal with  the  issue  of  paying  the  travel
agents what was owed to them.

It was also then that ITC, the company  I  mentioned  earlier,  applied  for
voluntary liquidation. Later on - more recently - Business Executive  Travel
was involuntarily liquidated by Standard Bank at the instance of  Parliament
in order for Parliament to get back its own money.

Many of the books  and  records,  especially  of  ITC,  revealed  that  some
members  had  received  benefits  that  appeared  to  have  been  paid   for
incorrectly by Parliament. This included car hire, hotel  accommodation  and
foreign exchange transactions.

The extent to which any  of  the  members  knowingly  got  involved  in  any
wrongdoing has to be clarified through the investigation.  Each  hon  member
must have an opportunity to shed light on any transactions done  in  his  or
her name.

We are also happy to say that there is agreement on this approach  with  all
the parties in Parliament and with the investigators,  and  it  is  on  this
basis that there is currently a process of  the  necessary  interactions  in
this regard.

I must, at this point, refer to a meeting  convened  by  the  then  Speaker,
Speaker Ginwala, with MPs whose names had come out in  the  ITC  liquidation
processes last year. There is nothing mysterious  about  this  meeting,  hon
Holomisa. It took place in the Old Assembly Chamber  on  8  August  2003  in
broad  daylight,  actually.  Each  MP  was  handed  an  envelope  containing
documents relating to what seemingly involved him or her.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Speaker.

B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker, I would like to know from the Speaker  why  he
is mentioning my name.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a she.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Why is she mentioning my name?

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Speaker, may I proceed?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed, hon member.

The SPEAKER: The hon members were advised to meet the  liquidators  to  give
relevant information and to clarify their understanding of why  their  names
were coming up. Some of the transactions related to committee travel,  which
had been organised not by MPs but by the  committee  section  of  Parliament
with no participation of MPs. Some were personal transactions  in  terms  of
which they had been directed for payment by the institution, instead of  the
bills being sent to individual MPs. Where MPs acknowledged  debt  they  made
the appropriate arrangements for payment with Parliament’s finance section.

In fact, there were some instances in  which  MPs  had  never  utilised  the
services of  ITC  and  it  was  a  mystery  to  them  how  they  had  become
implicated. Clearly, somehow knowingly or unknowingly, the vouchers  of  hon
members had been fraudulently used.

These are the loopholes we as Parliament must study in detail as  we  relook
at the systems, so as to close  the  gaps  and  restore  confidence  in  the
institution  and  in  the  hon  members  elected  to   serve   our   people.
[Interjections.]

For instance, there was a lack of proper control over the issuing,  use  and
cancellation of vouchers. There was no system  to  check  how  often  travel
agents invoiced Parliament for the same trips undertaken. No system  existed
to properly validate invoices submitted for travel. No  system  existed  for
members to validate trips undertaken in their name. I could  go  on  and  on
quoting some of the problems that have since come up.

To come to the present, after the 2004 elections the new presiding  officers
asked for a progress report on the investigation and received  a  summarised
one in June 2004. For the first time the issue of possible  charges  against
MPs appeared in that report. As  everyone  knows,  the  media  have  carried
numerous  stories  implicating  current   and   former   members.   I   have
consistently refused to add to the confusion and the frenzy that  has  tried
and sentenced hon members ahead of  time.  [Interjections.]  [Applause.]  No
amount  of  intimidation  will  change   my   approach   in   this   matter.
[Interjections.]

Our Constitution is clear in that  any  person  is  presumed  innocent  till
proven guilty by a court of law. [Interjections.] We will not  violate  that
principle. We must allow the law  to  take  its  course.  Whoever  is  found
guilty will have to face  the  full  consequences  of  due  process.  It  is
irresponsible to try to score political points on a  matter  such  as  this,
which has serious implications for an institution  such  as  Parliament  and
indeed for the country as a whole.

The issue of the draft report of PriceWaterhouseCoopers . . .  This  is  the
report. [Interjections.] It has provided a lot  for  media  reports  in  the
past few weeks. I just want to mention briefly a few facts about  it.  There
was never a promise on my part that when I got the report  I  would  publish
it or circulate  it.  [Interjections.]  What  I  did  promise,  at  a  press
conference at the airport, was that after reading the report we  would  come
back to the public. [Interjections.] Right.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Speaker, you have a minute to conclude.

The SPEAKER: Even if I had wanted to, I could not have shared  this  report,
because it is clearly stated that it is strictly private  and  confidential.
[Interjections.]  This  is  especially  because  the   investigation   still
continues. You could not publish  what  the  contents  of  this  report  are
without bad implications for the investigation.

Thirdly and lastly, this report does not mention the Deputy  Speaker’s  name
or the name of the Speaker. There is nothing about that in this report.  And
further, you will get the final report when the time comes  and  just  watch
this space. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M S MANIE:  Madam  Deputy  Speaker,  I  rise  on  a  point  of  order.  I
distinctly heard the hon member Mark Lowe shouting  “cover-up”.  To  make  a
statement like that reflects not only on the integrity of the  Speaker,  but
also on this institution. I would like you to give a  ruling  and,  in  that
respect, ask the member to withdraw that statement unconditionally.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, if those words were  said,  then  would  you
please withdraw them, because indeed . . .

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of  order.  [Interjections.]
Won’t you consider, in  terms  of  freedom  of  speech,  that  this  is  the
personal view of a member? He is reflecting on what  he  believes  has  been
done. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I was not giving you an opportunity to  rise
on a point of order. I am asking you . . .  [Interjections.]   Hon  members,
don’t scream at me. You will have an opportunity to  speak  to  me.  I  will
give you an opportunity to speak to me.

I am addressing this hon member at this point in time in that “cover-up”  is
unacceptable. I am ruling that that is unparliamentary, so  please  withdraw
it. That is all. I am not asking you to give me a speech. [Interjections.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Chair, I was just asking  you  for  your  permission  to
address  you  on  the  point  of  order  before   you   made   the   ruling.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I have made a  ruling.  So  you  cannot  address  me
before  I  make  a  ruling,  because  I  have  made  the   ruling   already.
[Interjections.] Hon Mark Lowe?

Mr C  M  LOWE:  Madam  Deputy  Speaker,  I  am  happy  to  withdraw  .  .  .
[Inaudible.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no microphone, so we  cannot  record  what  you
are saying. Why is there no microphone on? [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE  MAJORITY  PARTY:  Madam  Speaker,  can  we  establish
whether this member is trying to defy the order from the Chair?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, I have not yet recognised  you.  The  member
should find a microphone and speak to us.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: He cannot find a microphone.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He must find one. Hon Chief Whip of the Majority  Party,
please sit down.

Mr C M LOWE: Hon Deputy Speaker, if you are ruling that the word  “cover-up”
is unparliamentary, I am happy to withdraw them on that basis.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon member, do you still want to address  me?
No. Thank you.

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to
thank the Speaker for granting the request of the DA to have this debate,
and for having the courage to come and participate herself today. The
crooks must be punished and the innocent exonerated. [Interjections.] Only
in this way will the reputation of Parliament be restored. The previous
Speaker gave the undertaking that no one would be exempt, and we need to
reaffirm that today, whether the people concerned are travel agents,
officials or MPs.

The travel voucher scandal is the biggest crisis to hit Parliament since
the advent of democracy in 1994. It is not Parliament’s money or the
state’s money that is at issue, it is the people’s money. Every cent we
spent could have been used for other purposes and priorities like building
houses and schools, and providing more police officers to fight crime.
[Interjections.] It is an embarrassment to all honest MPs – and there are
many of them – that some amongst us seem to have forgotten their idealism
and commitment to serving the people.

The DA’s position is quite clear: Any DA MP who is arrested will be
suspended; any DA MP who is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty
will have to vacate his or her seat. The law states that an MP sentenced to
a term of imprisonment of 12 months without the option of a fine,
automatically loses his or her seat.

The DA says that that is inadequate, because we believe that if 20 or 30
MPs end up being convicted criminally and perhaps being fined or given a
sentence of imprisonment with the option of a fine, it would be
unconscionable if they were to stay on in Parliament, having defrauded the
people of South Africa. [Applause.]

The proportional representation system allows party leaders to exercise
their authority and remove from Parliament people who brought their parties
and Parliament itself into disrepute. And the question we must ask is: Will
they have the courage to do so?

The investigation of this scandal seems to have been very thorough, and was
conducted at the instance of Parliament and the presiding officers. But the
truth is that the investigations have been inordinately delayed. It is
shocking that a scandal of this magnitude has taken 20 months to
investigate and is still nowhere near conclusion. Surely, if the
investigation had been tackled with vigour, this whole mess could and
should have been cleared up before, and long before, the election.

The delay in proceeding with the liquidations against the remaining
companies also causes concern. It is at liquidation interrogations that the
truth comes out. In-house investigations too easily result in matters being
swept under the carpet, or private deals and arrangements being made with
the guilty. The foot-dragging by the investigators has allowed this scandal
to escalate, and their lack of openness has made it worse. The Republic has
had to rely on newspaper leaks and speculation about 135 or even more MPs
being involved.

Apart from the DA announcement of the name of it member, almost all of the
rest has been based on leaks. In response to suggestions that the junior
MPs were taking the flack while the powerful were being shielded, the
Secretary to Parliament made an ill-advised statement. He said that the
names of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Minister of Education
appear on the list, but they are in no way criminally involved.  No one
thought they were in the first place, but those politicians should have
been talking for themselves, because the implication of the Secretary’s
statement was that, apart from those three people not being guilty, all the
other 132 MPs on the list were guilty. The Secretary must be very careful.
He is a manager; he is no longer a politician. He needs to separate those
two roles. [Interjections.]

I have been informed that the ANC has instructed some of its MPs who owe
money to Parliament not to repay it and I want say, speaking as an
attorney, that that is very bad advice. [Interjections.] In particular,
those who end up being charged criminally will not be able to say in
mitigation of sentence that they have made a sincere effort to repay the
people’s money. I think the ANC needs to think again.

We, on this side of the House, want a statement naming all of the MPs
involved, stating which have been exonerated – and there should be many of
them – and which were not necessarily guilty or under investigation,
because then the public will know what is going on in this Parliament.

Secondly, we want the forensic report that the Speaker waved around just
now, so that the public can know that Parliament has done and is doing
everything possible. Thirdly, I think we must insist that this
investigation proceeds with all due haste. I don’t believe that Parliament
can go on for the next few months under this cloud of suspicion, gossip and
dishonesty which hangs over every single member of Parliament.

It is not idle curiosity about these documents that moves the DA. We say
that only when the allegations have been properly and urgently
investigated, and when the guilty have been convicted and adequately
punished, will this ugly chapter in Parliament’s history be put to rest. I
thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members,
let me from the start state that the ANC is committed to clean and
transparent governance . . . [Interjections.] [Applause.] That is our track
record as a liberation movement, and no less is expected of us by the
people.

Kubalulekile ukuba kwasekuqaleni siyicacise mhlophe into yokuba uKhongolozi
uyazibophelela kwinkqubo yolawulo olucocekileyo, kwanokuba abantu
abalindelanga nto enganeno kuleyo kuKhongolozi.

Ndifuna ukuthi asiyonyani into yokuba uKhongolozi ukhe wayalela nabani na
ukuba angahlawuli okanye angenzi ntoni. Asiyo nyani leyo. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[It is imperative that we clarify from the start that the ANC is committing
itself to the programme of clean leadership, and also that people are not
expecting anything less than what the ANC is offering. I want to say that
it is not true that the ANC has instructed anyone not to pay, or to do
nothing. That is not true.]

I’m sorry, hon Gibson, but it’s not correct that the ANC has instructed any
of its members to pay or not pay anything. [Interjections.] And, hon sir,
it is very dangerous to even begin to try to speak on behalf of the ANC.
[Applause.] But the issue, again . . .

. . . owona mba usentloko ngala mahum-hum namarhe okuba kukho imali eye
yesetyenziswa okanye malungelo athile aye akasetyenziswa ngandlela ngabantu
abangabameli babantu. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The main issue is these rumours that there is money that has been used, or
certain privileges that were not enjoyed properly, by people representing
others.]

We believe that we need to tackle corruption in the way we have tackled
other issues and challenges that have come our way. We have to do so in a
constructive, responsible and thorough-going manner. As the ANC we are
guided by a constitutionally crafted set of human rights principles that is
at the centre of this caring society we wish to create. And it is within
this ambit that we wish this matter be dealt with.

The ANC is saddened by the sensationalisation of the travel voucher
investigation by those who have indulged in rumour-mongering around this
issue. This debate itself seems more the result of these rumours than an
attempt at comprehensive and thorough consideration of what transpired.
This has done much damage to this premier institution, which is one of the
important tiers of our governance structure. The fact that Parliament has
been built on the blood and tears of many of our people who endured
immeasurable hardship should never elude us. [Interjections.]

It is therefore important that we debate the facts and not the rumours on
this issue. The facts are as follows. Firstly, Parliament as an institution
itself called for this investigation. It was not the Scorpions, it was not
the DA and it was not someone who compelled it to undertake this
investigation: It was Parliament as an institution. It did so because of
its commitment to clean and transparent governance. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

Let’s address the fiction that has surfaced in the past few weeks. Certain
sectors of our society claimed to know who the wrongdoers were, long before
the report was even handed to the presiding officers. That members of
Parliament set out to defraud Parliament, with the collusion of certain
travel agents, was seen as a fait accompli. It is important to note that to
date no member of Parliament has been given a set of charges. Not a single
member of Parliament has been given a set of charges, and yet names
continue to be published.

I understand the context in which a party like the DA can say that it
released the names. The context is very suitable for a party of that
nature. Why? [Interjections.] If you look at this side of the House - look
at those people – the ANC has invested a lot in these people. The ANC has
agreed for them to be deployed here because it has trust in them, because
it has faith in them. [Applause.] Therefore because of that faith, the ANC
will not callously bring the credibility of this force into question.
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Will you eat your words?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: You can easily do so with the hon
Morkel, because he is a minority coloured in a largely white environment.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] And that is consistent with the underlying
tone that whatever is African and whatever is black is inherently corrupt.
[Interjections.] [Applause.] That is the point of departure.

We in the ANC have not instituted an investigation. We are not
investigators. It is not our obligation to release anybody’s name, because
we don’t know the facts that surround that name. It is the obligation of
the investigators themselves and this institution if it so chooses to
release those names. [Applause.]

The ANC will proceed from the assumption that its members have not done
anything wrong until it can be proven beyond reasonable doubt. And, exactly
when that happens, you have an assurance from us that we will deal with
anyone without fear or favour. [Interjections.]

We cannot contradict ourselves: At one level we claim to have full
confidence and faith in the judicial system, and at convenient times begin
to assume the very same role of that institution. If a court of law
convicts any of these members, no matter who they are, I can assure you
that the ANC will take action without fear or favour. [Interjections.] But
until then, these people are innocent until proven guilty. (Interjections.)
(Applause.)

Hon MEMBERS: What about Tony Yengeni? Tell us about Tony Yengeni!

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: No, the debate is not about Tony
Yengeni. [Interjections.] We can tell you a lot about Tony Yengeni when the
debate is about Tony Yengeni.

Let me make a few quick observations. The hon Douglas Gibson says that the
investigation is the worst thing to hit this democratic Parliament, and yet
the reality is that this investigation is the most chaotic investigation I
have ever seen in the past 10 years! [Interjections.]

And this investigation takes place in the context of a serious
administrative breakdown in the finance section of this Parliament.
[Interjections.] Why, for example, as in the case of our telephone units,
are we not getting a report monthly that informs each and every member how
many trips he or she has undertaken, and how many remain? Why is this so?
[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Should people rob the bank, because there is no guard
outside the bank?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: No, no. It’s not about that. Not by
any means. The context here becomes very important . . . [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: The issues that I’m mentioning are
the very issues that the Chief Whips’ Forum is seized with. Side by side
with this assertion is the fact that you will never understand the
magnitude and the seriousness of these allegations, unless you take into
consideration some other real-life experiences of MPs.

Why do we design a voucher system that is supposed to serve as a tool of
travel for members to do their work and this very same tool . . .
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon Chief Whip, would you please take your seat?
I would like to address the House. We need to have a debate, and we need to
be able to hear every speaker. It is important for all of us to listen, and
we still have the right to disagree.

But we can’t drown out a person to a point where we can’t even hear what he
or she is saying. So, with regard to the interjections from the left,
please try by all means to make them as and when they are called for. Do
not make a noise about almost everything the speaker says. We can’t even
hear or follow what he is saying. Hon Chief Whip, will you please continue.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you. I am asking, why do we
have a system that is supposed to serve as a tool for members to do their
work, and effectively so, yet they have this thing that they get to the
airport and the voucher waves them goodbye, even though they still have to
go to the constituencies and elsewhere where they have to arrange
accommodation for themselves?

I say this because I feel that it is the role and duty of Parliament to be
a caring and supportive employer. The failure to be that is something we
will not see the end of. It will come again, in another form, and yet it
will be the same thing.

What is important for us in this debate is to simultaneously try to address
the disease and not the symptoms. So, I’m saying that it is important for
Parliament to do even more to try to be a caring, supportive employer, such
that we can forestall issues like this from taking place.

Ngamazwi amafutshane nangokuphandle, ndifuna ukuthi kwisizwe sakuthi
masingahendwa lula ngabantu abanjongo ikukuthengisa amaphepha, ze
sifulathele izinto esizakhe nzima nezinto esizisebenzele kabuhlungu,
njengale Palamente. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[In short and in clear terms, I want to tell our nation not to be easily
tempted by people who only have intentions of selling newspapers, and don’t
turn your back on the things that we have built with great effort and
things that we have worked hard for, like this Parliament.]

An HON MEMBER: Where’s the media?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Le Palamente idlale indima enkulu,
kwaye iseza kudlala indima enkulu. Owona msebenzi ubalulekileyo uphambi
kwethu kukumilisela iPalamente yeMbumba yeAfrika. Owona msebenzi mkhulu
ubalulekileyo esijongene nawo kukuba siqinisekise ukuba ezi nkqubo
urhulumente athe uza kuzenza ukuphucula impilo yabantu siyazenza.

Masingalahlekiswa silukuhlwe ngabantu abanjongo ziphambi kweenyawo zabo,
abacinga ukuba ngenxa yezi ngxakana zikhoyo, esiqinisekileyo ukuba ziza
kuphandwa de kufikelelwe engcanjini yazo, siza kukholelwa ukuba le
Palamente isebenze kangaka nala malungu abekekileyo, esiwonyuleyo sibonisa
intembeko kuwo, ukuxabiseka nokuhlonipheka kwawo makunyashwe ngeenyawo.

Kuhle ukuba lo mcimbi siwujonge kakuhle, uphandwe, kungafihlwa gama lamntu.
Kumntu owonileyo umthetho kufuneka usebenze ngendlela ekufuneka usebenze
ngayo. Kodwa masingakhe silinge senze impazamo yokucinga ukuba bonke abantu
abalapha benze le nto kuthethwa ngayo. Yiyo loo nto sicela ukuba bonke
abantu bakowethu benze konke ekusemandleni ukukhusela le Ndlu ibaluleke
kangaka nedlale indima engaka kwimbali, kwanokuqinisekisa ukuba uphando
kwalona luyaqhuba ngaphandle kwesisini nangaphandle kokusizela mnta’kabani.
Abo, ukuba bakhona, bafumaniseke bewaphule umthetho kuya kuthathwa
amanyathelo okulungisa izimilo zabo. Yiloo nto ke ecelwa yi-ANC. Siyabulela
kakhulu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[This Parliament has played a big role, and it is going to continue doing
so. The most important work that is facing us is that of establishing the
Pan-African Parliament. The most daunting task that we are faced with is
that of ensuring that we implement the programme that the government has
said is going to improve the lives of people.

We must not be misled and influenced by people whose objectives are
shortsighted, because of these small existing problems, which we are
certain will be investigated until we get to the root of them. Are we going
to believe that the value of this Parliament that has worked so hard, and
that of these hon members, must be looked down upon?

It is good that we look at this issue clearly, and that it be investigated;
there should be no name that is going to be hidden. Where someone has
committed an offence, the law should take its course. But we must not make
the mistake of thinking that everyone who is here has done what we are
talking about. It is for this reason that we ask everybody to do everything
in their power to protect this House that is so highly important and that
has played such a role in history, thereby also ensuring that the
investigation continues without laughter and without pity in respect of
somebody’s child. Disciplinary measures will be taken against those - if
there are any - who are found to have transgressed the law. That is what
the ANC is asking for. We thank you very much. [Applause.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, before the hon
Chief Whip leaves the podium, I’d like to raise as a point of order with
you, the fact that the hon Chief Whip contravened a ruling which the
previous Speaker gave about racially disparaging remarks about hon members.
[Interjections.] He referred, in a racially disparaging way, to an hon
member from this side of the House by saying he was “only a coloured”. Now,
that is quite clearly, in my submission, a contravention of the ruling by
Speaker Ginwala. That type of remark does not belong in this House, and
certainly not out of the mouth of the hon Chief Whip of the ANC.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of
order: I think that the reference was to a party, not to an individual, and
therefore the ruling would not apply. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, the point is raised at the end of the
speech, and we cannot at this point … [Interjections.]

Would you please give me an opportunity to speak? I think it is important
for us to look at the context of what Mr Gibson is saying, and at a
subsequent sitting a ruling will be made, because the hon member has
already completed his speech and left the podium.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, when you say a
subsequent ruling, are you saying that you are going to study the record
and will give a ruling in due course? Because I would be satisfied with
that.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am saying.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you.

Mr C T FROLICK: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order. During
the input of the hon Chief Whip of the ANC in this debate, the hon Mike
Waters of the DA shouted, amongst other things, “It’s your corrupt MPs” and
while referring to the Chief Whip said, “Tell us how you did it”. I am
asking you to rule this matter as unparliamentary, please.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think in the same way we are dealing with the point
raised by Mr Gibson, we will study that, and then at a subsequent sitting
of the House make a ruling on that as well.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very disappointed that in
a debate such as this we have mudslinging going on while we should be
trying to protect the integrity of Parliament. [Applause.]

I wish to thank the Presiding Officers for making available to me a copy of
the confidential memorandum setting out the details of the investigation
into the alleged abuse of travel vouchers.

The issue that we are discussing today is a very serious one, because,
rightly or wrongly, it has thrown a dark cloud over Parliament as an
institution and also over its members; that is you and me. We cannot deny
that perception and we have to deal with it as best as we can.

I therefore welcome this debate, because by doing so Parliament and our MPs
can publicly and concretely demonstrate that we are prepared, firstly, to
deal with this issue immediately in an open, transparent and fair manner,
secondly, to allow the law to take its own course, regardless of who may be
involved and, thirdly, that we will not deny the public and media any
information that is not sub judice.

We owe this to the people of this country who have placed us in this
Parliament. Today, we may not achieve much more than tabling these three
important statements, because the investigation has not yet been completed
and so far no MP has been convicted of any irregularity or crime. Yet, on
the other hand, we must be sensitive to the negative perceptions that have
surfaced so far.

We must also bear in mind, especially Mr Gibson, that the wheels of justice
turn slowly. Therefore, much more water will still have to flow under the
bridge before the truth is finally established.

Mr Gibson wants to know why the names are not published. I will tell him
why. In courts these days the names of accused are not published until they
have been charged and have pleaded, because if an innocent person’s name is
named and it later appears that he was innocent, then the damage is done
and you cannot repair it. [Applause.]

We must act with constraint and wisdom, not making harsh judgements of our
colleagues before all the facts have not been properly considered by the
courts of our land. Today some names of suspects are known, but we do not
know whether they are, in fact, guilty of any irregularity or crime. We
must remember that in terms of the Constitution of our land everybody is
regarded innocent until proven guilty by the courts. [Applause.]

The IFP has so far been spared of the embarrassment of some of our members
being named, but we do not see that as giving us the right to throw stones
at those colleagues who have in fact been named.

In my experience as a lawyer, I have learned that the case against an
accused is never stronger than at the moment when arrests are made. But as
matters progress, some cases lose steam along the line, and eventually the
truth will surface. Only then - when the truth is established by the court
- can we finally deal with the issue.

I am impressed, and so are my colleagues, by the manner and especially the
speed with which Madam Speaker and the former Speaker, the Secretary to
Parliament and others have dealt with this matter, taking the initiative of
trying to identify loopholes in our system and correcting it. We do not
point accusing fingers at Madam Speaker or the former Speaker or the
Secretary to Parliament. As far as we are concerned, the integrity of Madam
Speaker is not in question at all.

We must also never forget that we as MPs are, after all, only human beings
with human failings and shortcomings. I will certainly not be
the first to throw a stone.

On the other hand, Parliament and parliamentarians are to be seen as the
custodians of the laws of our land and we should set an example for others
to follow. [Interjections.]

Mr W P DOMAN: That’s the point!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: It is the point. Have you now discovered it?
Congratulations! [Applause.] [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Yes, you are the weakest 4X4 that ever came into
Parliament. [Laughter.] And it is not even a proper 4X4, because it only
has two legs and one brain. [Laughter.]

In the end, those of our colleagues who are found guilty by the courts will
have to pay the price. The law must take its course and, as Mr Gibson said,
we have to deal with ``crooks’’. Yes, the courts must deal with them, but
only once they have been convicted.
We should all learn by this experience and we should once again resolve to
protect this institution.

Therefore, as parliamentarians of all parties, no matter which party one
belongs to, we must today assure South Africa and its voters that we will
deal with this unfortunate matter with transparency, speed, honesty and
determination to clear the name of Parliament and its members. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the most critical
information about this saga has been suppressed and kept away from this
House and the public. The forensic report is, according to Madam Speaker,
``not available to members generally’’.

It has been made available only to a certain elite clique, who will
manipulate it for their own benefit. That same elite clique has gone ahead
and liquidated travel agencies whilst MPs who benefited from the services
rendered are still here. What we cannot tolerate is any attempt to decide
beforehand, and without all the facts, that all suspected MPs were
manipulated by travel agents.

Already, there is a public perception that Parliament is attempting to
control the police and Scorpions investigation by asking for lists and
briefings to be submitted to it. However, this information is demanded
through the Presiding Officers who keep it confidential, which is
problematic when they are suspects themselves, as reported in the media.
The UDM calls for the police and the Scorpions to proceed with their
investigations of the suspected MPs unhindered by unnecessary interventions
from Parliament. [Interjection.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Speaker, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for
the speaker to say that certain members are suspects, when we don’t have
any evidence of any charges being levelled against any member?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what we spoke about initially, when we
began our discussion, that unless you have information, we don’t have any
information of anybody who has been charged or any information that speaks
of a suspicion. [Interjection.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: When the police are investigating people, don’t you call
those people suspects?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Please refrain from saying something that we
don’t have any proof of. We are trying not to be investigators and we are
also not trying to be a judiciary. We are just trying to inform our
electorate. [Interjections.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Okay, Madam Speaker, I have taken note of your concerns.

The extent of the fraud justifies applying the same principles as in the
case of public servants. In other words, suspend the suspects whilst they
are being charged. As lawmakers we will lose all credibility if we cannot
walk the walk.

Already some lists are floating around and causing harmful speculations,
such as this list of 136 names that came into my possession. Naturally, the
House should satisfy itself whether this list corresponds with the
PriceWaterhouseCoopers forensic report.

We must ensure that this matter is speedily and openly resolved to put an
end to this harmful speculation. Therefore, I am tabling this list to
assist the ongoing investigations. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on a point of order:
May I ask in what capacity is the hon Holomisa tabling these papers? I
remember that he was once a Deputy Minister, but he is no longer one. What
is he tabling here? What is the status of these papers that he is tabling?

Mr B H HOLOMISA: These papers are going to Hansard. Relax, my friend.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, I just wanted to clear something and it has
been confirmed that I am indeed right. There is just no way that any of
those papers would appear in Hansard. Hansard summarises what has been
discussed in the House. As far as I am concerned, the papers will have no
status whatsoever.

Perhaps Mr Holomisa would like to clarify what status these papers have.
Otherwise this means that anybody can print a list of names and then ask
that it be tabled. What we have taken into consideration, Mr Chief Whip, is
everything Mr Holomisa has said within his allocated two minutes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Can we be very sure that these papers
belong to the dustbin? [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Holomisa, would you like to address us on the
status of your papers?

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker, I am trying to assist the process of
investigation. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Holomisa, would you please take your seat. I would
like to say something to you on that point: If you don’t know the address
of the Scorpions, I will provide you with that address. If you don’t know
where to find the Police Service, I will also give you their address.

This House is not an investigative authority of whatever manner and we do
not represent any investigative authority. Therefore, these papers will not
assist anybody. But, if you want to assist, as a responsible citizen - and
I know that you are a responsible citizen – then take these things to where
they will be of use, not here. Thank you very much. I now want to continue
with the debate.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker, may I respond? Madam Speaker has stated
before that there is a committee which has been looking after this, and
that it has authorised even the Scorpions to go via your office. Therefore,
I am asking you to facilitate the handing over of this documentation to the
Scorpions. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please take your seat, hon member. That was a very good
try.

Mr W P DOMAN: Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: While the Speaker spoke,
the front page of the report was displayed on the screen. Would it not be
in order if we could just display the front page of the hon Mr Holomisa’s
document on the screen? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, I thought that the hon Holomisa is
your colleague. It would be very easy for you to just walk over to his desk
and get a copy. You cannot bring the proceedings of this House to a halt in
order for me to give you a paper which you can just go and get from Mr
Holomisa. Please, get that copy and do not waste time.

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Speaker, I am actually very serious. Regarding my point
of order, I would like you to rule at a later stage that if the Speaker is
afforded an opportunity to display something on the screen, that should
then be the right of each member in order to assist them with their
speeches.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, wait. Hon member, I know that the debate is
very interesting, but are you implying that I am getting confused? Because
that is what you are saying. [Interjections.] Listen! The Speaker spoke on
a report and that report was shown on the screen. At no stage did Mr
Holomisa mention any of those names that were contained in that document.
As a result, that was not part of his speech. So don’t try to get those
documents from me when you can get them from him. Those documents were not
part of his speech. His speech was just the two minutes that was recorded
by Hansard. You can get that document from Mr Holomisa. As far as I am
concerned, I don’t even see the document because I don’t recognise it.

Mr D V BLOEM: Madam Speaker, on a point of order - and I am also very
serious about this: The hon Holomisa can’t call hon members of this House
“suspects”. They are not suspects; they are hon members. They have not yet
been charged or arrested. He can’t call them suspects.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Bloem, that point was raised with Mr Holomisa and
he understood that it was incorrect for him to do that. He has withdrawn
that. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: No, he didn’t!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, he did.

Mr A HARDING: Madam Speaker, this scandal has damaged the reputation of all
members of Parliament, even those of us from the ID who are not involved in
any way. More damage has been done to the institution of Parliament through
this scandal.

As members of Parliament we are accountable to the public. Together with
our political parties, we are entitled to more information in order to
respond adequately. Unfortunately, Parliament seems to have abdicated this
responsibility to the press, as we are often forced to read more in the
media.

By the hon Speaker’s admission a number of presiding officers have been
implicated and, as such, the presiding officers should not have controlled
the flow of information. The Speaker’s office should therefore recuse
itself from this matter. Parliament, as a collective, should set up a
multiparty committee to deal with the distribution of information that
stems from the ongoing investigations.

The issue has revealed a number of shortcomings with the present travel
system. In addition, it has also highlighted the structural and systemic
deficiencies in the support services for members of Parliament.

The ID believes that once the criminal investigation has been completed,
Parliament must then run its own internal process to discipline those
members who have been found guilty. These people would not have
transgressed against their individual political parties, but against
Parliament and the people of South Africa. It’s therefore important that
these errant MPs be disciplined.

This scandal is the acid test for the independence of Parliament from the
party, the state and the executive. If Parliament fails this test, we all
fail. I thank you.

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, may I say that we from the NNP side welcome
this debate. We think that the travel voucher saga has negatively affected
the integrity of Parliament and its members, and therefore we welcome the
debate today.

Firstly, certain issues are so obvious that they do not need to be debated.
The first one is that being that those members found guilty of fraud, in
other words those who have intentionally wanted to defraud Parliament, must
be punished. There is no question of a debate on that. The NNP believes
that if found guilty by a court of law, such persons must be dealt with
swiftly and decisively. No question about that either.

Secondly, and more importantly, we live in a society where the rule of law
must be upheld. There is also no debate on that. And that rule of law
applies to the rights of individuals when they are the subjects of an
investigation. With regard to the issue of making known the identities of
the persons on our list, the NNP is not protecting anybody. The situation
is quite simply that the investigation has not yet been completed. A charge
sheet only becomes a public document once a person has pleaded formally to
a charge. At this point, nobody has been formally charged.

The NNP is therefore not protecting anyone, but it would be simply
irresponsible to subject persons to a trial by media until they have been
properly questioned by the Scorpions, properly charged and have had an
opportunity to plead to the charge.

How do we take this matter further in a constructive way? The NNP has
instructed its members whose names appear on the list to co-operate fully
with the Scorpions. Once such persons have been charged, disciplinary steps
may be investigated. Only when a court has found somebody guilty will that
person face the full force of the law. But until such time, let us not jump
to conclusions. Let us respect the rule of law and let the law take its
course.

It is not up to any member of this House to call any other member corrupt.
That is a decision that a court of law must take. It is not a decision for
us to take. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chair, we have not exactly covered ourselves in glory in
this travel saga, but I have to say that I have never found it terribly
attractive when members of Parliament sit in judgment of each other. In my
experience, I wouldn’t really like to cast the first stone.

However, power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely, as
Lord Acton said. But this Parliament must be careful not to give the
impression that we have moved from struggle and reform idealism to
decadence and corruption without an intervening period of service. Is this
indicative of a wider malice and decline in public standards? Perhaps I
think so. Perhaps indeed the time has come for a third stream, a new
Christian democratic movement in South Africa.

The Chief Whip says that this is the most chaotic investigation he has
never seen. All I can say to him is that I bow to his superior knowledge
because we, as the ACDP, have not had the privilege of seeing any documents
that could lead us to such a conclusion. As far as we can tell, we are
happy with the way Madam Speaker has behaved, and we are happy with the way
the Leader of the Opposition and Mr Gibson have behaved so far. Perhaps it
is moving too slow, perhaps we need more transparency, but so far we think
that the whole thing has been quite well handled.

It is a basic tenet of crisis management to tell it all, to tell it quickly
and to tell it with openness and accountability, and that is, we believe,
the guiding principle that the ACDP would like to see in this whole debacle
and saga.

We believe that the members should be subjected to the same constraints and
legal sanctions as any other member of the public. Perhaps more so, because
we have a greater responsibility than people out there might have. There
will be a time for compassion and understanding if it is found that silly
and innocent members have inadvertently found themselves caught up in a
scam by crooks who have abused the privilege, but for which the member
received no benefit beyond that which was intended by Parliament. We will
have to see.

We will have to review our procedures, but will also have to review our
image. If we want people to respect the law, then they must respect the
lawmakers. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M P MENTOR: Chairperson of the House, in this debate  I  am  talking  not
just to the media, but also to the people of South Africa  about  the  media
and how the media have handled this problem and  reported  on  it,  and  how
they should actually have handled it. I will be referring to the problem  of
the vouchers, but there are also many others problems that preceded it.

Because I am talking to the media and about the media, I am dedicating  this
speech to Radio Freedom, the voice of the ANC that used  to  broadcast  from
the frontline states, giving us hope. [Applause.]

Ke lemogile gore fa go ne go bua rre van der Merwe wa IFP, letlhakore la  me
le le ka fa molemeng le ne le didimetse thata. Ke solofela gore ke  ka  gore
ba a mo tlotla gonne ke motho o mosweu. Ke lemogile gore fa go eme motho  yo
e seng mosweu fa a bua, ga a amogele tlotlo epe go tswa mo go bona.

Mo lebakeng la gore Mokwaledi ga se radipolotiki, a tlogele dipolotiki, ke
rata go raya ba ba mo letlhakoreng le le ka fa molemeng ke re . . .
(Translations of TSetswana paragraphs follows.)

[I have noticed that the time when Mr Vvan der Merwe of the IFP was
speaking, this side - that is on my right side - was very quiet. I believe
iit is because they give him respect, as he is a white person. I have
noticed that if a non-white stands up to speak, they do not give that
particular speaker such respect.

On the fact that the Secretary is not a politician, I would like to tell
those who are in the opposition that . . .]

We cannot micro-manage the Secretary to Parliament. In fact, because we  are
arguing that the systems of Parliament are weak and must be  addressed,  the
Secretary has every right to speak on this matter. The DA . . .

... e solofeditse batho ba Aforika Borwa gore e tla golola Rre Morkel, ka
ntlha ya gore leina la gagwe le tlhageletse mo makwalodikgannyeng. Le
gompieno jaana, ga ba ise ba mo golole. Seo se bontsha gore ga ba na nnete.
[. . . promised the South African people that it would be suspend Mr Morkel
because his name appeared in the newspapers. Even now, as I am speaking,
they have not suspended him. This shows that they are not truthful.]

Before 1994, just like the majority of black South Africans, the media
operated under very brutal conditions of suppression. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairperson, may I  raise  a  point  of
order?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Yes.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: There was a ruling about  people’s  names,
and we have just had a reference to  suspects  and  so  on.  Now,  this  hon
member is going out of her way again to refer to an hon member  of  the  DA.
That is one transgression.

The second one is that she consistently refers to the fact that the  DA  did
not tell the truth - she is misrepresenting what was said. The DA said  that
if any member was charged, he or she would be suspended,  and  that  if  any
member was convicted, he or she would lose  their  seat.  Neither  of  those
things has happened. The hon member should be instructed to withdraw that  .
. .

An HON MEMBER: That is not a point of order! [Interjections.]

The  HOUSE  CHAIRPERSON  (Mr  G  Q  M  Doidge):  Order!  Hon   member,   our
understanding  is  that  the  reference  was  to  the   DA   as   a   party.
[Interjections.] In that context  it  was  to  the  party  and  not  to  the
individual. [Interjections.]

Order! I thought that this debate was  to  inform  the  public  as  to  what
Parliament was doing about the problem,  but  we  cannot  shout  each  other
down, hon member.

The ruling is that this was in reference to the  political  party,  the  DA,
and we are going to leave it at that, Mr Gibson. But I am  going  to  appeal
to all speakers not to ignore the previous rulings  by  the  Deputy  Speaker
this afternoon in this debate. Please proceed, hon member.

Ms M P MENTOR: Thank you, Chairperson. Since the  advent  of  democracy  the
media has been operating under unprecedented freedom that is second to  none
in all countries of the world. As  a  result  of  our  fierce  struggle  for
freedom and emancipation, we sought  to  build  a  democratic  South  Africa
based on constitutionality, the rule of law, human dignity and human  rights
generally.

The democratic state that came into being as a result of our  struggle,  led
by the ANC and its alliance partners, is now viewed as  a  black  government
and, not only that, but as a black corrupt government. At the  beginning  of
the first decade of freedom, some sections of the media and the  enemies  of
peace and freedom predicted doom, chaos, inefficiency and corruption on  the
part  of  the  then  incoming  ANC-led  government,  the   so-called   black
government.

The concept of the gravy train was coined at that stage  and  was  put  into
the  minds  of  South  Africans.  When  the  prophecies  of   chaos,   doom,
inefficiency and corruption did not materialise at  the  end  of  the  first
term, our strategic defence package at the  beginning  of  the  second  term
then became the arms deal. Throughout the second term the  arms  deal  issue
was being thrown about and when it did not stick at the  end  of  the  first
decade of freedom - and at the beginning of the second  term  -  the  travel
scam arose.

The media have a right to report on things that  go  wrong.  They  have  the
right to operate . . . [Interjections.]

Ms R TALJAARD: Hon Chair, may I rise on a point of order? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please take your seat, hon  member.
What is your point of order?

Ms R TALJAARD: Chair, on a point of order: It is not only in respect of  the
travel scandal that the sub judice  rule  applies.  It  would  be  advisable
perhaps for you to also advise the current speaker in respect  of  the  arms
deal and associated investigations currently before the Durban  High  Court,
that those matters are  also  sub  judice.  I  would  also  request  you  to
instruct the member to withdraw those references as these  matters  are  sub
judice.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I will look at the matter and  rule
later. Please continue, hon member.

Ms M P MENTOR: Thank you, Chairperson. The media have a right to  report  on
things, but they must do so in a justifiably fair manner. They are  expected
to report accurately at all times. So many contradictory  things  have  been
reported  by  the  media  across  the  spectrum  about  the  travel  voucher
problems, but none of the things that were said by  the  media  provide  the
public of South Africa with clarity as  to  whether  the  members  involved,
directly or indirectly, have  acted  only  negligently  or  ignorantly,  are
liable to civil litigation, or have been intentionally corrupt.

None of the people whose names are held by the media has been  charged  with
any offence, either petty or serious, but the media continue to  judge  them
and try them publicly, and have already  found  them  guilty  without  their
being given a chance to defend themselves.

The democratic state and the new society that we are building, that  we  all
hold so dear and correctly so, is based on the principles  of  fairness  and
justice, one of which is “innocent until proven guilty” by a  court  of  law
and not by the media or the public.

Much as we all hold dear the right of the media to operate freely, and  much
as we uphold freedom of expression for the media and  the  people  of  South
Africa,  the  media  have  a  responsibility  and  an  obligation   to   act
responsibly and fairly at all times. When they report on  any  matter,  they
have to bear in mind that they are  actually  documenting  our  contemporary
history, and that they must do so in a fair and accurate manner.

All of us, including the organs of state, must operate within the  framework
of the Constitution at all times when we do our work. We have  no  right  to
violate human dignity. We have no right  to  violate  human  rights.  It  is
actually the violation of human dignity and human rights  that  sent  us  to
war to fight the apartheid state. We cannot, as early as 10 years  down  the
line, violate people’s rights as much  as  we  want  to  simply  because  we
belong to the media fraternity.

We all have a responsibility to  protect  and  defend  this  hard-fought-for
freedom and democracy. We all have the responsibility to defend the rule  of
law and constitutionality. We have a responsibility to defend the  integrity
and the institutions of freedom and democracy such as Parliament.

This does not remove the right of the media to criticise where necessary  or
to highlight shortcomings where they exist, but this  must  be  done  within
constitutional  principles,  within  the  framework  of  the  rule  of  law,
justice, human dignity and fairness.

The media have a role to play in the development of our country.  They  must
advocate justice and fairness for  all  subjects  of  the  state,  including
members of Parliament, when and if their  rights  are  violated.  The  media
have  an  obligation  to  uphold  the  values  that  are  enshrined  in  the
Constitution.

What would we do as South Africans, and the media in particular, if none  of
these members - or only some of them, whose names have been heard in  public
already - are found guilty? Who will take  the  responsibility?  What  price
should we pay to restore the dignity of those people’s names that have  been
damaged by being hurled into the media?

We have to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  state.  The  media  have  that
responsibility as well. That is why we are asking:  What  have  we  done  to
protect the integrity of the state and the integrity of Parliament, in  this
case?

The hon DA leader . . .

An HON MEMBER: Tony Leon.

Ms M P MENTOR: Yes, whoever he is, he used the media on Wednesday last  week
to instigate an uprising, and that  is  actually  treasonous.  I  was  taken
aback by the fact that none of the people in the media found that to  be  an
agitation against peace and stability. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I am  surprised  that  it  is
necessary for me to raise a point of order. Surely, the Chair heard the  hon
member accusing the leader of the DA of  treasonous  conduct?  I  think  the
irresponsibility of this member is breathtaking, and she should  be  slapped
down hard by the Chair. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, will you withdraw  that
remark about the Leader of the Opposition?

Ms M P MENTOR: I withdraw the remark, Chairperson. I will ask a question  at
the end of my  speech.  Thank  you  very  much.  When  you  agitate  for  an
uprising, when you agitate for national anger, I do not know  what  that  is
equal to I will not say what I think it is equal to, but  I  think  at  that
stage it was clearly an indication that the said member did not  want  peace
and stability to prevail within South Africa. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I rise on a point  of  order.
The  subject   under   discussion   is   the   travel   voucher   situation.
[Interjections.] The hon member is not dealing with  that  subject  at  all,
and I ask you to ask her to confine herself to the subject  of  the  debate.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, please continue on  the
subject before the House.

Ms M P MENTOR:  Thank  you,  Chairperson.  For  the  media  to  continue  to
sensationalise every issue, to ignore the facts  at  all  times  and  to  do
inadequate research does not augur well for South Africa and our  intentions
of development. The media have persistently taken the advantage  to  run  as
fast as possible when they can whenever there is an accusation in the air.

Today I would like to ask the media: What role are you playing  in  building
the developmental state? What role are we playing in giving  the  people  of
South Africa hope? Will you  forever  be  used  to  agitate  for  anger  and
uprising, or will you take the side of wanting to do constructive  work,  to
criticise constructively where necessary? [Interjections.]

The media are supposed to act in an ethical manner. There  are  supposed  to
be  international  norms  and  standards  that  the  media  should  use   as
yardsticks when they do their work. But, over and above  everything,  it  is
the values of the Constitution, the values of the rule of law, the value  of
human dignity, the value of human rights that should be the  framework  that
serves as the guiding principles within which the media should do its work.

Much as the democratic state gives the  media  the  freedom  of  speech   to
operate, we also call on the media  to  throw  in  their  lot  in  terms  of
assisting   us   in   enforcing   and   reinforcing   the   principles    of
constitutionality, and especially the principle  of  innocent  until  proven
guilty.

Before I sit down, and because I have four minutes left,  I  will  relate  a
story in Setswana to the House. A few months  ago  in  Galeshewe,  which  is
where I come from, the Scorpions descended  on  Kimberley  with  helicopters
and a convoy of  cars.  This  was  as  a  result  of  the  ANC  government’s
attempts, initiatives and projects to expose corruption.

Journalists had been involved together with the  state  in  exposing  things
that were wrong that had occurred. Suddenly, the  following  day,  when  the
whole of Galeshewe and the whole of Kimberley were waiting to know what  had
brought the helicopters and the black convoys  of  the  Scorpions  in  their
tens to Kimberley, these journalists received plum jobs and reported in  new
offices other than offices that were owned by the media. That  was  the  end
of the story.

The people of Galeshewe still want to know why the  Scorpions  descended  on
their city like that. Now, I am saying to the media today and to the  people
of South Africa  that  the  organs  of  state  have  to  act  without  fear,
prejudice and favour. The media also have to act in that  way.  When  people
in the media or the media themselves do  things  that  are  wrong,  we  very
seldom hear about it.

We call on the media to speak out about white-collar crime  in  the  private
sector, even when it occurs within the media environment itself.  It  is  so
that, even when it is an organ of state that is not toeing the  line  within
the spirit of constructive engagement and constructive criticism, the  media
will raise these issues and sometimes choose not to be  silent  on  them.  I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! On the point raised  by  the
hon Taljaard, the hon member’s statement did not reflect on  the  merits  of
that particular case you referred to and is therefore in order.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Geagte mnr die Voorsitter, die VF Plus is van mening
dat hierdie debat opsigself ’n skande is vir die instelling van die
Parlement. Dit is ’n skande dat parlementslede hier moet kom debatteer oor
ander parlementslede wat moontlik by misdaad betrokke is.

Dit is die taak van parlementslede om mense daar buite te beskerm teen
misdaad. ’n Mens kan mense daar buite nie kwalik neem as hulle sê dat die
grootste misdadigers in die Parlement sit, en hulle dus nie kan beskerm
nie. Dit is mos nou bekend dat 14 lede van die Parlement reeds
skulderkennings geteken het. Hulle is in die proses om die Parlement terug
te betaal vir die oortredings wat hulle begaan het. Laat daar geen
onduidelikheid wees nie: as ’n LP ’n vlugkoepon gebruik het om ’n motor te
huur, of om in ’n luukse hotel te bly, het daardie lid bedrog gepleeg. Hoe
kan die sub judice reël dan van toepassing wees? Hierdie lede het mos skuld
erken. En dan kom hierdie agb lid van die ANC en beskuldig die media dat
hulle op ’n heksejag is, en dat hulle sensasie najaag!

Dit is niks anders as “blame-shifting” om die media daarvoor te wil blameer
nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit is die ANC en die NNP, wat nie hulle lede se
name bekend wil maak nie, wat veroorsaak dat die media moet spekuleer oor
wie en wat betrokke is. [Applous.]

Ek is skaam om vandag te sê ek is ’n LP, want weet u, as die mense jou in
die straat raakloop en vra of jy ’n parlementslid is, dan vra hulle
onmiddellik vir jou: het jy ook bedrog gepleeg? [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek sê vir
u: maak die name van hierdie mense bekend. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Honourable Chairperson, the FF Plus is of the opinion
that this debate in itself is a disgrace for the institution of Parliament.
It is a disgrace that Mmembers of Parliament should have to come and debate
here about other members of Parliament who might be involved in crime.

It is the task of members of Parliament to protect the people out there
against crime. One cannot take offence if the people out there say that the
biggest criminals sit in Parliament, and therefore cannot protect them. It
is now knownnow that 14 members of Parliament have already signed
admissions of guilt. They are in the process of refunding Parliament for
the transgressions they have committed. Let there be no misunderstanding:
if an MP used a flight coupon to rent a car, or to stay in a luxury hotel,
then thatn MP has committed fraud. How can the sub judice rule then be
applicable? These members have admitted guilt. And then this hon member of
the ANC comes and accuses the media of being on a witch-hunt, and ofthat
they are pursuing sensation!

It is nothing other than blame-shifting to want to blame the media.
[Interjections.] It is the ANC and the NNP, who do not wanting to disclose
their members’ names, which that are giving gives rise to the media
speculating about who and what is involved. [Applause.]

I am ashamed today to say I am an MP, because you know, if people approach
you on the street and ask if you are a member of Parliament, then they
immediately ask you: did you also commit fraud? [Interjections.] I am
telling you: disclose the names of these people.]

I want to say to the hon member of the ANC, the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, who said in his opening statement that the ANC is committed to clean
and transparent government . . . [Interjections.] Thank you. Thank you,
Chairperson . . . that he must ensure that it is clean and transparent,
because outside the people say that ANC now stands for the agency for
national corruption. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, while we do not detract from
the importance of this debate, we feel it is unfortunate that, instead of
performing duties that will enhance the development of the country and its
people, we are quibbling about how wrong or right some of us are.

The conduct of elected representatives should be such that the task given
to them by the electorate is beyond reproach. Members of Parliament are
expected to be men and women of substance who will do all in their might to
resist the temptation to find temporary creature comforts.

The abuse of travel vouchers and, to some extent, Parmed facilities, has
been looked into by this House before. We in the UCDP believe that if there
is to be uprightness, parties should not hesitate to take unpopular
decisions against their defaulting members. If we are to protect the
interests of the nation and uphold this institution, parties should come
clean when the time comes and, without apportioning blame to anyone, we
believe that members must earn being called honourable and live up to that
honour by being decent in word and deed.

Parties, we believe, must make an example of those who will be found guilty
when the matter is closed. However, we commend Parliament for having been
proactive in this matter. We have confidence in this Parliament, the
presiding officers and all members of this House that this matter, like all
other matters, is surmountable and, like all other matters, will be
overcome when the time comes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the PAC of Azania has a consistent record of
condemning corruption in our country. This is evident in the PAC’s
condemnation of the notorious arms deal, now costing over R60 billion,
while very few jobs have been created, of corruption regarding old-age
pensions, which is rife, and of business deals that are cut in the
privatisation of strategic assets of the state.

It is a sad day indeed for the citizens of this country who have entrusted
their taxes to the development of our country to discover that their
elected representatives are looking after their own comfort, instead of
protecting the national interest of this country. [Interjections.]
Corruption, regardless of who commits it, must be investigated, and the
charge, if proven to have substance, must be prosecuted to the full extent
of the law. A clear message must be sent by this nation to all corrupt
elements in high places, namely that corruption will not be tolerated.
Travel agencies have already been punished by liquidation and a media gag,
and their bills are not being paid whilst the case is still under
investigation.

PAC e nyatsa mofuta ofe kapa ofe wa bobodu le manyofonyofo. Bohle ba
ikarabellang ho tsa bobodu le manyofonyofo, ba tlamehile hore ba
ikarabelle. Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[The PAC detests any form of corruption. Everybody who is guilty of
corruption will have to be held accountable. Thank you.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, it is most unfortunate that issues regarding
the use of travel vouchers have reached such a point. However, as a
democracy governed by qualities such as transparency and good governance,
the MF is pleased that Parliament has called for this investigation.

The public, in the light of this, may have to be reassured that government
has its best interests at heart. This investigation will be concluded in
the courts. But what we need to bear in mind is that as a democracy, our
rule of law determines that one is innocent until proven guilty. It is true
that media coverage on the matter may result in finger-pointing, but we, as
representatives of our nation, need to instil confidence in our people. We
need to reassure them that this government is for the people, and we need
to stop the negative impact that this travel voucher saga has had on the
confidence our people have placed in us.

The MF also hopes that this matter will receive the efficient attention of
Parliament, and that this matter be settled at the earliest time possible.
We, however, would like to urge that guidelines regarding the use of travel
vouchers are forwarded to members, and if in any way persons accused may
have been misguided in their use, we need to fix the loopholes to avoid
similar occurrences. However, while investigations are still underway, we
request that members – old and new - be adequately educated in the use of
the various gratuities made available to us.

The MF expresses much concern on the matter of the travel vouchers, and
hopes that clarity will be reached as soon as possible. The MF
supports good governance and transparency for an efficient democracy. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, members of Parliament are supposed to be
upholders of high moral standards by virtue of being lawmakers. To this end
they have to carry out their activities in an exemplary and dignified way.

South African citizens must have been highly discouraged when they came to
realise that some of the members of Parliament had allegedly engaged in
fraudulent activities to defraud the very institution that pays them
salaries and benefits.

Azapo believes that all of us in this House are required by the ethics
associated with our public offices to practice what we preach. To Azapo it
is crucial that Parliament, as a public institution, take such steps as are
necessary to protect itself from misuse by some of its members.

Parliament, therefore, must take steps consistent with its code of conduct
to punish those who are found guilty of engaging in any fraudulent
activities associated with travel vouchers. Such steps must include a full
recovery of its losses from the members concerned and the dismissal of such
members from Parliament - if found guilty.

In the meantime though, Azapo believes that the law must take its course,
regardless of who is involved. At the same time, we call upon parties whose
members are found guilty to remove them from Parliament, and not to allow
them to hold any future public office - irrespective of whether they were
found guilty with an optional fine or not.

This matter should be regarded as a breach of trust by the South African
citizens who elected all of us to protect Parliament and its integrity.
Apart from punishing the affected members, Parliament now needs to re-
examine its code and ethics and tighten then in order to prevent similar
incidences. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms H ZILLE: Chairperson, what do Judge Siraj Desai and Ms Marion Sparg have
in common with a number of soccer referees, and the men falsely accused of
raping Baby Tshepang? The answer is that none of them are members of
Parliament and could thus not call on the country’s most senior political
office bearers to shield them from media reporting of allegations against
them.

Their names appeared on the front pages before they were charged, tried,
convicted or sentenced. It is now a matter of record that some of them were
found not guilty, while the rest still await their day in court.

We, in the DA, believe in the rule of law, and that people are deemed
innocent until proven guilty. But the way press freedom is interpreted in
South Africa means that the media often reports on allegations against
people before they are charged – let alone convicted. If this applies to
some, it must apply to all, especially the politically powerful. Alongside
the principle of the presumption of innocence, is the equally important
principle of equality before the law.

Yet, here we see the politically powerful disgracefully playing the race
card, blaming the system, probably blaming apartheid, to shield their
colleagues from public exposure in what is potentially one of the greatest
scandals to emerge in any democratic parliament anywhere. [Interjections.]

It is, frankly, beyond contempt to imply, as the ANC’s Chief Whip did, that
the DA’s commitment to transparency is racist because of the colour of the
skin of the MPs that have so far been named. Or, as another ANC speaker
said, that a call for transparency is treasonous. Nothing could illustrate
the ANC’s contempt for democracy more clearly than these statements. It is
the death knell to the ANC’s claim to be a nonracial party, committed to
democracy. It implies that a misdemeanour is acceptable to the ANC -
depending on your skin colour. That is what the public has heard today.
[Interjections.]

The irony, of course, is that despite – and perhaps because of - the
attempts to suppress the names of the “Travelgate” MPs, the media has made
a point of ferreting them out. And because secrecy implies that there is
something to hide, the public believes that anyone named must be guilty.
Furthermore, all MPs remain under a cloud of suspicion. All this could have
been avoided by a full, early disclosure and an explanation of why a name
on a list does not automatically imply wrongdoing.

Instead, the ANC and NNP are once more hiding behind the sub judice rule.
We should not be surprised if the general public think that that sub judice
is a Latin term meaning “cover-up”. [Interjections.] In fact, when it comes
to public accountability, people who hold public office and spend public
money must expect far greater scrutiny than the private citizen.

This principle was underscored by our own press ombudsman in a precedent-
setting ruling in 1998, when he said:

  Suppression of high-level investigations into
  allegations against senior politicians cannot be
  justified as being in the public interest. It would
  be wrong to withhold such information from the
  public of a country whose Constitution provides for
  a democratic and open society.

The former Speaker, Dr Frene Ginwala, agreed with this approach. When the
first signs of the travel scam emerged early last year, she reportedly gave
assurances that all forms of corruption in the use of Parliament’s travel
budget would be fully exposed. An increasingly cynical public may be
excused for concluding that her premature departure may have had something
to do with her clear lack of enthusiasm about invoking the sub judice rule
to protect her colleagues in this matter.

We have missed her in the debate today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chair, on a point of order: Is in order that a member of the
House should refer to the previous Speaker when she is not here to defend
herself? Is that in order? And is it correct? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, we will look at that
point and get back to you.

Mr J H JEFFERY: Mr Chair, let me begin by again stating the ANC’s position
that the charges of travel voucher misuse must be thoroughly investigated,
that the law must take its course, but that individuals implicated or
charged must be presumed innocent until found otherwise, and that the ANC
will act in accordance with its Constitution against any of its public
representatives found guilty of such conduct.

Let us make no mistake as well that the ANC is committed in its fight
against corruption. Fighting corruption was indeed an important element in
our election manifesto in the 2004 elections. The ANC-led Government has
indeed already taken great strides in the fight against corruption over the
past 10 years.

On the institutional front, our Constitution provides for independent
institutions such as the Auditor-General, the Public Protector and the
Public Service Commission.

Additional bodies have been set up to deal with corruption: the Independent
Complaints Directorate, the National Prosecuting Authority and so on. Then,
we have improved on the systems – the Public Finance Management Act and the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act - to transform the
controls over the spending of public money and to make the prevention and
detection of corruption a lot easier. Lastly, we have the Protected
Disclosures Act and the Prevention of Corruption Act, which provide
comprehensive detail of the offences of corruption and the procedural steps
to be followed.

Let me just add that it is said that 80% of corruption cases in government
reported in the media are actually first uncovered by the government
itself. And I think this applies to this issue that we are debating today.

The ANC is also committed to transparency. Can you even compare the
transparency in the tricameral parliament, which didn’t really exist, with
the democratic Parliament that has existed since 1994? Some of the
highlights are access to information legislation, the committees of
Parliament are open to the public and, in addition, MPs have to disclose
their gifts over a particular amount and their assets.

These are things that many parliaments, which may be regarded as coming
from democratic traditions, either do not have or have just instituted.
Countries like Germany, Denmark, Canada, New Zealand and India, for
example, do not have an assets register. In addition, members of our
executive also have to complete a list of liabilities.

There were cases in the previous parliament of misuse of travel vouchers.
These cases were investigated by the National Assembly’s disciplinary
committee, which was chaired by our current Speaker on two occasions and by
one of the House chairs on another. Three MPs were found guilty and were
publicly reprimanded in the House. They forfeited some of their travel
vouchers and had to pay back the money for the abused vouchers.
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: But they weren’t charged with fraud,
which is what they should have been.

Mr J H JEFFERY: The cases, Mr Gibson, were handed over to the NPA as the
disciplinary committee felt that fraud had occurred. In terms of media
reports, the NPA declined to prosecute in at least two cases that occurred
in 2001. In the other case, which occurred in September last year, the MP
in fact resigned from Parliament after being requested to do so by the ANC.

However, Mr Leon is quoted in the media as saying this was just a rap over
the knuckles. [Interjections.]

Mr E W TRENT: Chair, may I ask the hon member a question?

Mr J H JEFFERY: No - at the end of my speech if I have time.
[Interjections.] Well, that is his opinion. I mean, Mr Leon is quoted in
the media as saying it was a rap over the knuckles. That is his opinion
now, but I don't recall him or any other member of the DA saying so at the
time.

As we have heard, the current irregularities were uncovered by Parliament,
which ordered a forensic investigation. We need to congratulate Parliament
in this regard on the steps that it took.
I want to use this point as well to condemn Mr Gibson’s aspersions on the
Secretary, claiming that he is still acting as a political office bearer. I
think it is reprehensible to make such remarks in a forum in which the
Secretary cannot defend himself. [Interjections.]

We need to accept that the systems are inadequate, something many speakers
have already raised, in that MPS arrange and book flights through travel
agents, the agents pay SA Airways and submit the accounts to Parliament,
but MPs are never given a regular statement to indicate what is being
claimed on their behalf. Certain travel agents have been charged; we need
to await the outcome of those cases. One cannot assume their guilt.

Questions have been raised on the role of the MPs in this matter. Now,
obviously, MPs feature very prominently and are at the centre of things as
the claims that were made by the travel agents – the disputed claims - were
claims made on their behalf. But what has not helped is the manner in which
some members of this House, some of the parties and some members of the
media have attempted to sensationalise this matter, blow it out of
proportion, while acting on leaks and rumours. [Interjections.]

Many members have spoken on the presumption of innocence. That’s a
principle in our law. A person is presumed innocent until proved guilty.
It’s a right enshrined in our Constitution. In fact, it was one of the
rights that existed before our Bill of Rights came into existence. It’s a
universally accepted right. What the presumption of innocence means is that
the state must prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. And the reason for
this is that the consequences of finding a person guilty are extremely
severe. They may result in loss of liberty, negative economic consequences,
loss of a job and they can destroy a person’s social standing and family.

We have the presumption of innocence because we only want to punish
blameworthy people, and establishing blameworthiness is a complex task. We
do not want to punish people for acts they did not intend to commit. Now I
imagine no one would disagree with that. Many speakers have stressed this
point as well, even from the DA.

But has this right with regard to MPs been respected? The Sowetan editorial
of 12 August stated: "We agree with the ruling ANC that the MPs whose names
are contained in the report must be deemed innocent until proved otherwise
by a court of law." That’s very good. But the same Sowetan of 12 August had
a headline on the front page, which screamed “Expose rogue MPs” and wanted
the ANC to release the 23 names. In other words, here is the DA members’
problem with the presumption of innocence - they can’t actually apply it.
If the Sowetan headline is to be believed and the MPs are rogues – none of
those 23 is innocent until proven guilty - they are rogues. A dictionary
defines a “rogue” as a dishonest or an immoral man; presumably that can
apply to women as well. Is this respecting the presumption of innocence? I
think it smacks of a presumption or even a finding of guilt.

But this is not the only example. "Shame on you" said The Star editorial of
26 June, and it then proceeded with a piece that castigated guilty MPs. But
have any MPs been found guilty? No. None has even been charged. Is this
editorial a presumption of innocence? I don't think so. The news on e-tv,
when reporting on some MPs’ explanations, had a line that read "Excuses,
excuses, excuses". In other words, these MPs are guilty and because of that
their explanations must be regarded as feeble.

Even members of this House have sought to turn this to their political
advantage. I think we have seen this with many of the speakers from
particularly the DA, the FF Plus – as I think you are called now – and so
on. An article in the Cape Argus of 18 August, which reported on an
interview with the hon Tony Leon, had the headline: “Travel Scam: Big guns
being shielded” and that’s attributed to the DA. Is that presumption of
innocence?

There is a paucity of facts. Even those who appear to be under
investigation don't know exactly what they are accused of doing. As with
the presumption of innocence, this is a key requirement of a fair trial. We
ourselves, as members of this House, often learn of the details of some of
the allegations from the rumours and leaks that the press pick up. A
fundamental problem in this matter is the rumour-mongering and the
sensationalisation that have taken place. As far as I am aware even the 23
members, required by the Scorpions, don't have all the details of what they
are alleged to have done.

The hon Zille spoke about the fact that people like Judge Desai were found
guilty by the media when they were, in fact, innocent and that there should
be equality and that that should apply to everybody. But is that right? I
don’t think that’s right. The press need to be more responsible in the way
they report, as do members of this House. The media, in the way they have
projected things, have presented a very confused picture. On 1 August the
Sunday Times reported that 135 MPs had been investigated by
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the auditors appointed by Parliament. But City
Press on the same date had a front-page headline that screamed “179 MPs
face arrest”. Business Day two days before had referred to 37 MPs being
fingered. So, how many MPs are we talking about? We don’t know.
[Interjections.]

Some people have said that Parliament should do more by explaining its role
in initiating the current investigation. Now this may be so, but we should
also rely on the media to correctly inform one on issues - and many of the
reports that have come out have been extremely inaccurate.

The Star on 12 August had a front-page headline, which read “MP travel
scam: More heads to roll”. The subheadline was "Goings on in Parliament
likened to The Bold and the Beautiful". Very dramatic. I don’t know if that
increased their circulation. They had done some research and printed a copy
of a flight voucher with the caption: "In black and white: Although some
MPs have claimed ignorance of how the parliamentary travel voucher works,
it clearly states that it may only be used for air tickets." And that’s
correct. The voucher reads it must be "presented by the member personally
for issuing an air ticket".

An HON MEMBER: Everyone knows that. You don’t have to be a rocket
scientist.

Mr J H JEFFERY: Right, thanks for that DA. But now I wish the reporters had
done a little more research. Parliamentary Circular LO19, to which the hon
Speaker referred and which details travel facilities for MPs, while silent
on the use of hired cars quite clearly states that a voucher can be used
for travel by bus, by train and for driving from Parliament to your home or
constituency. So the wording on the voucher is actually incorrect, and
printing that is only half the story.

Even the fact that MPs have used vouchers to hire cars is not in itself
proof of corruption on their part. Some members were under the impression
that they could hire a car to drive from Cape Town to their constituency,
and they were informed that this could be done by the travel agent. Now why
trust the travel agent, you may ask. Because, I think, MPs expected them to
know. It’s like going into a chemist and asking the pharmacist: “Is this
medication covered by medical aid?” You trust what he or she tells you.

While I am not trying to defend members who may be guilty, there is a
presumption of innocence. We mustn’t just pay lip service to it. There may
be reasonable explanations for some of these accusations. In addition,
members should only have to respond when they are informed of the full
details of the suspected acts that they are meant to have committed.

In closing, I want to re-emphasise the ANC's commitment to fighting
corruption and to say that that cannot be doubted, even by Afro-pessimists
like the hon member from the FF Plus. Any allegation of untoward behaviour
on the part of MPs must be properly and expeditiously investigated, and the
ANC will take action against any person found guilty. However, individuals
being investigated must be regarded as innocent until proven guilty.

We need to take steps to improve the travel system for MPs – there is
general agreement on that. But I hope, as some speakers said earlier, that
we can use this debate to actually explain to the public what has happened
and some of the issues, and not for political point-scoring. To do that
actually brings discredit on all of us.

One last point. With the DA’s new-found commitment to transparency, I hope
that they will now tell the public who was the mysterious Hans who gave
them money and whether, in fact, they ever took money from Jurgen Harksen.
Thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Regarding the point of
order raised by the hon Turok, the reference made to the former speaker is
not out of order.

Debate concluded.

                        CHIEF ALBERT LUTHULI MEMORIAL
                            (Member’s Statement)

Umntwana N E ZULU (IFP): UKhongolose uyasincoma kakhulu isinyathelo
esithathwe uhulumeni sokuba enze isikhumbuzo seNkosi u-Albert Luthuli,
kanye nokuguqula indlu ayehlala kuyo ibe ngeyokugcinela izizukulwane zethu
umlando wakhe. Ukukhululeka kweNingizimu Afrika kusinikeze ithuba lokuba
sikhombise umhlaba wonke lokho okungamagugu ale lizwe lethu obekufihlakele.

Ukwethulwa kwesikhumbuzo seNkosi u-Albert Luthuli KwaDukuza nguMongameli
wezwe mhla zingama-21 kuNcwaba, kuwo lo nyaka, kube yisambulo esisha
sokubaluleka kokuqoshwa kabusha komlando wale lizwe. Ukuvulwa kwendlu
yamagugu omlando okwakuhlala kuyo leli qhawekazi lase-Afrika kanye
nesikhumbuzo somfanekiso wakhe, kube iyona ndlela abantu baseNingizimu
Afrika abakhombise ngayo ukumbonga ekuzinikeleni kwakhe emzabalazweni
wokukhululeka kwale lizwe.

Ukubaluleka kwalo mkhosi weNkosi uMadlanduna kubonakale ngokuhanjelwa
iNgonyama yamabandla onke, iSilo uZwelithini, esiwumzukulu weSilo uDinizulu
esabamba iqhaza elikhulu ekwakhiweni kukaKhongolose. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu member’s statement follows.)

[Prince N E ZULU (IFP): The ANC highly applauds the step taken by the
government to celebrate the unveiling of the Chief Albert Luthuli memorial,
and also the converting of the house in which he was staying into a museum
in order to keep his history for future generations. Our freedom in South
Africa has provided us with an opportunity to show the whole world all the
heritage of our country that was previously concealed.

The unveiling of the Chief Albert Luthuli memorial in KwaDukuza by the
President onthe 21st of August, this year, was a new revelation which marks
the importance of revisiting the history of this country. The unveiling of
the museum of this African hero and his statue was the way the South
African people showed gratitude to him for his dedication in the struggle
for freedom in this country.

The importance of this commemoration of Chief Madlanduna was clearly marked
by the presence of His Majesty King Zwelithini, who is the grandchild of
King Dinizulu and who played a pivotal role in the formation of the ANC.
Thank you. [Applause]]

                          SALDANHA MILITARY ACADEMY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Thank you, Chairperson. At a time when the
SANDF is trying to attract quality young recruits, the problems at the
Saldanha Military Academy present the worst advertisement. The academy, hon
Chairperson, is training the future leaders of the Defence Force, but both
black and white lecturers are resigning because of alleged political
interference, which is damaging the academic ethos of the academy.

These posts remain vacant because only affirmative action appointments will
be considered. The growing burden on remaining lecturers is causing further
resignations and a loss of much-needed skills. And reports of racially
motivated attacks on students, which the top management is allegedly
covering up, must be urgently investigated and disciplinary action must be
taken.

The fact that the declining conditions at the academy are reported to be
linked to the new Commanding Officer must also be investigated. We know
that there were no problems under the former Commanding Officer, the hon
Brigadier General Soli Molo.
The Minister of Defence must brief the Portfolio Committee on Defence on
the reasons why the academy has deteriorated so badly, and what action is
being taken to rectify matters. Thank you.


                       ATTACKS ON MEMBERS OF THE SAPS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Thank you, Chairperson. The attack and murder of
members of the South African Police Service by civilians is a worrying
situation and a cause of great concern. It seems to be the latest trend for
civilians to attack and harass police officers while they are on duty.

This was the case on Tuesday, 17 August in the Eastern Cape, where a
civilian was also injured during such an attack. Members of the Police
Service must know that they have the right to defend themselves, as their
lives are no less valuable than those of the criminals whom they are tasked
to protect us from.

This statement is directed at members of the Police Service who are
innocently attacked while fulfilling their duties, and not at police
officers who are killed or injured because of their involvement in criminal
activities.

The Ministry must take note of these attacks, and bear in mind that an
attack on a member of the Police Service is an attack on the state itself.
There is a thin blue line between the state and the criminals, and that
line is the SAPS which helps to maintain law and order. Those who are found
guilty of killing innocent police officers should be prosecuted harshly. I
thank you.


                     CONGRATULATIONS TO ANC YOUTH LEAGUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M R MOHLALOGA (ANC): Thanks, hon Chairperson. The ANC congratulates the
African National Congress Youth League and its leadership on the successful
conclusion of their 22nd national congress, which was held at Nasrec from
18 to 22 August 2004. We further congratulate the ANC Youth League on the
progressive declaration and resolutions they took at the congress.

As the ANC, we will engage various committees of Parliament on resolutions
adopted at that congress to speed up the eradication of the challenges that
our youth face, be it regarding unemployment, access to finance or
entrepreneurial support.

We further welcome the constitutional amendment, obliging all structures of
the youth league to have a minimum of 40% representation by women. The ANC
wishes the newly elected leadership a successful term of office. Thank you.

 TELKOM’S RESTRUCTURING PROGRAMME
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M DIKO (UDM): Thank you, Chair. The UDM condemns Telkom’s continued
insistence on extensive job cuts. Telkom insists that it will proceed with
its restructuring programme that will result in
4 000 jobs being cut over the next three years.

It is puzzling that Telkom and its chief executive can adopt such an
intransigent position in the face of appeals by the unions and government
to the contrary. Are the unions and government no longer stakeholders in
Telkom? Is Telkom now a force unto its own? This occurs despite the fact
that Telkom operates very profitably as a monopoly at the grace of
government.

The Chief Executive Officer himself seems to have completely lost sight of
the harsh employment reality of South Africa today. Whilst he reportedly
earned R11 million last year, we are supposed to believe that he can no
longer pay 4 000 of his employees. Further shocking claims have recently
been made that Telkom has hired 20 luxury rooms on the luxury liner, the
Queen Mary II, which is currently in Athens for the Olympics.

Ukuba ibingabameli bezopolitiko abenze oku ngekukho ingxolo enkulu ngale
nto. [Had it been politicians who were involved in this, there would have
been a lot to say.] Again it is difficult to understand how a company can
afford such lavish expenses, but cannot guarantee employment for its
workers.

The UDM calls on the Minister to consult with Icasa and to remind the
management of Telkom that their licence does not operate in a vacuum. Thank
you.

                              TELKOM’S MONOPOLY

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Telkom is the only provider of a fixed-line telephony
service in South Africa. Due to policy, legislation, regulations and delays
in the introduction of the second national operator, Telkom has been able
to entrench its protected position as a monopoly in the ICT sector.

Telkom has recently announced profits of over R4,5 billion and salary
payments to its CEO of over R11 million, whilst at the same time announcing
plans to retrench over 4000 employees.

At the same time there has been a drop of over 200 000 in fixed line
connections between 1999 and 2003. A number of websites have recently been
established by concerned citizens to voice their disapproval over these
contradictory actions and statements; websites such as hellkom.co.za and
telkomsucks.co.za.

The ID calls on government and Telkom to accelerate the introduction of
competition so as to lower the costs of telephone charges and improve the
roll-out of affordable and quality services to all. I thank you

                SUDANESE GOVERNMENT REJECTS OBASSANJO’S OFFER
                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): The reports that the Sudanese government has
rejected an offer by the chairman of the African Union, President
Obassanjo, to send troops to disarm rebels are worrying and have raised
many questions. The Sudanese government has been denying charges that they
are sponsoring the armed Arab Janjaweed militia in their campaign of ethnic
cleansing in the South.

Women and children have been raped and villages have been looted and burnt
down in a ruthless campaign that the Khartoum government has failed to stop
for years. The ACDP will support any possible sanction imposed on the
Sudanese government, by the UN Security Council, after the 30 August
deadline.

We therefore call on the Khartoum government to accept any offer of help
from the AU to bring back peace, security and stability to the southern
Sudan, particularly the Darfur region.


                       CLEAN-UP OPERATION IN ALEXANDRA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN(ANC): Modulasetulo, ke ragoga mo ka lethabo; ke
thabišitšwe ke mošomo wo ke o bonego ka motseng wa Alexandra. Badudi ba
Alexandra ba thekgile barutiši le dihlogo tša dikolo tša phoraemare tše di
latelago: Iphutheng, Pholosho, Zenzeleni, Gordon le Carter.

Dikolo tše di šoma ka maatla go hlwekiša ditikologo tšeo di lego go tšona
ka projeke yeo e bitšwago Bontle ke Botho. Gape dikolo tše di tšea karolo
go ruteng bana matlhale le botaki. Bana bakhwi ba laeditše setšhaba tsebo
le kwešišo ya bona phatlalatšeng.

Dikolo tše di kgopela gore baetapele ba tšee tlhwekišo ya tikologo ka šedi
yeo ba tšeago malwetši ao a lego gona setšhabeng - a go swana boHIV/Aids.

Kgopelo ya ka go mafapha a Mmušo ke gore a thekge dikolo tše; a thekge le
barutiši bao ba ikgafetšego go šomela setšhaba gammogo le dihlogo tša
dikolo tšekhwi.

Ke fihlišitše memorantamo wa dikolo tše go Tona ya Saense le Teknoloji le
Tona ya tša Tikologo gore ba tle ba kgone go bona mošomo wa dikolo tšekhwi.
Ke a leboga. Šatee! [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of Pedi
member’s statement follows.)

[Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN (ANC): Hon  Chairperson,  I  arise  with  great
joy, impressed by the work that I  have  seen  in  Alexandra  Township.  The
residents there are very supportive of the teachers and  principals  of  the
following  primary  schools:  Iphuteng,  Pholosho,  Zenzeleni,  Gordon   and
Carter.

These schools are working very hard to clean up their environment through
the project referred to as “‘ Bontle ke Botho”’. These schools also
participate in teaching the learners about science and art. These learners
have publicly shown their knowledge and understanding.


These schools appeal to the Ministers to prioritise the cleaning up of the
environment as much as they do with perturbing diseases like HIV-/Aids.


My request to the government departments is to support these schools,
support these teachers who have volunteered to work for the nation, as well
as the school principals.

I have submitted the memorandum from these schools to the Minister of
Science and Technology and the Minister of Environmental Affairs, so they
can see the work that these schools have done. Thank you. (Praise) (Time is
up) [Time expired.] [Applause.]]


                   COMPULSORY COMMUNITY SERVICE FOR NURSES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R COETZEE (DA): Chairperson, the Minister of Health should drop her plan
to force this year’s graduating nursing students to undergo compulsory
community service from January next year.

There is, as yet, no legal basis for compulsory community service for
nurses. The Nursing Bill, which provides for it, has yet to go through
Parliament. Moreover, the Department of Health cannot hope to organise a
properly managed introduction to community service by January.

Any attempt to do so will drive even more of our nurses overseas.
Over 18 000 nursing posts in the public sector are vacant. Nurses go
overseas because of poor working conditions and because many feel they are
being treated with disdain and insensitivity by the Government.

Forcing mismanaged and disruptive community service on graduating nurses in
January is hardly the right introduction to a nursing career in South
Africa, and will confirm the worst fears of those who are already concerned
about their future.

If the Minister insists on implementing her plan, she will succeed only in
depriving our country of more desperately needed healthcare workers.


                  REINSTITUTION OF THE MAMUSA MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr P H K DITSHETELO(UCDP): Chairperson, the wall-to-wall nonracial
municipalities introduced in 2000 have suffered casualties. Some
municipalities are finding it difficult to keep their heads above water
because of a lack of resources, while others are wallowing in the morass of
ineptitude because of greed on the part of their councillors.

The Mamusa Municipality in Schweizer-Reneke, North West, which had to be
dissolved by the MEC for Local Government because of in-fighting and
corruption, has been reconstituted. We hope that the new council will have
learnt from the mistakes of its predecessor.

We hope that the Mamusa municipality, like other deserving municipalities,
will benefit from the R15 billion allocated to municipal infrastructure
development launched by the Minister two weeks ago.

We call on those elected to the municipality to take office with
responsibility. The department is called on to provide the necessary
support systems to ailing municipalities as failure to do so tends to
demoralise the residents in the affected municipalities. The question of
double appointments to the same post, as was and is the case in some
municipalities, should not be allowed to recur. All people need their
services to improve their lives.

Let us hope, now that the UCDP is coming on board with the council, that
they will serve as a catalyst, because the three parties that served in the
last council thrived on differences rather than development. I thank you.
[Time expired.]


                              GATUMBA MASSACRE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is shocked to learn from
media reports about the recent massacre in Burundi of refugees from the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We condemn unreservedly this heartless waste
of human life. What was supposed to be a quiet and peaceful night turned
out to be the worst in their lives since their arrival in Burundi. Their
killers came in the dark of the night and hacked to death innocent people
who were already victims of violent conflict in their motherland.

As is always the case in any conflict, women and children were the most
affected. It appears that they were murdered because they are Banyamulenge
and are said to have ties with the Tutsis of Rwanda. The killers argue
that, because they are related to the Tutsis of Rwanda, they do not deserve
the right to live.

We support the call made by our Government that the perpetrators should be
brought before a court of law to account for this human rights abuse. We
call upon the African Union and the entire international community to
condemn this despicable act against human life. I thank you. [Applause.]


                         TAXPAYERS’ MONEY EMBEZZLED


                            (Member’s Statement)




Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Agb Voorsitter, Rapport, een van die grootste
naweekblaaie, berig op 22 Augustus 2004 oor miljoene rande se staatsgeld
wat verduister word. Dit is kommerwekkend om daarop te let dat die media
verwys na staatsamptenare se vindingrykheid om belastingbetalers se geld
vas te lê.

Mnr Willie Hofmeyer se spesiale ondersoekeenheid berig van korrupsie en
bedrog en verskeie openbare departemente wat tans ondersoek word om
sodoende op staatsgeld te herwin.

Die ANC het tydens algemene verkiesing vroeër vanjaar weereens belowe om
korrupsie in die openbare sektor te beveg. Ten spyte daarvan is die publiek
geskok om sedertdien byna daagliks via die media te verneem van openbare
korrupsie wat gepleeg word en dat die skuldiges dan in sommige gevalle
blykbaar net verplaas, aangespreek of selfs na bewering bevorder word.

Terselfdertyd is ons bly om te hoor dat sover moontlik ondersoek ingestel
word na openbare bedrog, maar die kiesers sal graag wil sien en hoor dat
die skuldiges uitgewys word en aan die pen ry. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN WDYK (DA): Hon Chairperson, Rapport, one of the largest weekend
newspapers, reported on 22 August 2004 regarding millions of rands of state
funds that are embezzled. It is worrying to note that the media refers to
the ingenuity of state officials in getting hold of taxpayers’ money.

Mr Willie Hofmeyer’s special investigation unit reports corruption and
fraud and various state departments are under investigation in order to
recoverthe state’s money.

The ANC, during the general elections earlier this year, once again
promised to fight corruption in the public sector. Despite this the public
is shocked that since then they have to learn, almost on a daily basis via
the media, reports about public corruption taking place and that about the
guilty parties who are in some casesare apparently merelyjust transferred,
addressed taken to task or even, it is allegedly, promoted.

At the same time we are glad to hear that insopublic fraud is being
investigated as far as possible, but the voters would like to see and hear
that guilty persons are exposed and that they are convicted. Thank you.
[Applause.]]




                           ALLEVIATION OF POVERTY

                             Member’s Statement)

Ms M S MAINE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the continued efforts of
government to uplift the poor from their conditions. The UN has declared
this year to be the Year of the Family.

The recent intervention by the MEC for Social Development in North West is
another indication of the caring nature of our Government. On Sunday 15
August 2004, City Press reported on a family of five - triplets and their
two parents. Both parents at that time were unemployed, poor and unable to
feed these babies. The triplets were suffering from hunger and their
parents did not know where their next meal would come from. The MEC donated
food and clothing and further promised the family a proper house. Since the
report appeared in City Press, many people and organisations have come
forward and assisted the family. The father of the triplets has since then
got a job with the local municipality.

The ANC appreciates the good work done by the MEC, the journalist from City
Press, the staff and the editor of the newspaper. E ke yona konteraka ya
batho. Mabogo dinku a a thebana. Ke a leboga.
[Legofi.] [This is the real people’s contract. One hand washes the other.
Thank you. [Applause.]]


           BUILDING OF FAMILY HOUSE IN MAMELODI THROUGH WOMENPOWER


                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr D C MABENA (ANC): Chairperson, women employees from Tshwane Metro’s
housing division laid the first brick in a project to build a house for one
of the poor families in Mamelodi East last week. The project is done in
partnership with Habitat for Humanity and is intended to be under the
people’s housing process. This exercise will encourage families to take
part in building their own houses.

The building of this house is part of the metro’s activities for women’s
month. Completion of this house is expected by the end of this month and it
will be handed over to the beneficiary on 24 September 2004, to coincide
with the Heritage Day celebrations.

We urge the private sector to participate in this people’s contract. Their
role in building these houses will help in demystifying the myths in the
townships and will make a huge difference. I thank you. [Applause.]




                 ALLEGATIONS OF CORRUPTION IN RAF MANAGEMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Chair, the DA was not surprised at the recent
announcement by the Road Accident Fund board that nearly R1 billion of the
Fund’s claims could be fraudulent.

It is shocking to know that almost one third of the nearly R3,5 billion
awarded to the fund from the fuel levy is stolen. This translates into
nearly 7c of the 21,5c paid by motorists for every litre of fuel put into
their cars.

The fund is technically bankrupt, and there are over 350 000 accident
victims on the RAF books waiting for their claims to be processed.

On 21 May 2004, Minister Radebe gave the RAF ten days to come up with new
solutions to its financial woes. Subsequent to this, the Minister suspended
the incumbency on the chairperson of the board, pending an enquiry. He must
not stop there. The patience of South Africa’s motorists has run out.

For the past 10 years the ANC government has been capitulating to one
internal investigation after another, without solutions. [Time expired.]

COMPANIES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Chairperson and hon
members. Let me at the outset congratulate Mr Ben Martins on his
appointment as the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
Industry. I hope we will have just as good a working relationship with him
as we did with the previous Chair, Dr Rob Davies.

It needs to be stated at the outset that the Companies Act was initially
enacted in 1973. A mere reference to the cover page of the principal Act
will reflect that, over a period of 31 years, it has been amended on
approximately 35 occasions. By and large, most of these amendments have
been specific in the sense that they were aimed at addressing certain
practical, legal or technical situations if and when they arose.

This partly explains why the DTI is currently engaged in a holistic review
of company law, which will ultimately result in substantial changes to the
Companies Act of 1973. However, even though this extended review is
expected to be finalised by the end of the year, the ultimate law reform
may take even longer. It is therefore still necessary to effect certain
amendments to the existing legislation so as to ensure that certain
specific issues, in the main pertaining to corporate governance, are
properly addressed.

In essence, what does this Bill before us do? The proposed amendments
relate to three issues. The first one is the insertion of a provision to
enhance the protection offered to bona fide purchasers of uncertificated
securities and participants in STRATE. The second is the insertion of
various provisions pertaining to disqualified or delinquent directors of
companies. The third one is the removal of clauses and provisions in the
Bill that have become obsolete.

The provision embodied in clause 2 of the Bill is in a sense an
amplification of the principle that is found in section 91A of the Act.
Section 91A(4)(c) provides that transfer of ownership in uncertificated
securities shall occur irrespective of any fraud or illegality underlying
such transaction, provided that a transferee who was party to or had
knowledge of the fraud may not rely on this principle.

Legal opinion furnished in this respect is to the effect that,
notwithstanding the provision of section 91A(4)(c), it may in law still be
possible for an aggrieved party to approach a court of law for a
rectification order. Such rectification order would then result in the
reversal of the transaction concerned.

If we keep in mind that the marketplace demands legal certainty and
investor confidence, such legal possibility should be excluded. This is
what is provided for in clause 2 of the Bill.

Chairperson and hon members, the current provisions contained in the Act
relating to delinquent directors are inadequate in that they do not
expressly state that a disqualified person may not participate in the
management of a company. In addition, section 219 requires a court-ordered
exclusion to be obtained so as to prevent disqualified persons from acting
as directors of companies or from being involved in the management of
companies.

Section 218 of the Act currently precludes certain persons from being
appointed or acting as directors of companies. However, this prohibition is
restrictive in the sense that it does not preclude them from being
concerned or taking part, directly or indirectly, in the management of a
company. Clause 3(b) of the Bill seeks to achieve exactly that, without
embarking on lengthy litigation processes as provided for in section 219.

Clause 3(c) of the Bill contains a provision extending the grounds for
disqualification to persons removed from positions of trust as a
consequence of theft, fraud, forgery, uttering a forged document,
corruption, or any other act involving dishonesty.

I need not inform hon members of the global phenomenon of companies
collapsing as a result of improper or poor governance. This unfortunately
results in the undermining of investor confidence and a deteriorating
perception of the manner in which companies are conducted.

Clause 3(d) and (e) as well as clause 4(a) and (b) should be considered
against this perspective. Collectively, these clauses would require the
Registrar of the Court to notify the Registrar of Companies of the issue of
sequestration orders, the issue of orders for the removal of a person from
an office of trust on account of misconduct or of a conviction on certain
offences.

These clauses put together, furthermore, place a statutory duty on the
Registrar of Companies to notify each company which has as a director the
person to whom the order or conviction relates. The relevant company is
itself required, through this legislation, to notify all its shareholders
of such notification.

In addition, it provides for directors or officers of a company to be held
liable, jointly and severally, for all debts incurred by that company for
the period during which such persons knew, or could reasonably be expected
to have known, of any disqualification or contravention.

I want to make specific reference to the amendments agreed upon by the
Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry in the National Assembly, as they
are reflected in B10A-2004. I must say that these amendments have brought
about very important changes to the position of a body corporate, the
principle of investor notification in the event of irregularities and the
legal liability attached to those guilty of such irregularities. I would
like to thank the chairperson and all the members of the committee for
their valuable contribution in this respect.

In conclusion, I want to refer to the issue of obsolete words or
expressions. Very briefly, and in the same vein, I refer to clauses 1 and 5
of the Bill.  They simply deal with terminology and expressions found in
the principal Act that have become obsolete and need to be substituted.

We no longer have attorney-generals, but we have a Director of Public
Prosecutions. We do not have supreme courts; we have different names that
are applicable now. I hope that all parties present in this House are going
to support this amending Bill. I thank you.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, esteemed Deputy Minister of Trade and
Industry, hon members of Parliament. The apartheid state entrenched itself
with a system of laws and practices that resulted in a dualistic economy
and society that was characterised by disenfranchisement, grave
inequalities and impoverishment.

Ten years down the road of democracy, the challenges of overcoming the
aforementioned distortions in the South African economy still loom large.
It is in this context that the Department of Trade and Industry is
currently engaged with the general reform of corporate law. However, some
provisions of the Companies Act, No 61 of 1973, have required immediate
amendment to update company law in order to make companies more accountable
and accessible to a broader section of ordinary South Africans, thereby
promoting growth, employment, good corporate governance, international
competitiveness and confidence in the South African economy.

The Companies Amendment Bill thus proposes a more inclusive concept of a
company, which is broader than the traditional company law principles that
only defined the relationship between the company, shareholders, directors
and managers.

The Bill makes provision, amongst others, for stringent disclosure
requirements, the optional representation of employees on a company’s board
of directors, and lays down concise rules on accountability.

Taking into account the dialectic of the unity and interpenetration of the
two spheres of the South African economy - the first, relatively advanced
and skilled; and the second, mainly informal, marginalized and unskilled -
I am of the opinion that the Companies Amendment Bill will lay the basis
for promoting the competitiveness and development of South Africa’s
economy, amongst other things, by doing the following.

Firstly, encouraging entrepreneurship and enterprise diversity by
simplifying the formation of companies and reducing costs associated with
the formalities of forming a company and maintaining its existence, thereby
contributing to the creation of employment opportunities.


Secondly, promoting the efficiency of companies and their management.

Thirdly, encouraging transparency and high standards of corporate
governance.

The ANC supports the passage of the Companies Amendment Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Chairperson, the DA will always support measures and
legislation which are in the interest of South Africa for the simple reason
that we believe in putting South Africa first, and if anyone takes the
trouble to view the legislation that the DA has supported, it will find
this to be a fact.

In the DA’s policy statement we clearly note that investors prefer
certainty in and familiarity with the business environment within which
they operate. Moreover, the formal norms applicable to corporate governance
and business ethics impact on the confidence of investors.

We believe in a zero-tolerance approach to corruption in the private
sector, in the need for tough penalties for commercial crimes and that, in
this fast-changing world, new challenges to good corporate governance arise
continually and must receive prompt attention.

The DA has spoken out against corruption and supported good governance and
we are ad idem that good governance should equally apply to the private
sector. It is through good corporate governance that we can attract
investment. We cannot afford to have Enrons in South Africa. Directors
should, like Caesar’s wife, be above suspicion.

Good, responsible directors and managers will not be affected by penalty
provisions of this Bill. The DA recognises the need for company reform and
has noted, as the previous speaker also went into some detail, that this
process is now under way. It will be a long process and the process to
amend the Companies Act, as required, must continue in the interim.

The provisions of this amending Bill, in section 91A of Act 61 of 1973,
secures the title of bona fide purchases of dematerialised shares, thereby
enhancing the integrity of the market. Once title is passed to a bona fide
purchaser, his title will be unassailable. When one considers the number
and value of the shares traded daily, and the fact that the value of
dematerialised shares as a percentage of market capital is 94,78%, then one
realises how important, nationally and internationally, market certainty
is, and this Bill contributes thereto.

The provisions amending sections 218 and 219 of the Companies Act
disqualify certain directors and officers not only from accepting an
appointment as director, but they are also prohibited from being concerned
with or participating in any way in the management of the company. This
adds to good corporate governance.

Moreover, the principle of making co-directors and officers of a company
criminally accountable and personally liable for acts by disqualified
directors is a positive development. The Bill provides for a wide-ranging
series of notifications concerning court orders against directors, and for
the DA’s amendments to notify shareholders as well - for which we thank our
colleagues on the committee and the Minister. All these notifications will
expand the element of transparency.

The DA supports the Bill in the interest of market certainty, transparency
and good corporate governance. [Applause.]

Ms D M RAMODIBE: Chairperson and hon members of Parliament, the SA
Companies Act of 1973 is 30 years old and has not been subjected to a
comprehensive review to reflect the fundamental developments that have
taken place in South Africa in these 10 years of democracy. The Act has
been amended 34 times, but the model remains that of the 1962 Act.

Section 1 of the Companies Act, although the Bill seeks to substitute
certain absolute expressions, was but one of the provisions of the
Companies Act of 1973 that needed immediate attention as an interim
measure.

The Department of Trade and Industry is currently reforming the corporate
legislation. That will provide permanent solutions, but the process will
take some time to finalise. In section 3(b) the Bill prevents companies
from having delinquent directors to serve as directors. They will also be
disqualified from being appointed or acting as directors, and section 3(c)
also prevents companies from allowing unfit and improper directors to serve
in the management of such companies. An unfit and improper director is a
person who is removed, because of her conduct, from a position of trust due
to theft, fraud, forgery or corruption, or any act involving dishonesty.

In terms of morality and ethics, I quote from the Moral Renewal of the
Nation national document of the ANC:

  The state is expected to act as the moral arbiter of the society, and it
  is entrusted with the supreme power to maintain the agreed norms of that
  society. When the state pursues policies that negate the social morality
  and values it is supposed to uphold, it loses its position as the arbiter
  of society. That is precisely what happened to the apartheid regime, and
  why the whole world found the state itself guilty of the ultimate crime
  of inhumanity.

In section 3(d), the Bill seeks to address the creation of a register of
all sequestrated persons. The Registrar shall establish and maintain a
register to record convictions such as sequestration, and the books shall
be open to inspection.

This will contribute towards providing accessible, transparent, accountable
and efficient access to redress for economic participants, and this will be
in line with the state of the nation address.

In section 3(e) the Bill further strengthens and tightens restrictions of
delinquency by stating that anyone found guilty of an offence shall be
equally liable for the debts incurred by the company for the period that
the disqualified person acted as a director.

This also contributes to the creation of investor confidence in the
domestic market and encourages economic participation, which is also in
line with creating work and fighting poverty in partnership with the
people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms E S CHANG: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, at the
outset I would like to state that the IFP fully supports the amendments.
These amendments are closely tied to a system of good governance and
corporate ethics.

Despite the importance of corporate governance, from a risk management
perspective, I wonder how many board meetings or high-level strategic plans
actually deal with governance issues in a meaningful way. A simple answer
would be, very few.

We know that Enron and its fairytale of spinning straw into gold sent
shockwaves throughout the international community. The amendments to the
Companies Act create a new kind of animal and align our law with
international standards. International experience tells us that
shareholders’ activism and engagement should be proactive, as opposed to
being reactive. For example, one area is in the board’s composition. We are
mindful of the concept of independence as defined in the second King report
and in international best practice.

In the US, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq
Rules place several governance provisions on publicly traded companies. The
New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq Rules require companies to have a
majority of independent directors on their boards, so as to increase the
quality of the board and lessen the possibility of managing conflicts of
interest.

Hon Deputy Minister, disclosure and accurate reporting are paramount to
good corporate governance and this is not simply about financial reporting
in its proper format, but it is also about statements on public interest
issues, such as BEE and environmental laws. It is about responsible
business.

The IFP believes that the shareholders and asset managers must exercise
their vote in a proactive manner to ensure representation of truly
independent directors and not delinquent directors. In doing so, there is
likely to be a reduction in the incidence of corporation fraud. We know
that there is no way to legislate morality, but we can control conflicts of
interest with independence.

The IFP also supports the amendments to section 218 and 219, which
disqualify certain persons appointed to act as a director of the company.
As we kill mosquitoes by constant cleaning of stagnant waters, we have to
cleanse the waters. The failure to implement good governance can result in
a heavy cost beyond regulatory problems.

The whole idea of corporate conscience is embodied in governance procedures
and reforms. Shareholders are to create an ethical identity into a
corporate identity. We know that the new amendments are not foolproof.
However, they will push companies towards disclosure and reduce fraud, also
allowing for more effective market discipline. They supply a check and
balance in the final analysis. Good governance promotes fundamental and
universal human rights and also means the absence of corruption.

The IFP calls for a high standard of both corporate and professional ethics
to be both promoted and maintained. This means preventing corruption
through education, awareness-raising and ensuring adherence to strict
procedures as we continue to combat corruption by relentlessly
investigating and prosecuting cases.

It cannot be overstated, but the Enron Metals debacle and its repercussions
will be with us for a long time. Deputy Minister, these amendments are a
step in the right direction. Thank you! [Applause.]

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members
and comrades, once again we are taking another formidable step to enhance
the transformation of our economy through enabling legislation, and I
quote:


  Many businesses in South Africa pay mere lip service to ethics
  management, thus constituting a significant ethical risk.

This was stated by the Ethics Institute of South Africa on 10 October 2003
in Sandton.

It is therefore without doubt that an amendment of such nature had to be
introduced so as not only to prepare for punitive measures against
transgressors, but also to create a preventative measure for would-be
transgressors. This amendment, therefore, wags a warning finger at any
director or officer of a company who may know, or could reasonably be
expected to know, of any contravention but does not abide by any court or
legal order against those found to be contravening the law.

As expected, the ANC-led government had to persistently introduce, review
and refine legislation that ensures that corruption is not swept under the
carpet – a clear undertaking that is in keeping with the people’s contract,
to which we committed ourselves during this year’s election.

The current Companies Act does, unfortunately, have a few loopholes which
need to be tightened in specific areas. Such tightening is, however, done
in the context of a comprehensive overhaul of corporate law, including
policy. Specifically, the Companies Amendment Bill seeks to expand
circumstances under which delinquent directors or officers of any company
could be disqualified. Any form of misconduct or any other act involving
dishonesty while conducting business within a company’s operations must be
dealt with using appropriate punitive measures.

Investor confidence, both local and foreign, has pretty sensitive
commercial eyes and ears. It sniffs and quickly picks up any untoward or
unacceptable business practice, and the result is usually lamentable. The
ANC-led government is committed to guarding against this; hence this
Companies Amendment Bill.

In the past, it was possible for delinquent directors who were disqualified
to engage in activities of a company through other surreptitious ways and
means. Once again, this amendment attempts to broaden the scope of offences
regarding the prohibition of disqualified persons from engaging in certain
company-related activities. Particular reference is made regarding
instances whereby delinquent persons engage either directly or indirectly
in management activities within an affected company.

Somlomo, nangona esi sihlomelo somthetho sibonakala ngathi sincinane kuba
singamaphepha amane kuphela, kodwa isithonga sokusebenza kwawo siza
kuvakala ngamandla kwabo bagcwele ubuqhetseba nobuqhophololo. Ininzi imali
echithwa ngabomthetho ukunqandana nokuleqana nezaphula-mthetho malunga nale
miba ikwesi sihlomelo. Le mali ngeyichithwa kwiinkqubo zikarhulumente
ezijongene nabahluphekileyo neempula zikalujaca.

UKhongolose akaludeleli uxanduva awalufumana njengelifa olufana nesibetho
neenzingo, lisuka kwixesha lombuso wocalucalulo nengcinezelo. Futhi ezi
nzingo zilungiswa sesi sihlomelo azizi kulunga ngomso. Siseza kunyuka
iinduli, kodwa ke asinadyudyu, asinankantsi.  (Translation of Xhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[Madam Speaker, as much as this legal amendment appears to be small,
because it is only four pages, its impact will be greatly felt by those who
commit fraud and corruption. A lot of money is spent by law enforcers on
combating and chasing criminals concerning issues mentioned in this
amendment. This money could be used in the government’s poverty alleviation
projects, which are meant for poor people.

The ANC does not underestimate the burden it received as an inheritance -
which is like a punishment, accompanied by difficulties - from the
government of apartheid and suppression. And the difficulties this
amendment is addressing are not going to be corrected soon. We are still
going to move uphill, but we are not afraid, we have no cramps.]

White-collar crime is costing South Africa billions of rands and will
always pose a threat to investment of any sort. This Bill goes a long way
in stemming such activities. Even the chief executive officer of Ethics
South Africa, Mr Willem Landman, indicated in October 2003 that:

      Whilst most South African companies maintain admirable standards, our
      research has identified worrying ethical lapses.

Somlomo, nokuba singathini, asikwazi ukuyekela le nyhikithya yenziwa
ngoonqal’intloko kwezoshishino. Esi sihlomelo sisekhondweni, sizama
ukulungisa kanye oko. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Madam Speaker, no matter what we do or say, we cannot allow this
disastrous practice done by the criminals in business. This amending Bill
is in line with exactly what we are trying to correct. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr A HARDING: Mr Chair, the main purpose of this Bill is to replace some of
the outdated provisions of the Companies Amendment Act. These legislative
changes are necessary in the light of, inter alia, some of the corporate
governance scandals.

Whilst the primary aim of the Bill is to ensure good corporate governance
as part of the overall informative Companies Act, there is a limit to
legislating for corporate governance. The ID is satisfied that the question
of share transactions is dealt with, as well as with the measures that the
Bill proposes for dealing with illegal transactions.

The Bill will see to it that the quality of directors appointed to boards
will improve. People who are sequestrated will not be easily appointed to
boards. Similarly, the fact that very few directors of listed companies
know their actual fiduciary duties is alarming. The worrying factor is that
people who come from the SMME sector and who had business failures in that
sector will find it difficult to be appointed as directors. I state this in
view of the fact that it is common knowledge that the SMME sector has a
large measure of failed businesses, and I need not remind this House where
the majority of those people come from.

The rationale why body corporates are not allowed to assist companies is
not clear. In terms of section 218(1) a body corporate is prevented from
directly or indirectly taking part in the management of a company. In
practice, however, where a company does not have the required expertise, it
normally obtains expertise from outside and most notably from body
corporates. The question is, then: Why should any company not request
specialist management services from a body corporate simply because of such
a specialist corporate provision?

The issue of joint and several liability for debts incurred by the
delinquent directors is fair and reasonable as it forces directors to peer-
review each other’s performance at board level regarding the monitoring of
finances of a company.

The ID supports this amending Bill, because it will enhance corporate
governance objectives in a broader scope of corporate law reform in South
Africa. Thank you very much.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Chairperson, Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon members, I
would like to start by quoting from an ANC document on moral renewal of the
nation, and I quote:


      Corruption, criminality, tax evasions, fraud, rape, the abuse of women
      and children are the outward forms of a diseased social climate which
      affects all of us.

Having said this, it becomes our obligation to renew the morals of our
society. This Government is committed to that, and the ANC leads. We cannot
separate social transformation from spiritual transformation.

In order for me to clarify what I have talked about earlier, I would like
to say that we need to educate our society and talk openly about
corruption, fraud and ways to transform our society. In the past,
individuals were left to act on their own, with no moral laws to guide
them, no sense of responsibility and no awareness of guilt. The state set
no moral standards but advocated an unethical position. When wrong was made
right and the law was used for inhumane purposes, respect for the law
collapsed. By becoming a law unto themselves, the law-enforcement agencies
killed their consciences and engaged in unlawful acts.

This Bill that we are debating today prevents sequestrated directors from
operating anywhere in the country. It actually enhances transparency and
accountability. If a director has been sequestrated and has been in
operation for five years, for instance, he will have to be liable for all
debts incurred by the company for the period during which the disqualified
person acted as a director. Even if he or she took part directly or
indirectly, as far as the management of the company is concerned, he is
liable.

In the past, after a director had been disqualified, he would still work in
the company and not notify anyone, and least of all shareholders. According
to the Bill, the Registrar of Companies should inform the company, so as to
prevent such a particular individual from engaging in the said business
activities. The shareholders should be notified as well.

The Bill seeks to substantiate the state of the nation address regarding
good corporate law reform and good governance activism of economic citizens
in South Africa. Since sequestrated directors will be listed, it will, for
example, prevent black emerging companies from employing them.

In very extreme situations, vulnerable people tend to fall from the fray.
They fall for these disqualified directors who always tell them about the
experience they have had. Because of the notification, they will not be
taken, anyway.

Re buile gore re batla go bona khumo ya naga e gola. Re batla go bona batho
ba tswa mafatsheng a mangwe go tla go reka mo Aforika Borwa. Molao ona o fa
bareki ba mafatshe a mangwe gore ba tshepe mmuso wa rona ka go tla ka se ba
nang le sona go oketsa moruo wa naga ena. Sengwe gape se se etsang gore
kgwebo tse potlana di se ke tsa tswelela pele ke ka ntlha ya gore ba kopana
le magodu ana mme ba dire gore leruo le phutlhame. Tapole e e bodileng mo
kgetseng e bodisa tse dingwe. Re tshwanetse go leka ka thata gore leruo la
batho bantsho le oketsege gone bantsho e le bona ba leng bantsi mo Aforika
Borwa. Mmuso ona o re rotloetsa go dira dilo tsotlhe mo pepeneneng.
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[We stated that we would like to see the country’s economy growing. We
would like to see people from other countries coming to buy in South
Africa. This Act gives buyers confidence in our government by bringing
whatever they have into our country to increase our economic growth.
Another factor that hampers the progress of small businesses is that they
collaborate with these thieves and cause the economy to decline. One rotten
potato in a bag spoils the rest. We have to do our best to ensure that
black economic growth increases because they are in the majority in South
Africa. This government encourages us to be transparent in everything we
do.]

I won’t be doing justice to women if I don’t take into cognisance that this
is Women’s Month. We must encourage more women to enter the business sector
and encourage them to be directors of their companies by giving them the
necessary skills to develop themselves. This legislation may also serve to
pre-empt the risk faced by women, especially black women, through falling
victim to abuse by unscrupulous and delinquent directors, given that women
are entering the world of business in large numbers nowadays.

In conclusion, let me leave you with some food for thought. We live in such
exciting times, where opportunities abound. Whether we are young or not so
young, wealthy or less well-off, clever or just average, we are all alive.
Therefore, let us make the most of it; let us be alive and well. The ANC
supports the Bill. Thank you and God bless you all. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairman and hon members, the PAC of Azania supports the
Companies Amendment Bill, as tabled in this House. It must be noted that
the Companies Act was enacted in 1973, with amendments made from 1974 to
the year 2001.

The material conditions under which companies traded changed dramatically
globally. The experiences of this period of time compelled us to revisit
the Companies Act and adjust it accordingly. The amendment is a way of
protecting the industry from unqualified persons being put in positions of
trust. This will indirectly cover unsuspecting members of the community who
may be preyed upon by these directors who are disqualified owing to
unethical business behaviour.

Our country needs a major revamp in trade and industry to boost the economy
and create the much-needed work for millions of unemployed struggling
women, the youth and adults. The PAC will support all endeavours to totally
liberate our people from all forms of economic exploitation. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The transformation, or rather
reformation, of corporate law is on the drawing board and, hopefully, in
due time, will be up for debate and legalised. The MF acknowledges the
amendments made in this Bill, based on priority and urgency, with regard to
section 91(a)(4) of the Companies Act 61 of 1973.

We support the amendment that requires a court not to remove the name of a
person from the register of ownership of various securities, unless the
name was fraudulently placed. Noting the huge value of such securities, we
feel that greater caution needs to be exercised.

We further support the amendments made to sections 218 and 219 of the same
Act, regarding the disqualification of directors of companies. We support
the keeping of a register on such persons and have no objections to the
possibility of accomplices or those with knowledge of such
misrepresentations being punished.

Further, the liabilities or debts incurred by the company during the tenure
of such disqualified directors are felt to be his or her sole
responsibility and he or she needs to make compensation. Thus it is felt
that persons, directors and officers who were aware of the offence should
be punished, but should not share in the liabilities or costs incurred by
the company as a result of the offence.

The MF calls for the drafting of the relevant corporate laws so as make
this sector more efficient.

The MF supports the Companies Amendment Bill. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chair, one can’t but be struck by the difference in tone of
this debate about fraud in companies in the private sector with the tone of
the debate that we had earlier this afternoon.

It is to be greatly welcomed that this House and, indeed, our committee,
the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, is able to discuss questions
of fraud in the private sector in this dispassionate way. Also, it noted
that in the committee itself we had full agreement across all parties and
we discussed this issue in a calm, objective manner.

One would have hoped that the issues that came up earlier this afternoon
could have been discussed in the same tone and in the same manner. We hope
that the DA, when we come to discussing the parent Act, the Companies Act,
will be as vehement in defending the criticisms and the supervision of the
private sector as it has been regarding this particular amendment.

We note that the DA is very quick to attack the ANC, the government and,
indeed, this House on questions of fraud of the kind that we discussed
earlier. Is it going to be equally vehement when we come to discussing good
governance and fraud in the private sector, particularly in the companies
that are so often defended by the DA and, in fact, which in their policy
documents do not feature when it comes to fraud, corruption and so on?

So, I want to issue a challenge before I deal with this particular Bill.
Let us put the House on the alert and say that we will monitor the way the
DA discusses the parent Act, the Companies Act . . . [Interjections.]
[Applause.] . . . because this is a technical Bill which makes some
adjustments here and there. But the Companies Act – let us alert the House
- is a major piece of legislation that is going to deal with the whole
socioeconomic structure of South Africa. Then we will see whether the DA is
willing to criticise and be vigilant about good governance in the private
sector. I wait to hear what will happen then. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

We are conscious that we are dealing with fraud in the private sector,
particularly in the stock exchange. That is a major issue worldwide.
Anybody who reads the international press and is conscious of the
international media will know what shock waves went through the whole
international financial system when Enron, WorldCom and Parmalat were
disclosed as being major vehicles of fraud.

And the story goes on. The New York Stock Exchange itself is under constant
examination, because there are funny things happening there and we are very
anxious that we should not be tainted by that kind of behaviour in South
Africa.

Indeed, when the committee discussed this particular Bill, we sought an
assurance from the department and from STRATE, the people who run the stock
exchange certification process, that our system is untainted. And, after
some discussion – and we had to have a number of hearings – STRATE, which
is the company that runs the certification of shares, assured us that
indeed our performance was better than that of the UK or the USA at
present. It’s because of this that we had multiparty agreement on this
particular amendment, and this was very much welcomed.

Let me say quickly that the question of shared trading is a critical issue
for our economy. It’s particularly sensitive, partly because of the volumes
of trade that go on our stock exchange. Of course, it is nothing compared
to the New York Stock Exchange or the London Stock Exchange but,
nevertheless, substantial volumes of trading go on to the extent of R2
billion a day on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.

However, this is also owing to the speed of transfer of share ownership. As
a result of the electronic system we installed two years ago, which
replaced the paper transfers that identified ownership of shares, we now
have a situation in which there are both massive volumes of transfers of
shares on our stock exchange, as well as very speedy transfers. It is
partly owing to the speed of transfer, in which no actual piece of paper is
handed over from A to B, that all sorts of insecurities can arise. In this
regard STRATE has assured us that, with the development of a higher level
of technological capacity in South Africa and the careful arrangements of
electronic transfers, we have now achieved a very high level of certainty
that what goes on is sound and proper.

One of the points made in the Bill is that a person who acquires a share
certificate or a share ownership is guaranteed to retain that, no matter if
fraud took place along the way. We assume, in the law, that both the
original owner and the new owner are innocent of any wrongdoing, but there
may have been some faulty management along the way.

It seems to me that this Bill gives us a great deal of security and
assurance. And let me say that this government, which brought this Bill
before the House, happens to be an ANC government, which the DA forgets.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chairperson, I would like to
thank hon members and all parties for supporting this Amendment Bill. I
really do agree with most of what was said by all of them. I agree with Mr
Labuschagne that we expect and want good governance to be applicable not
only the public sector but also in the private sector.

What Mr Njikelana said was also true. Although the legislation looks like a
very small piece of amendment, the impact it will have on the market will
be huge. No longer can corrupt or delinquent directors hop from one company
to the other, messing up and messing shareholders around. There is now not
only a warning for the corrupt director, but her or his co-directors are
going to have to worry about her or his conduct and experience.

Ms Khunou is very correct that we need more women appointed to the boards
of companies. We need to encourage, expose and train them so that when they
sit as direct members of the boards and directors of companies they know
exactly what to look for. Indeed you were correct to say that this is a
very small piece of legislation trying to sort out corporate governance
issues. It is interesting that Prof Turok said so as well, because when we
come out with that we will finalise the review of the Companies Act that
will shape the corporate world, because we also intend to utilise that
piece of legislation to enhance our own BEE strategy. We are hoping that at
that time they will understand, as they have understood today, that we do
not only need well-functioning markets. In a country where investors can
have confidence we also need the majority of our people to start
participating in the economy. We hope they will support us when we try to
put in those amendments in the larger legislation.

Finally, I would like to say thank you to everyone who participated. As
Prof Turok said, there was a major consultation process with everyone on
whom this Bill will impact. Whether you talk about the Reserve Bank, JSE,
SARS, or the Standing Advisory Committee on Company Law, everyone was
consulted and they were all agreed that this can’t wait. We need it like
yesterday. We hope that it will make our markets certain and boost
investor’s confidence, and that it will improve and encourage good
governance in companies. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:14.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 20 AUGUST 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 August 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3) classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 20 August 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(4), classified the following Bill as a section 76
         Bill:


         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76).


COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Traditional Health
     Practitioners Bill [B 66 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 17
     August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject
         of the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66 - 2003]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 66A - 2003].


     Note:        The Report on the above Bill that appeared in the
              ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS of 19 August
              2004 (p 528), contained an error in that it referred to the
              "Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism".
              The above Report is the correct version.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 18 August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the Companies Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 10A - 2004].





                           MONDAY, 23 AUGUST 2004


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Health:

     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Commissioner for
     Occupational Diseases for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry:

     Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
     Corporation of South Africa Limited (ECIC) for 2003-2004, including the
     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
     2004.


                           TUESDAY, 24 AUGUST 2004



TABLINGS:


National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker:


     (a)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Causes and Effect
         of Mobility amongst Senior Management Service and Professional
         Staff in the Public Service [RP 195-2003].

     (b)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Investigation
         into the Re-employment of Persons Retired due to Ill-health [RP 32-
         2004].

     (c)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management of
         Discipline in the Public Service [RP 141-2003].

     (d)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Dispute
         Resolution Mechanisms in the Public Service [RP 198-2003].

     (e)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Abilities of the
         Departments to deal with devolved authority regarding Remuneration
         and Conditions of Service.

     (f)    Report of the Public Service Commission on the Management of the
         Subsidized Motor Transport Scheme [RP 33-2004].

     (g)    Report of the Public Service Commission on Remunerative work
         outside the Public Service - An Investigation undertaken in the
         Gauteng Provincial Health Sector [RP 219-2003].


COMMITTEE REPORTS:


National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Convention
     between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Cabinet
     of Ministers of Ukraine for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 24
     August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Convention between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Cabinet of
         Ministers of Ukraine for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

     Request to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
     the State of Kuwait for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 24
     August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the State of
         Kuwait for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
         Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, referred to it,
         recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

     Request to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 3 from "ATC0824e"
CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 4 from "ATC0824e"


