---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 02 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-11-02
---

TUESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 17:44 in the Imbizo Hall, Empangeni, KwaZulu-Natal.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NO MOTIONS


                               (Announcement)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Honourable members, I have been informed that
there will be no notices of motion or motions moved without notice. We
will, therefore, proceed to the motion as printed on the Order Paper in the
name of the Chief Whip. May I then call upon the hon Chief Whip?


                 COMMENDING THE PRESIDENT FOR HIS LEADERSHIP


                             (Draft Resolution)

USOSWEBHU OMKHULU: Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –

        1) ubona iqhaza elivelele elibanjwe nguhulumeni eminyakeni eyishumi
           eyedlule yentando yeningi ekwenzeni ngcono izimpilo zabantu
           baseNingizimu Afrika;


       2) uncoma ukuqaliswa kwemigomo kanye nemithetho emayelana
          nokuthuthukiswa kwezimpilo zabantu, ukulwa nobubha okuholele
          ekwenzeni ngcono kwezimilo zabantu bakithi;


       3) uncoma imizamo kahulumeni waseNingizimu Afrika ekuthuthukiseni
          abantu ngolwazi kwezobulili kanye nokwenza indawo iphephe, kuliwe
          nokuhlukunyezwa kwabesifazane, izingane kanye nabantu
          abakhubazekile okungabantu okudlalwa ngabo kakhulu emiphakathini
          yethu;


       4) uncoma uMongameli waseNingizimu Afrika ngobuholi bakhe
          ekubhekaneni nesimo sababencishwe amathuba kakhulu ezweni lethu;


        5) wamukela impumelelo kahulumeni waseNingizimu Afrika ekutholeni
           ukuhlonishwa yizwekazi kanye nomhlaba wonke ngempumelelo yakhe;


        6) ngakho-ke uphakamisa ukuba kuchitshiyelwe unombolo 6 wesinqumo
           esamukelwa ngoLwesibili mhla ka-26 Okthoba 2004 esabhalwa
           kumaMinithi eNqubo yangalolo suku ekhasini 970 ngesigatshana (5)
           esinalezi zigatshana ezilandelayo:

             “(5)      Ugxeka ukudlwengulwa ngesihluku kwabantu kanye
                   nokungashaywa ndiva kwabadlwenguliwe;


             (6) uphinda elokuthi umnyango othintekayo mawuthathe
                   izinyathelo ezifanele ukuvikela abahlukumezekile futhi
                   kuqinisekiswe ukuthi izidingo zabo zempilo ziyanakekelwa;
                   futhi


                7) ukholwa ukuthi imiphumela yokhetho luka 2004 iyinkomba
                   yoxhaso nethemba lokuthi uhulumeni waseNingizimu Afrika
                   oholwa nguMongameli uMbeki, usendleleni eyiyo nokuthi
                   uyophinde wenze ngcono izimpilo zabantu bakithi.”


    (7)      uphinda  unqume  ukuqinisekisa  ukuxhasa  nokuthemba   kweNdlu
        ubuholi bakaMongameli wezwe, uMnu Thabo Mbeki.
     (Translation of isiZulu draft resolution follows.)


     [That the Council –


     (1)    notes the outstanding role played by the Government in the past
         ten years of democracy in improving the quality of life of the
         people of South Africa;


     (2)    commends the implementation of policies and legislation with
         regard to social development and the alleviation of poverty that
         has resulted in the advancement of our people;


     (3)    acknowledges the strides of the South African Government in
         promoting gender awareness amongst the population, and creating a
         safety net to curb the abuse against women, children and people
         with disabilities, the vulnerable sector of our communities;


     (4)    commends the President of South Africa for his leadership in
         addressing the plight of the once marginalised in our country;


     (5)    acknowledges the South African Government's success in gaining
         recognition from the continent and the rest of the world for the
         strides it has made;


    (6)     therefore resolves to amend item 6, a resolution adopted by the
        Council on Tuesday, 26 October 2004, and printed in the Minutes of
        Proceedings of that day on page 970, by substituting subitem (5)
        with the following subitems:


          "(5)   condemns the horrific rape and subsequent neglect of some
                  rape victims in the strongest possible terms;

            (6)  reiterates that the relevant department takes the
                  necessary steps to protect the victims of rape and ensure
                  that their health needs are attended to; and

             (7) believes that the results of the 2004 elections are
                  testimony to the people's support and confidence that the
                  South African Government, led by President Mbeki, is on
                  the right path and will further enhance the quality of
                  life of our people."; and


    (7)      further  resolves  to  reaffirm  the  unwavering  support  and
        confidence of the House in the leadership of the President  of  the
        Republic, Mr Thabo Mbeki.]




THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: There is no speakers’ list. I shall now put
the question: That the Motion be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’
votes. Are all delegation heads present? [Interjections.]


Mr Watson, I am still dealing with a motion and I am still dealing with the
provinces. May I be given the opportunity to finish . . . [Interjections.]
[Inaudible.]

Mr A WATSON: I say, Madam Chair, that I am rising on a point of order in
connection with your ruling on the voting that is just about to take place.
If you will allow me to proceed, I will explain why. [Inaudible.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Please repeat what you said.

Mr A WATSON: I said, Madam Chair, that I am rising on a point of order in
connection with your attempt to have this matter voted on in terms of
section 65 and, therefore, in terms of Rule 71. I am asking whether I may
address you on the point.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mr Watson, please take your seat. Please take
your seat, Mr Watson. Can we please deal with the orders of the day? I will
allow you time when I am done with the proceedings of the day.

I would like to continue and say: In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first
allow all provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if
they so wish.

Nkk B N DLULANE: Ngiyabonga, Mhlalingaphambili. Thina, pha eMpuma Koloni,
sithi: Ngokomthetho wama 71weBhunga lamaPhondo, iphondo leMpuma Koloni liya
sixhasa isigqibo seBhunga lamaPhondo. Indima edlalwe nguRhulumente kule
minyaka elishumi iyabokala ngokuthi imithetho neenkqubo zikaRhulumente
ziphucule ukuphila kwabantu ngezi ndlela zilandelayo:

Okokuqala, imithetho yokulwa ukuxhatshazwa koomama nabantwana ikhona kwaye
abantu bayafundiswa ukulwa ukuxhatshazwa koomama nabantwana. Okwesibini,
iinkqubo zokulwa indlala zikhona.

Iphondo laseMpuma Koloni lithi-ke: Huntshu kuwe Mongameli Thabo Mbeki
ngendima oyidlalileyo ekulweni ukuxhatshazwa koomama
nabantwana.(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Ms B N DLULANE: Thank you, Chairperson. In the Eastern Cape, we declare as
follows: In accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of Provinces, the
province of the Eastern Cape supports the resolution of the Council of
Provinces. The role that has been played by the Government in the past ten
years can be seen in the manner in which its policies and laws are
improving the lives of the people in the following ways: Firstly, laws
against women and child abuse have been passed and the people are being
trained to fight against women and child abuse. Secondly, programmes
against poverty are being implemented.

Therefore, the province of the Eastern Cape says: Congratulations to you,
President Thabo Mbeki, for the role you have played in the fight against
women and child abuse.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms S J LOE: Madam Chair, on a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: What is the point of order?

Ms S J LOE: My point of order, Madam Chair, is that I am from the Northern
Cape delegation and I have not been consulted by my province as to what my
view is.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Can we agree, Ms Loe, that the matter is one
that has to be discussed within the province, but I have requested the
views from the Northern Cape and not from the individuals. Thank you, very
much. Please continue, Mr Sulliman.

Ms S J LOE: Chair, on a point of order: The DA has established that at
least eight of the nine provinces have not been consulted on this matter
and have not submitted any written mandates. There are no instructions from
the provinces. Madam Chair, perhaps what we need to . . . [Interjections.]
What we need, Madam Chair, is to see the written mandates and the written
instructions.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ms Loe, please take your seat. Let us proceed,
Mr Sulliman.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Thank you, Madam Chair. It is always difficult when you
are looking for members from your province and they are busy somewhere else
with some other things.

Voorsitter, ingevolge Reël 71 van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies steun
die Noord-Kaapprovinsie die konsepbesluit van die Huis. Die provinsie steun
president Thabo Mbeki en wens hom geluk met die uitstekende rol wat hy
gespeel het in die stryd teen MIV/vigs, verkragting en die viktimisering
van vroue en kinders. Die rol wat die President en die regering oor die
afgelope tien jaar gespeel het, kan gesien word in terme van die wetgewing,
programme en beleidsrigtings wat in werking gestel is en wat die
lewensomstandighede van die algemene publiek verbeter het. Dit is sigbaar
op die volgende wyses: Die regering het wette in plek wat vroue en kinders
beskerm teen verkragting, mishandeling en viktimisering. Hierdie wette
bemagtig vroue en kinders om te praat oor die misdade van verkragting en
mishandeling. Ons regering het programme in plek om teen armoede en
werkloosheid te veg, en versnel hierdie programme voortdurend en verbeter
sodoende die lewe van alle Suid Afrikaners. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, in accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of Provinces, the
Northern Cape province supports the resolution of the House. The province
supports President Mbeki and wishes him well for the outstanding role that
he has played in the fight against HIV/Aids, rape and the victimisation of
women and children. The role that has been played by the President and the
government in the past ten years can be seen in terms of legislation,
programmes and policies that are in place and which are improving the lives
and circumstances of the general public. They are evident in the following:
The government has passed laws that protect women and children against
rape, abuse and victimisation. These laws empower women and children to
talk about the crimes of rape and abuse. Our government has programmes in
place to fight poverty and unemployment, and these are continually
accelerated, in so doing improving the lives of all South Africans.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, Mr Sulliman. I now call
on Gauteng.

Mr M E SONGONI: Siyabonga, Mhlalingaphambili. Isifundazwe saseGauteng
sazisa ukuwuxhasa umsebenzi nazo zonke iindlela uMonganmeli alawula ngazo
ukugwema ubugebengu kanye nezinye iintlelo zokusiza oomama ukuze bazithole
bephephile. Ukuqinisekisa ukuba umdlwenguli akanandawo emphakathini wethu,
uhulumeni kaMongameli Mbeki, ngo 1997, wabeka umthetho obizwa Criminal Law
and Procedure Act, Act No. 105 of 1997. Lo mthetho loyo wenza ukuba umuntu
owenze ubugebengu obuthize, njengokudlwengula noma ukubaulala, lowo muntu
angagwetshwa ngaphansi...ngamanye amazwi i-minimum sentence kube iminyaka
ethile. Soloko lo mthetho wabekwa, nangendlela uhulumeni agcizelela ngayo
ukuvikela amalungelo oomama nezingane, wonke umnu uyazi ukuba
sekuyagwetshwa manje, akudlalwa.

Umnyango wezobuLungisa uthi seliphakeme inani labantu abazisa amaphoyisa,
bavule amacala. Liphakeme nge-64%, Mhlalingaphambili. Sekwakhiwe iinkundla
ezingama-62, kwenziwa nee-maintenance courts ukuzama ukuvikela oomama
nezingane. Okokugcina, sekufundiswa oomantshi, abashushisi kanye
namaphoyisa ukuze bakwazi ukusebenza ngocoselelo nabomama nezingane.
Emaphoyiseni kuneendawo ezizodwa ezibizwa ngokuthi, phecelezi, victim
empowerment centres lapho umuntu uma ezovula icala angabe esakhuluma
ekhawunteni, kugcwele abantu, kodwa abizelwe eceleni
[Kwaphela ixesha.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Gauteng province declares its support
for the work and all mechanisms used by the President in combating crime as
well as other programmes that are aimed at helping women and children so
that they may be safe. In order to ensure that a rapist has no place in our
communities, the government of President Mbeki, in 1997, passed the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, Act No. 105 of 1997. That Act stipulates that a
person who has committed a crime such as rape or murder must be sentenced
in accordance with a stipulated minimum sentence. With the passing of that
law and the manner in which the government insists on the protection of
women and children, everybody is aware that criminals are now punished
severely.

The Department of Justice reports that the number of people who report
crimes to the police and who open cases has increased. It has increased by
64%, Madam Chairperson. Sixty two new courts have been built, and
maintenance courts have also been established. Finally, magistrates,
prosecutors and police officers are now being trained so that they may deal
sensitively with women and children. Police stations now have victim
empowerment centres, which means that when a victim goes to the police to
report a crime he or she no longer does so at the counter with everybody
listening, but is called aside [Time expired.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I now call upon the Free State.

Ms S E MABE:  Ke a leboha, Modulasetolo. Ho ya ka Molao 71 wa National
Council of Provinces, porofensi ya Free State e tshehetsa qeto ya Ntlu.
Porofensi e theoletsa le ho tshehetsa ha holo holo Moporesidente Thabo
Mbeki ka tshebetso e kgabane ye a e etsang twantshong ya bohloko ba
HIV/Aids, hlekefetsong ya bana le basadi mmoho le hlekefetso ya motabo.
Tshebetso ya Moporesidente le mmuso, dilemong tse leshume tse fetileng, e
bonahala melaong, ditshebetsong le melawaneng e entsweng molemong wa ho
tswedisa pele maphelo le maemo a setjhaba, ka tsela tse latelang: Mmuso o
entse melao e tshehetsang basadi le bana kgahlanong le hlekefetso ka hohle
hohle. Melao ena e tswedisa pele le ho ruta basadi ho bua kgahlano le
hlekefetso ka botlalo. Mmuso wa rona o tla tswela pele ka ditshebetso ho
lwantsha bofuma le thloko ya mebetsi mmoho le ho tswedisa pele maphelo a ma-
Afrika Borwa kaofela. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Chairperson. In accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of
Provinces, the Free State province supports the resolution of the House.
The province supports President Mbeki and wishes him well for the
outstanding role that he has played in the fight against HIV/Aids, rape and
the victimisation of women and children. The role that has been played by
the President and the government in the past ten years can be seen in terms
of legislation, programmes and policies that are in place and which are
improving the lives and circumstances of the general public. They are
evident in the following: The government has passed laws that protect women
and children against rape, abuse and victimisation. These laws teach women
and children to speak out against abuse. Our government will continue with
the programmes to fight poverty and unemployment and to improve the lives
of all South Africans.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Ngiyabonga Mphathisihlalo. Ngokomthetho 71 woMkhandlu
weziFundazwe, isifundazwe sakwaZulu-Natali siyaseseka isinqumo seNdlu.
Isifundazwe, ikakhulukazi, sincoma futhi sesekela ngokugcwele uMongameli
uThabo Mbeki ngendima ebalulekile neqotho aseyidlalile ekulweni nesifo
sengculazi kanye negciwane laso, ukudlwengula kanye nokuhlukunyezwa
kwabesifazane nezingane. Iqhaza elibanjwe nguMongameli kanye nohulumeni nje
jikelele, eminyakeni eyishumi eyedlule, iyabonakala emithethweni,
ezinhlelweni kanye nasemigomeni ebekiwe, eqhubekayo, yokuthuthukisa
izimpilo nezimo abantu abaphila phansi kwazo.

Nakhu-ke okunye osekwenziwe: Uhulumeni useshaye imithetho evikela abantu
besifazane kanye nezingane ekudlwengulweni, ekuhlukunyezweni kanye
nasekuxhashazweni. Lemithetho inika abesifazane kanye nezingane amandla
okukhuluma, bagxeke ubugebengu obufana nokudlwengula kanye nokuhlukumeza.
Okwesibili, uhulumeni wethu usebe nezinhlelo futhi usaqhubeka nokuba
nezinhlelo eziletha ngokushesha intuthuko, zilwe nobuphofu kanye
nokungabikko kwemisebenzi. [Kwaphela isikhathi.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Chairperson. In accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of
Provinces, the province of KwaZulu-Natal supports the resolution of the
House. In particular, the province commends and fully supports President
Mbeki for the outstanding role that he has played in the fight against
HIV/Aids, rape and the victimisation of women and children. The role that
has been played by the President and the Government generally, in the past
ten years, can be seen in terms of the legislation, programmes and policies
that are in place and which are continuing to improve the lives and
circumstances of the people.

The following steps have also been taken: The government has passed laws
that protect women and children against rape, abuse and victimisation.
These laws seek to empower women and children to speak out against crimes
such as rape and abuse. Secondly, our government has had programmes and
will continue to have programmes that facilitate service delivery and which
fight against poverty and unemployment [Time expired.]]

Ms S LOE: On a point of order, Madam Chair: I cannot keep up with this
fascinating debate.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Ms Loe, I have not given you the platform.
Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Modulasetolo, Go ya ka Molao wa 71 wa Lekgotla la bo
Setjhaba la Diprofense, profense ya Limpopo e thekga sephetho saKhansele.
Ga golo profense e thekga Moporesidente Thabo Mbeki go mošomo o mobotse le
karolo eo a e ralokilego go lwantsha bolwetši ba HIV/Aids, kato le
thlokofatšo ya basadi le bana. Karolo ye Moporesidente le Mmušo ka bophara
ba e ralokilego ka go fetiša melao, mo mengwageng e lesumi ya go feta, e a
bonagala mananegong ao a begilwego go tswetsa pele maphelo le maemo a
setjhaba ka kakaretšo, ka mokgwa o latelago: Sa pele, mmuso o beile melao
ya go sireletsa basadi le bana kgahlanong le go katwa, go hlokofatswa le go
šumišwa ka boshaedi. Melao e efa basadi le bana matla a go bolela
kgahlanong le botlokotsebe, kato le go šumišwa ga mpe. Sa bobedi, mmušo wa
rena o tšwela pele ka go tšweletša mananego a go lwantsa bohloki, go hloka
mesumo, ka moo go kahonafatswa maphelo a badudi ka moka ba South Afrika.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[In accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of Provinces, the Limpopo
province supports the resolution of the House. The province supports
President Mbeki and wishes him well for the outstanding role that he has
played in the fight against HIV/Aids, rape and the victimisation of women
and children. The role that has been played by the President and the
Government in the past ten years can be seen in terms of the legislation,
programmes and policies that are in place and which are improving the lives
and circumstances of the general public. They are evident in the following:
The government has passed laws that protect women and children against
rape, abuse and victimisation. These laws teach women and children to speak
out against abuse. Our government will continue with the programmes to
fight poverty and unemployment and to improve the lives of all South
Africans.]


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?


Ms M P THEMBA:  Thank you, Chairperson. In terms of Rule 71 of the National
Council of Provinces, the Mpumalanga province supports the resolution of
the House. The province particularly commends and fully supports the
President, Mr Thabo Mbeki, for the sterling role he has played in the fight
against HIV/Aids, rape and the victimisation of women and children. The
role played by the President and the government in general over the past
ten years can be seen in terms of the legislation, programmes and policies
that have been put in place, which continue to improve the lives and
conditions of the general public in the following ways:
To date, there are mechanisms in place such as the Commission on Gender
Equality and the National Network on Violence Against Women and Children.
The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has listed
violence and children as a critical area of concern in its gender policy.
The policy commitment relates to the effective implementation of the
Domestic Violence Act, etc.

We further support the President and the government in their efforts to rid
the country of all forms of racism and social prejudice, regardless of
their origin.

Ms J TERBLANCHE: On a point of order, Chair . . .

Rev P MOATSHE: Modolasetelo . . . [Chairperson . . .]

Ms J TERBLANCHE: On a point of order: I was available and I was not asked
to raise my opinion on this. [Interjections.] And I also know that no
meeting took place at the legislature. [Interjections.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Moatshe, please continue. You have the
floor.

Rev P MOATSHE: Go ya ka Molao 71 wa Ntlo ya bo Setjhaba ya Diprofense,
profense ya Bokone Bophirima e tshegetsa phetso ya Ntlu. Bogolo thata,
profense e akaretsa le go tshegetsa thata thata Moporesidente Thabo Mbeki
mabape le mokgwa o a o dirisitseng go losa Hiv le Aids, mokato le tshutlo
ya basadi le bana. Mokgwa o Moporesidente le Puso ka kakaretso, mo
dingwageng tse di lesume tse di fetileng, e ka lebega ka melao, lenaneo le
melawana e dirilweng go tswedisa pele matshelo le maemo jaa ka golatela:
Puso e thlomile melao e tshegetsang basadi le bana kgathlanong le go
thlokofadiwa. Melao e e matlafatsa basadi le bana go ba thusa go bua
kgathlanong le thlolokfatso yothle. Puso e thlomile melao e losang lehuma
le go thloka tiro, ka jalo entlafatsa matshelo a ma Afrika Borwa hothle. Re
e tshegetsa jaalo. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Rev P MOATSHE: In accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of Provinces, the
North West province supports the resolution of the House. The province
supports President Mbeki and wishes him well for the outstanding role that
he has played in the fight against HIV/Aids, rape and the victimisation of
women and children. The role that has been played by the President and the
government in the past ten years can be seen in terms of legislation,
programmes and policies that are in place and which are improving the lives
and circumstances of the general public. They are evident in the following:
The government has passed laws that protect women and children against
rape, abuse and victimisation. These laws teach women and children to speak
out against abuse. Our government will continue with the programmes to
fight poverty and unemployment and to improve the lives of all South
Africans.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agbare Voorsitter, ingevolge Reël 71 van die Nasionale Raad
van Provinsies, steun die Wes-Kaapprovinsie die konsepbesluit van die Huis.
Die provinsie steun president Thabo Mbeki en wens hom geluk met die
uitstekende rol wat hy gespeel het in die stryd teen MIV/vigs, verkragting
en die viktimisering van vroue en kinders. Die rol wat die President en die
regering oor die afgelope tien jaar gespeel het, kan gesien word in terme
van die wetgewing, programme en beleidsrigtings wat in plek gestel is en
wat steeds die lewensomstandighede van die algemene publiek verbeter. Dit
is sigbaar op die volgende wyses: Die regering het wette in plek wat vroue
en kinders beskerm teen verkragting, mishandeling en viktimisering. Hierdie
wette bemagtig vroue en kinders om te praat oor die misdade van verkragting
en mishandeling. Ons regering het programme in plek om armoede en
werkloosheid te beveg, en versnel hierdie programme voortdurend en verbeter
sodoende die lewe van alle Suid-Afrikaners. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, in accordance with Rule 71 of the Council of Provinces,
the Western Cape province supports the resolution of the House. The
province supports President Mbeki and wishes him well for the outstanding
role that he has played in the fight against HIV/Aids, rape and the
victimisation of women and children. The role that has been played by the
President and the government in the past ten years can be seen in terms of
the legislation, programmes and policies that are in place and which are
improving the lives and circumstances of the general public. They are
evident in the following ways: The government has passed laws that protect
women and children against rape, abuse and victimisation. These laws
empower women and children to speak out against the crimes and to report
cases of abuse. Our government has had programmes and will continue with
programmes to facilitate service delivery and to fight poverty and
unemployment, thus improving the lives of all South Africans. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to vote on the Question.
I shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must
please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: I-Eastern Cape iyaxhasa kakhulu. [The Eastern Cape strongly
supports.]

Ms M E MABE: Free State e a e amohela. [The Free State supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: I-Gauteng iyaxhasa, Comrade Chairperson. [Gauteng supports,
Comrade Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: I-KwaZulu-Natal iyayixhasa. [KwaZulu-Natal supports it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re kotelelana. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Mrs M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga iyasekela lokuphindzaphindziwe [Kwashaywa
tandla.] [Mpumalanga supports repeatedly.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Northern Cape supports wholeheartedly.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: North West re e ema nokeng. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes Kaap steun, Voorsitter. [Western Cape supports,
Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I therefore
declare the motion adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution
[Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: I am rising on a point of order, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, you
are refusing me my right to rise on a point of order.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I am not going to allow you the point of
order, Mr Watson, because the matter has been dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution. Thank you very much.



                           STATEMENT OF CONDOLENCE
                           (The late Mr N M Raju)

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, we are taking this opportunity to express words
of condolence to the family of the late Nelson Raju. Raju was a member of
this House and he was a person who participated in this House. He was a
“commentator” on sports issues. When this House deals with motions and
notices of motions we will always remember Raju, because he would take his
place right at the back of the Chamber, in Cape Town, and mention all the
teams, from soccer, to rugby to cricket. He was indeed a lover of sport.
This will make us think of this man.

Raju was full of humour, a friendly man. He was always accessible. Indeed,
we have become a big family in the NCOP, irrespective of provinces and
parties. Therefore, we must applaud the ANC for creating space for all the
people of South Africa to draw closer to one another so that we understand
that we have a common goal and a common objective, that of changing the
lives of the people of South Africa for the better.

May his family be comforted. May his family draw power from above, from the
Almighty God. We wish them a better future and a protected one. We so move.

Mr O M THETJENG: Thank you, Chairperson. The DA takes this opportunity to
extend sincere condolences to the Raju family after the passing away of
Nelson Raju, who sat as a member of Parliament in this House. He was, at
one stage of his political life, also a member of one of the predecessors
of the DA, namely the DP. His death was untimely and we, who served with
him for some months, were shocked to learn of his demise. Nelson Raju would
always take his time to congratulate the sportsmen and women of this
country with passion. No big sports event passed unnoticed, and he always
ensured that a motion was passed in the Chamber.

When we learnt that he fell ill and eventually passed away while on the
golf course, I knew that we had lost a person who had a passion for sport,
who loved it more than anyone. Most of the time, we shared political
discourse and one would not have represented different political parties.
Before his death, we had planned to talk politics over a cup of coffee, but
it never happened.

He was an orator, and we will miss him. He spoke with authority on every
subject that he handled, showing his commitment to everything that he did.
The family’s loss is a loss to the NCOP and the greater community of South
Africa, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal. We so move.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Thank you, Chairperson. To me, he was a brother, a
colleague and a comrade. He left us so suddenly. Surely he will be missed
not only by his family, but also his party, the IFP, and friends and the
members of the NCOP as a whole.

He was one person who was easily teased and taunted, because of his unique
personality, but he never changed face.

Umfowethu uRajuubeyithanda imidlalo, kungaba yibhola unobhutshuzwayo,
ikhilikithi, ibhola lombhoxo nokunye. Uyokhumbuleka ngokuncoma kwakhe njalo
abaphumelele emidlalweni yemincintiswano.

Impela imihla yomuntu ifana notshani. Uyaqhakaza njengembali ebuye ibune
masinyane, nendawo yayo ingabe isayazi. Sengathi angaphumula ngokuthula.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Our brother, Raju, really loved sport; be it soccer, rugby, cricket or any
other sport. He will be remembered for always paying tribute to those who
were victorious in competitive sport.

Indeed the days of a person are like grass. He or she blossoms like a
flower that soon withers and its place is never known. May he rest in
peace.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson, when we started in the NCOP as permanent
delegates after the April 2004 elections, I did not know the hon member,
Nelson Raju. Today, hon Chairperson, I would, on behalf of the NNP, hon
Freddie Adams and myself, bring our earnest condolences to the family and
to te loved ones of the late Mr Raju.

What I know of the hon Raju today is that he was somebody who, through his
passion for sport, envisaged a South Africa that would be free, prosperous
and equal, but, above all, cleansed of racism and bias. Who would ever
forget his motions in the Council, congratulating and commending our
national and provincial sports teams for their successes and, sometimes,
their failures.

Today, hon Chairperson, I can declare that the Nelson Raju that I knew was
a people’s person with an unequivocal love for our country, South Africa.
May his spirit and what he propagated live on. We greet you, we honour you,
but, above all, we salute you. May your spirit rest in peace, Nelson Raju.

Nkk A N D QIKANI: Mphathisihlalo, abahlonitshwa bonke abakhoyo nomphakathi
wonke, xa sifumana ukuba umhlonitshwa uRaju usishiyile, siye sothuka
kakhulu siyi-UDM. Siya kumcinga–ke ngee-motions zakhe, more especially xa
epromowuta i-sport – itsho iNdlu ihlokome nokuba ibithule.

Sithi, siyi-UDM, kwifemili yakhe nabantwana: Akuhlanga lungehlanga. UThixo
onikayo, ikwanguye nothathayo. Wanga umphefumlo wakhe ungafumana ukuphumla
nokonwaba emazulwini. UThixo asikelele. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, all dignitaries present and the community at large, when we,
the UDM, learnt that the hon Raju had passed away, we were extremely
shocked. We will always remember him for his motions, more especially when
he was promoting sport. There would always be excitement in the House, even
when it was a quiet day.

The UDM would like to say to his family and children: Death will always be
with us. It is God who gives, and it is God who takes away. May his soul
find eternal rest and peace in the heavens. God bless.]

Mr J O THLAGALE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and hon members. It
was with the greatest sense of shock that I heard about the untimely death
of our colleague, Comrade Raju. I have known him for the past five years as
a man with a friendly and likeable disposition, a sports commentator of
outstanding calibre. He was the type of man who would not miss an
opportunity to move a motion related to sports, which was close to his
heart, as already indicated by my colleagues who spoke before me.

Together with his family and party members, we mourn the death of this son
of the soil. We wish them God’s blessings at the time of their bereavement.

Rev E ADOLPH: Hon Chairperson, members of this House, we will never be able
to hear Raju’s voice in the NCOP again. His voice has been silenced
forever. What will remain and will be remembered always is his passion for
sport - all the codes of sport.

I had the privilege of speaking to Raju just a day before he died so
suddenly. I asked him a specific question: Raju, you are the so-called
unofficial/official champion and spokesperson for sport in the NCOP. Did
you ever play rugby or any other sport? He smiled and said to me: No, I
have never played rugby, but I love rugby. I think that says it all about
his personality. He was really the champion who stood up as the first
uniting force in South Africa. His last speech about sport is a reminder to
all of us: You must never forget that your talent will only be discovered
once you are no longer there.

He passed on to another dimension with God, his Creator. On behalf of the
ID and this House, we want to wish his family well - our sincere
condolences and sympathy. I want to say: Comrade Raju, hamba kahle [go
well].

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, thank you very much. May I also
take this opportunity, firstly, to thank the Chairperson of Committees who,
together with the Chief Whip, made time to go and bury Raju on behalf of
the Council. We want to thank them sincerely. We also want to say to the
province of KwaZulu-Natal that their loss is our loss. We have known Raju.
Some of us have travelled with Raju. We have never seen such a humble man.

We would like to say to his family, and his party and colleagues: May his
soul rest in peace. I would like us to stand and observe a moment of
silence in honour of Mr Raju. [Silence.] May his soul rest in peace. Thank
you.

              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL
      (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee thereon)

Mr J B TOLO: Thank you, Chair, hon members. The NCOP Select Committee on
Social Services is aware that the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
Amendment Bill does not seek to repeal the principal Act 92 of 1996, as
some people might have thought. We also understand that the 1996 Act came
about largely due to concerns that backstreet abortions were responsible
for the large proportion of maternal deaths. This left women who chose to
terminate their pregnancies without access to safe and legal terminations.
A national study, conducted in 1994, of incomplete abortions confirmed that
the situation was indeed dire when it was found that 45 000 incomplete
abortions were admitted to public hospitals each year and that, of these,
34% were unsafe abortions.

It is also this Committee’s understanding that the terminations are
conducted through those facilities designated for that purpose and that no
one may force anyone to undergo termination without their explicit consent.
Counselling - prior and post-termination – is also part of the regime, in
every case, presenting for termination. It therefore remains the
individual’s choice as to whether to terminate a pregnancy or not. I will
repeat this: It therefore remains the individual’s choice as to whether to
terminate a pregnancy or not.

Chair, we cannot understand why some people think that their views must
prevail all the time. They want their views and beliefs to dominate those
of others. We cannot understand that. Who is telling them then that their
views are superior and that, therefore, they must be the benchmark? If
anybody does not believe in the termination of pregnancy, by all means, let
that person not do it. Nobody is forcing anyone.

Madam Chair, the legislation seeks to improve the conditions under which
terminations are conducted and to open up more primary care facilities for
TOP services. So, the amendment to section 3 ensures that the facilities
for top services are fully equipped, with the appropriate medical
personnel, operating theatres and other necessary clinical and emergency
provisions. In addition, TOP services can also be conducted at any ward
facility that has a 24-hour maternity service. These facilities may provide
TOP services to women who are up to, and including, 12 weeks pregnant,
without having to obtain prior permission from the MEC.

Additionally, the new Amendment Bill broadens the field of people who may
perform terminations from doctors and registered midwives only, to
registered nurses who have undergone some prescribed training. The
amendment gives powers to the MEC to make regulations with regard to
requirements and conditions as designated by TOP facilities. Furthermore,
the MEC may take the decision as to where termination may take place,
rather than this being the sole responsibility of the national Minister.
The purpose of this is to, having eliminated lengthy red-tape processes of
waiting for the national Minister, designate TOP facilities.

Madam Chair, the NCOP Select Committee on Social Services supports the
Bill, with the amendments to clause 6.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
Question. The Question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. I am
convinced that they are all present. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall
first allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote,
if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to vote on the Question. I shall do so in alphabetical
order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair
whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting.

Ms B N DLULANE: Impuma Koloni iyaxhasa. [The Eastern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs E S MABE: Free State e a dumela. [Free Sate agrees.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu, Madam Chair [Gauteng supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo e a e thekga. [Limpopo supports it.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Mrs M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun. [Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution [Applause.]

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                        STERILISATION AMENDMENT BILL
      (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee thereon)

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Madam Chairperson, when this government first passed the
Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, in 1996, some of the sections
contained in this Act repealed provisions in the Abortion and Sterilization
Act, Act No 2 of 1975, which dealt with the termination of pregnancy.
However, at the same time, other provisions of the Abortion and
Sterilization Act of 1975, which dealt specifically with sterilisation,
needed to be captured appropriately in a different piece of legislation.
The Sterilisation Act of 1998 therefore fulfilled this role.

Contained in this principal Act is the provision for the right to be
sterilised, should the need arise. Furthermore, the appropriate conditions
under which such sterilisation may occur, have been met. The principal Act
allows for certain surgical procedures to be followed which result in
sterilisation, but have certain exclusions from these sterilisation
procedures. Furthermore, the principal Act creates an environment for
consent to be given when a person is unable, due to mental disability, to
make such a decision. Moreover, the principal Act provides for a panel that
includes a psychiatrist as well as a social worker, all of whom have to
concur in the decision to sterilise a person who is incapable of
consenting.

Madam Chairperson, what the new Amendment Bill seeks to do is to expand the
type of procedures for sterilisation. Whereas sterilisation procedures
previously excluded hysterectomies, because it specifically excluded the
removal of any genet, the new amendment is widened to include
hysterectomies and leaves the option open for other procedures for
sterilisation.

Also significant about the new amendment is that a requirement is added
with regard to consultation with a medical practitioner who originally made
the diagnosis recommending sterilisation. So, in practical terms, a
mentally disabled person receives additional protection from an independent
practitioner, and is not limited only to the views of a caregiver in the
final decision as to whether to sterilise or not. For further protection,
the independent medical practitioner must provide his or her opinion in
writing before sterilisation may occur.

The issue of consent is a fundamental theme that recurs throughout the new
amendments. So, when one’s health is in jeopardy or one is above 18 years
of age and deemed capable of consenting, one has the right to give consent
for sterilisation. However, in cases where one’s mental instability renders
one incapable or incompetent to give consent, such a decision can be made
by an independent panel of experts. The panel is also restricted in its
decision-making in that they should consider what potential effects
sterilisation could have on the continued good mental health of the person.
Finally, a person must have fully understood the possible implications and
consequences of sterilisation before consent can be given, including the
fact that such a procedure is irreversible.

Madam Chairperson, the Select Committee supports the Bill, with amendments.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
Question. The Question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. I am sure they are all present. In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to vote on the Question. I shall do so in alphabetical
order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair
whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Sivumelana nayo. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Gauteng iyaxhasa. [Gauteng supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: iKwaZulu-Natal iyavumela. {KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a kotelane. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Ke a rona. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Northern Cape iyavuma. [Northern Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?
Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West re ema koneng. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Wes-Kaap ondersteun.[Western Cape supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution [Applause.]

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                      DENTAL TECHNICIANS AMENDMENT BILL
      (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee thereon)

Mrs H LAMOELA: Madam Chair, this Amendment Bill seeks to give recognition
and acknowledgement to those informally trained persons assisting in the
laboratories of dental technicians and dentists. Research shows that the
majority of this category of workers come from the previously disadvantaged
and have been used as backroom helpers, assisting the qualified dental
technicians.

The definition section in the Amendment Bill seeks to provide parameters
determining what constitutes an informally trained person and what length
of period could be regarded as the minimum training period required to
qualify under this category. It was understood by the Select Committee that
the five years in question need not necessarily take place only under the
supervision of one qualified dentist or dental technician, or even that
such training should be continuous, but rather that the total sum of
training undergone by an informally trained person should not be less than
five years. In other words, if training had been interrupted through
circumstances or choice, they are still entitled to accumulate whatever
time they served as accumulative training time. They will be deemed to have
successfully completed the training once the accumulated training adds up
to five years.

Another area of contention for informally trained persons was that the
financial acknowledgement of the work that they did depended upon the
goodwill of the dentists and dental technicians who employed them. This
meant an unregulated work environment that led, at times, to inadequate
compensation for work done or services rendered. This Bill, therefore,
seeks to redress this inequity and gives this category of workers
recognition in their own capacity so that their compensation can be
regulated in the same manner as any other profession.

Finally, the provisions contained in this Amendment Bill empower the
Minister to make regulations regarding the terms or conditions under which
informally trained persons may be registered with the South African Dental
Technicians Council. Therefore, through these new amendments, previously
illegally trained people will be able to obtain restricted registration
with the Council.

Madam Chairperson, the Select Committee on Social Services has considered
the Bill and supports it without amendments. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
Question. The Question is that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. I am sure they are all present. In accordance with
Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to make their
declarations of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to vote on the Question. I shall do so in alphabetical
order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair
whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mrs B N DLULANE: Oos-Kaap steun. [The Eastern Cape concurs.] [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: The Free State agrees.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [Gauteng agrees.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal ke ya rona. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo ha u seketela. [Limpopo supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Mrs M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga ondersteun. [Mpumalanga supports.] [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: Ke a rona. [Northern Cape supports.] [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: North West re ema nokeng. [North West supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Siyaxhasa. [Western Cape supports.] [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 18:40.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         WEDNESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Council of Provinces:

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 27 October 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
         Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     South African Export Statistics for Conventional Arms for 2003.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human Resources
     for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
     the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Chairperson

     Statement from the Acting Minister for Local Government, Housing and
     Traditional Affairs in Kwazulu-Natal regarding the allegations of fraud
     and corruption occurring within the Ulundi Municipality, Kwazulu-Natal
     in terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
     Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     The statement is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
     and Administration.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Dental
     Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76),
     dated 27 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Dental Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill
         without amendment.

   2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the
      Traditional Health
               Practitioners Bill [B 66B - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
   76), dated 27
          October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66B -
         2003] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the
         Bill without amendment.

   3. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
      Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National Assembly -
   sec
      75), dated 27 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
         considered the subject of the Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B
         16 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports
         the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                 NEW CLAUSES


         1.  That the following be new Clauses to precede Clause 1:

              Amendment of section 1 of Act 120 of 1977, as amended by
              section 1 of Act 61 of 1985, section 1 of Act 68 of 1991 and
              section 1 of Act 58 of 2003

                1. Section 1 of the Petroleum Products Act, 1977
              (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), is hereby
              amended by the substitution for the definition of "wholesale"
              of the following definition:
                    "`wholesale' means the purchase and sale in bulk of
                  petroleum products by a licensed wholesaler to or from
                  another licensed wholesaler, or to or from a licensed
                  manufacturer, or sale to a licensed retailer or to an end-
                  consumer for own consumption and `wholesaler' shall be
                  interpreted accordingly;".

              Amendment of section 2A of Act 120 of 1977, as inserted by
              section 3 of Act 58 of 2003

                2. Section 2A of the principal Act is hereby amended by the
              substitution in subsection (4) for paragraph (c) of the
              following paragraph:
                "(c) in the case of retail and wholesale licences be the
              owner of the business [entity] concerned;".

                                  CLAUSE 1


         1.  On page 2, in line 5, to omit all the words after the first
              "the" up to and including "Act)," in line 6 and to substitute
              "principal Act".

                                  CLAUSE 2


         1.  On page 2, after line 9, to insert:


              (a) by the substitution for subsection (1) of the following
                  subsection:
                       "(1) The Minister must prescribe a system for the
                  allocation of site and their corresponding retail
                  licences [and the supply of prescribed petroleum products
                  to such licensees,] by which the Controller of Petroleum
                  Products shall be bound: Provided that the Controller of
                  Petroleum Products shall only be bound by the provisions
                  of such a system for the period set out in that
                  regulation or any amendment thereto or any substitution
                  thereof which period may not exceed 10 years from the
                  date of commencement of that regulation.";

                                 LONG TITLE


         1.  On page 2, in the first line, after "as" to insert  "to effect
              certain technical adjustments;".


                          THURSDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    National Small Business Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Trade and Industry on 27 October 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee
         on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Regulation of Constitutional Amendments Amendment Bill, 2004,
         submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
         Development on 27 October 2004. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
         Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Declaration of an Amnesty in terms of section 139(2)(a) of the Firearms
     Control Act, 2000 (Act No 60 of 2000).

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
         Language Board (PANSALB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         166-2002].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     Employment Equity Report of the Department of Water Affairs and
     Forestry in terms of section 22(2) ofthe Employment Equity Act, 1998
     (Act No 55 of 1998).


                           FRIDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces:

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following members of the National Council of Provinces have
         been appointed to the Joint Committee mentioned, viz:

         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women:

           African National Congress

              Hollander, Ms P
              Kgoali, Ms J L
              Mabe, Ms S E
              Mack, Mr N
              Masilo, Ms J
              Mokoena, Kgoshi M L
              Themba, Ms M P

              Windvoël, Mr V V Z (Alt)

           Inkatha Freedom Party

              Vilakazi, Mrs J N

           United Democratic Movement

              Qikani, Mrs A N D



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Executive Summary of Report of the South African Members of the
         Pan-African Parliament on the Second Ordinary Session of the Pan-
         African Parliament


Insert "1029pap2"



     (b)    Report of the South African Members of the Pan-African
         Parliament on the Second Ordinary Session of the Pan-African
         Parliament


                              Insert "1029pap3"


2.    The Minister of Housing


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
         Registration Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 169-
         2004].


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the People's Housing
         Partnership Trust for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Finance

     Financial Statements of the Recontruction and Development Programme
     Fund for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces:




CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 1 from ATC1029e


                           MONDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
              prior notice of its introduction published in Government
              Gazette No 26926 of 25 October 2004.]

              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 2 November 2004.

              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
              of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
              parliamentary working days.


                          TUESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 61B - 2003] - Act No 18
         of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 28 October 2004);
         and


     (2)    National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14D - 2004] - Act No
         22 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 28 October
         2004).

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 2 November
         2004:


         (i)     Dental Technicians Amendment Bill [B 63 - 2003] (National
              Assembly - sec 76)

National Council of Provinces:

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1) The following members of the National Council of Provinces have
         been appointed to the Committee mentioned, viz:

         Members' Legislative Proposals:

         Adams, Mr F   New NP     Western Cape
         Hollander, Ms P     ANC  Northern Cape
         Manyosi, Mr A T     ANC  Eastern Cape
         Mokoena, Kgoshi M L ANC  Limpopo
         Moseki, Mr A L      ANC  North West
         Ntuli, Mr Z C ANC   KwaZulu-Natal
         Shiceka, Mr S ANC   Gauteng
         Watson, Mr A  DA    Mpumalanga
         Worth, Mr D A DA    Free State

         Alternate members:

         Mabe, Mrs E S ANC   Free State
         Mkhaliphi, Mr B J   ANC  Mpumalanga
         Mzizi, Mr M A IFP   Gauteng
         Thetjeng, Mr O M    DA   Limpopo


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces:

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs
     on the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
     Related Activities Bill [B 12B - 2003 (Reprint)] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 1 November 2004:

         The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs,
         having considered the subject of the Protection of Constitutional
         Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Bill [B 12B -
         2003 (Reprint)] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it,
         reports the Bill with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  PREAMBLE


         1.  On page 3, in the sixth paragraph, in the fifth line, after
              "committed" to insert "in accordance with such international
              law".

                                  CLAUSE 1


         1.  On page 5, after line 39, to insert:


              (iv)  "engages in a terrorist activity", with reference to
                    sections 2 and 3, includes -
                    (a) the commission, performance or carrying out of;
                    (b) the facilitation of, participation or assistance
                         in, or contribution to the commission, performance
                         or carrying out of;
                    (c) the performance of an act in preparation for or
                         planning of; or
                    (d) instructing, directly or indirectly, the -
                         (i)  commission, performance, carrying out of;
                         (ii)  facilitation of, participation or assistance
                                in, or contribution to the commission,
                                performance or carrying out of; or
                         (iii) performance of an act in preparation for or
                                planning of, a terrorist activity,
                    and the expressions "to engage in a terrorist
                    activity", "engaging in a terrorist activity" and
                    "engagement in a terrorist activity" shall be construed
                    accordingly;


         2.  On page 7, from line 38, to omit the definition of "property"
              and to substitute:


              (xix) "property" means money or any other movable, immovable,
                    corporeal or incorporeal thing and includes any rights,
                    privileges, claims and securities and any interest
                    therein and all proceeds thereof;


         3.  On page 8, from line 26, to omit subparagraph (iii) and to
              substitute:


              (iii) endangers the life, or violates the physical integrity
                    or physical freedom of, or causes serious bodily injury
                    to or the death of, any person, or any number of
                    persons;


         4.  On page 8, in line 48, to omit "defense" and to substitute
              "defence".


         5.  On page 8, in line 53, after "insurrection" to insert "in the
              Republic".


         6.  On page 8, in line 61, to omit "a State" and to substitute
              "the Republic".


         7.  On page 9, from line 21, to omit subsection (3) and to
              substitute:

                (3) For the purposes of paragraph (a)(vi) and (vii) of the
              definition of "errorist activity", any act which is committed
              in pursuance of any advocacy, protest, dissent or industrial
              action and which does not intend the harm contemplated in
              paragraph (a)(i) to (v) of that definition shall not be
              regarded as a terrorist activity within the meaning of that
              definition.


         8.  On page 9, in line 31, to omit the first "the".


         9.  On page 9, in line 42, to omit paragraph (a) and to
              substitute:


              (a) the person has actual knowledge of that fact; or


         10. On page 9, from line 43, to omit paragraph (b) and to
              substitute:


              (b) the court is satisfied that -
                  (i)   the person believes that there is a reasonable
                         possibility of the  existence of that fact; and
                  (ii)  he or she fails to obtain information to confirm
                         the existence of that fact.


         11. On page 9, from line 45, to omit paragraph (c).

                                  CLAUSE 2


         1.  On page 10, from line 1, to omit subsection (2).

                                  CLAUSE 12


         1.  On page 13, in line 16, after "report" to insert "as soon as
              reasonably possible".


         2.  On page 13, after line 26, to insert:

                (5) A person required to make a report in terms of
              subsection (1) concerning a suspicion that any other person
              intends to commit or has committed an offence referred to in
              section 4, may continue with and carry out any transaction to
              which such a suspicion relates, unless directed in terms of
              subsection (6) not to proceed with such a transaction.
                (6) If a police official authorised thereto by the National
              Commissioner, after consulting with a person required to make
              a report contemplated in subsection (5), has reasonable
              grounds to suspect that a transaction referred to in that
              subsection may constitute an offence contemplated in section
              4, that police official may direct that person, in writing,
              not to proceed with the carrying out of that transaction or
              any other transaction in respect of the property affected by
              that transaction for a period as may be determined by that
              police official, which may not be more than five days.
                (7) For the purposes of calculating the period of five days
              in subsection (6), Saturdays, Sundays and proclaimed public
              holidays must not be taken into account.
                (8) Subsection (6) does not apply to the carrying out of a
              transaction to which the rules of an exchange licensed in
              terms of the Stock Exchanges Control Act, 1985, or the
              Financial Markets Control Act, 1989, apply.

                                  CLAUSE 15


         1.  On page 14, in line 37, to omit "that".


         2.  On page 14, in line 37, to omit "South Africa" and to
              substitute "the Republic".


         3.  On page 14, in line 38, to omit "that".


         4.  On page 14, in line 38, to omit "South Africa" and to
              substitute "the Republic".


         5.  On page 14, in line 43, after "resident;" to insert "or".

                                  CLAUSE 17


         1.  On page 15, from line 51, to omit subsection (6) and to
              substitute:

                (6) A person charged with committing an offence under
              section 4 may raise as a defence -
              (a) the fact that he or she had performed any act in
                  connection with the property in question, or allowed or
                  facilitated the performance of any act in connection with
                  that property, solely for the purpose of preserving the
                  value of that property; or
              (b) that he or she acted in good faith and reported his or her
                  suspicion in accordance with section 12 of this Act, or
                  section 29 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001
                  (Act No. 38 of 2001), as the case may be.


         2.  On page 15, after line 54, to insert:

                (7) No action, whether criminal or civil, lies against a
              person complying in good faith with section 12(1).
                (8) A person who has made, initiated or contributed to a
              report in terms of section 12(1) concerning a suspicion that
              any other person intends to commit or has committed an offence
              referred to in section 4 is competent, but not compellable, to
              give evidence in criminal proceedings arising from the report.
                (9) No evidence concerning the identity of a person who has
              made, initiated or contributed to a report in terms of section
              12(1) concerning a suspicion that any other person intends to
              commit or has committed an offence referred to in section 4,
              is admissible as evidence in criminal proceedings unless that
              person testifies at those proceedings.

                                  CLAUSE 19


         1.  On page 17, in line 8, to omit "Gazette" and to substitute
              "Gazette".

                                  CLAUSE 25


         1.  On page 19, in line 27, to omit "Gazette" and to substitute
              "Gazette".

                                  CLAUSE 26


         1.  On page 19, in line 38, to omit "laid upon the Table" and to
              substitute "tabled".

                                  CLAUSE 28


         Clause rejected.

                                 NEW CLAUSE


         1.  That the following be a new Clause:

                28. (1) This Act is called the Protection of Constitutional
              Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004,
              and shall, subject to subsection (2), come into operation on a
              date fixed by the President in the Gazette.
                (2) Section 12 shall come into operation three months after
              the date  of commencement referred to in subsection (1).

                                  SCHEDULE


         1.  On page 21, in the fourth column relating to Act No. 76 of
              1962, in the third line, to omit "re-".


         2.  On page 21, in the fourth column relating to Act No. 87 of
              1993, to omit paragraph (a) and to substitute:


              (a) the substitution for paragraph (h) of the following
                  paragraph;
                  "(h) refuses or fails to comply to the best of his or her
                       ability with any lawful requirement, request or order
                       of an officer or employee of the Department, an
                       inspector or a person authorized by the Council;
                       [or]".".


         3.  On page 25, in the fourth column relating to Act No. 38 of
              2001, to omit paragraph (a) and to substitute:


              (a) after the definition of "Director" of the following
                  definition:
                  "'entity' has a corresponding meaning with the definition
                  in section 1 of the Protection of Constitutional
                  Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act,
                  2004; and


         4.  On page 25, in the fourth column relating to Act No. 38 of
              2001, to omit item 4 and to substitute:


              4.  The substitution for the heading to Chapter 3 of the
                  following heading:

                  "CONTROL MEASURES FOR MONEY LAUNDERING AND FINANCING OF
                  TERRORIST AND RELATED ACTIVITIES [CONTROL MEASURES]".


         5.  On page 26, in the fourth column, to omit paragraph (a) of
              item 6 and to substitute:


              (a) the business has received or is about to receive the
                  proceeds of unlawful activities or property which is
                  connected to an offence relating to the financing of
                  terrorist and related activities:


         6.  On page 26, in the fourth column, to omit paragraph (b)(ii) of
              item 6 and to substitute:


              (ii)  has no apparent business or lawful purpose;


         7.  On page 27, in the fourth column, to omit paragraph (b) of
              item 8 and to substitute:


              (b) that account or other facility has received or may receive
                  the proceeds of unlawful activities or property which is
                  connected to an offence relating to the financing of
                  terrorist and related activities or is being or may be
                  used for money laundering purposes or for the financing
                  of terrorist or related activities or for the purpose of
                  any transaction contemplated in section 29(1)(b).".


         8.  On page 27, in the fourth column, after item 8, to insert:


              9.  The substitution in section 40(1) for paragraph (b) of the
                  following paragraph:
                  "(b) an entity outside the Republic performing similar
                       functions to those of the Centre, or an investigating
                       authority outside the Republic which may, at the
                       initiative of the Centre or on written request,
                       obtain information which the Centre reasonably
                       believes is relevant to the identification of the
                       proceeds of unlawful activities or the combating of
                       money laundering or financing of terrorist and
                       related activities or similar offences in the country
                       in which that entity is established;".


