---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-08-17
---

TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2004
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.




ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.





                       CONGRATULATIONS TO SPORTS TEAMS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms H LAMOELA: Madam Chair, I move without notice:


  That the Council –


  (1) congratulates the South African sports teams on their spectacular
        success over the weekend, making us all very proud;


  (2) notes that –

       (a)  the Springbok rugby team convincingly beat the All Blacks rugby
           team from New Zealand 40-26 on Saturday at Ellis Park, and are
           now well-placed to go on and win the Tri-Nations Series;


       (b)  our swimmers won our first Olympic Gold Medal at the 2004 Athens
           Olympics with a world record time of 3 minutes 13:17 seconds in
           the 4 x 100 freestyle relay on Sunday; and


       (c)  our South African Men’s Hockey Team won 2-1 against the powerful
           Argentinian team;


  (3) recognises that whilst anything is possible in sport, the victories
       are just the tonic needed to elevate our sportsmen and women to
       greater heights; and


  (4) assures them that the whole South Africa is behind them.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                         MURDER OF KLERKSDORP WOMAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I move without notice:
  That the Council –


  (1) notes the senseless murder of 64-year-old Mrs Celia Pool from
        Flamwood, Klerksdorp in the North West Province;


  (2) conveys its sincere condolences to her family and friends in their sad
        bereavement;


  (3) expresses concern at the increase of crime and violence against women
        and children; and


  (4) calls on the government to take drastic steps to reduce crime,
        especially against women and children in this and other badly
        affected areas by policing the area more visibly.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


             MOTION OF CONDOLENCE FOR THE LATE MS MARGARET NTULI


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr V V Z WINDVOËL: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

  (1) notes with sadness the passing away of Ms Margaret Ntuli, the sister
       of one of our permanent delegates, Mr Chris Ntuli;


  (2) expresses its sincere condolences to Comrade Chris and the Ntuli
       family; and


  (3) assures them of our continued support in their hour of bereavement.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


           MOTION OF CONDOLENCE FOR THE LATE COMRADE ELIJAH GUMEDE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Moh J MASILO: Modulasetulo, ke tshikinya kwa ntle le kitsiso gore -


  Gore Khansele –


  (1) e fitlhisa matshediso go ba lelapa la ga cde Elijah Gumede wa kwa
       Mabopane Unit X kwa Bokone Bophirima yo o tlhokofetseng Labotlhano we
       dibeke tse pedi tse di fetileng mme a bolokwa Lamatlhatso o o
       fetileng kwa Mabopane; e bile


  (2) e amogela gore e ne e le mongwe wa bagokaganyi mo ditlhophong tsa rona
       kwa ofising ya kgaolo ya Mabopane ka fa tlase masepala wa Tshwane.
(Translation of Setswana draft resolution follows.)

  [That the Council –


  (1) expresses its condolences to the family of Comrade Elijah Gumede of
       Mabopane Unit X in the North West, who passed away on Friday two
       weeks ago and was buried last Saturday in Mabopane; and


  (2) notes that he was one of the people who co-ordinated the last
       elections in the zonal office in Mabopane which falls under the
       Tswane municipality.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF FILMS AND PUBLICATIONS AMENDMENT BILL AND OF REPORT OF
                          SELECT COMMITTEE THEREON

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: May I take this opportunity to welcome the
Deputy Minister of Home Affairs.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Madam
Chairperson and hon members, we are happy to table before the National
Council of Provinces this Films and Publications Amendment Bill, which is a
product of extensive consultations.

What we really seek to do through this Bill is to increase the ability of
law enforcement agencies to police and bring to book those in our society
who are sick enough to abuse and exploit the vulnerability of children. The
reality of the world we live in today is that the widespread application of
information and communications technology has created both the conditions
for the unprecedented advancement of humanity as well as for the emergence
of gross crimes against vulnerable people, especially children.

The 2003 report of the UK-based Internet Watch Foundation estimates an
increase in online child abuse images of approximately 1 500% in the past
few years. To the extent that the whole world is today more interconnected
than at any other stage before, South Africa has not been exempted from the
emergence and proliferation of cybercrimes such as child pornography.

Computer alterations and the potential for creating computer-generated
pornography pose formidable challenges for law enforcement throughout the
world. The globalisation of the trade in this sordid and despicable crime
has unfortunately been on the rise in South Africa as well. These online
crimes represent today one of the greatest social and moral challenges
facing governments, civil societies, the media and private sector.
The image of the child you see on the Internet, DVD or picture is an image
of a real child, abused in real life, a child whose childhood has been
permanently stolen and vandalised by a person this child trusted to protect
and nurture him or her. Parents, teachers, priests, psychologists, police
and others are part of this great tragedy, which must be ended.

The actual intention of this amendment, albeit not enough, is to ensure
that South Africa becomes the safest place on earth for children. This
crime commands all of humanity to action in defence of the children. It
commands a massive campaign waged through legislation such as this Bill,
the media, public awareness campaigns and other means to combat this gross
crime against our children.
It was with this in mind that we made the pledge during the debate on
Budget Vote No 4 to launch a massive public campaign, involving the
government and other public and private stakeholders, to ensure that we
fight, with all our might as a nation, and united in action, this crime.

One of the tragedies we live with is that South Africa and other SADC
countries are allegedly targeted by crime syndicates involved in these
crimes which are raking in billions of dollars through the criminal abuse
of the children of the world. The point of this amendment, therefore, is to
address the weaknesses in the current Act that provide loopholes, making it
difficult for law enforcement to police online paedophiles. It seeks to
satisfy the need for a delicate balance between the legitimate concerns for
the protection of freedom of expression and the protection of children.

In addition to the weaknesses in the Act, government must also respond to
the international call for the harmonisation of anti-child-abuse
legislation. Without this international co-operation, certain countries
might become the refuge of those who face tough legislation in their home
countries.

It was for this reason that the government participated in the drafting of
the first International Cybercrime Convention and went on to sign the
convention in Budapest, Hungary, in 2000.
We are called upon at this stage to protect the childhood and innocence,
the very future, of children from all forms of abuse and exploitation. The
use of children as commodities is something that is devoid of all the good
of humanity, and should be fought with everything we have. It exposes
innocent and defenceless children to the unnecessary evils of humanity, and
teaches them that one may actually derive pleasure from hurting others less
strong than oneself.

This includes making sure that even those who possess child pornographic
images under the guise of artistic creativity and for the purposes of art-
related research should have their rights limited. The Films and
Publications Board will be empowered to regulate publications containing
visual presentations or descriptions referred to in Schedules 1 and 2, so
as to prevent access to such materials by children. The creation,
production, possession and distribution of child pornography, as well as
the failure to report it, are offences punishable in terms of this Bill.

This Bill also includes amendments to increase the maximum penalty for
offences involving child pornography from the current five years to ten
years. The Bill introduces the following provisions. Clause 1(a) seeks to
substitute the present definition of “child pornography” with a new
definition.

Clause 1(b) will delete the definition of the word “degrade” because it is
unnecessarily limiting in that it is gender-biased and does not take into
account the violation of human dignity in its totality.

Clause 1(c) substitutes the present definition of “distribute” with a new
definition, so as to include the failure to take reasonable steps to
prevent access to pornographic material by children.

Clause 1(d) defines “Internet address” and “Internet service provider”,
which is necessary since this Bill also brings the Internet within the
jurisdiction of the Act as far as child pornography is concerned.

Clause 1(e) substitutes the definition of “sexual conduct” as defined in
Schedule 11, for the reason that the present definition is not only too
limiting, but is restricted only for the purpose of the Schedules.

Clause 1(f) defines “possession”, which is necessary since the Act now also
covers the Internet.

Clause 2 introduces the office of the non-executive chairperson of the
board, who shall also be the chief executive officer. It also deals with
the manner in which decisions of the board are taken.

Clause 3 amends subsection (2) of section 5 of the Act, which refers to the
“President”, whereas it should refer to the “Minister”.

Clause 4 provides for the reporting of the board on all its activities
during that financial year.

Clause 5 deals with the manner of convening meetings of the board or the
executive committee.

Clause 6 amends section 17 of the Act to allow the board to regulate more
effectively publications containing visual presentations or descriptions
referred to in Schedules 1 or 2, so as to prevent access thereto by
children.

Clause 7 amends section 18 of the Act to make the regulation of films and
interactive computer games more effective in the interests of the
protection of children.

Clause 8 amends section 20 of the Act, so as to remove the limitation on
the powers of the review board.

Clause 9 is a necessary amendment, following the amendment of section 17 in
clause 3.

Clause 10 amends section 26 of the Act, to include the offence of
broadcasting any film which has been classified “XX” in accordance with
Schedules 6 or 10.

Clause 11 amends section 27 of the Act, by making clearer what will
constitute the offence of child pornography, as well as introducing the
offence of failing to report child pornography and removing the requirement
of the authority of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions for the issue of
a search warrant in cases involving child pornography, so as to bring the
investigation and prosecution of child pornography offenders in line with
the requirements of other serious offences.

The amendment also addresses the problem of child pornography on the
Internet by requiring Internet service providers to register with the board
and making non-compliance an offence.

Clause 12 deletes subsection (3) of section 28, which unnecessarily delays
the prosecution process.

Clause 13 amends subsection (1) of section 29 to include a prohibition on
the broadcasting of publications covered by section 29(1) as an offence.

Clause 14 is an amendment of section 30 of the Act, which is the penalties
provision, for consistency with amendments to the offence provisions of the
Act. The amendments also provide for an increase in the maximum penalty for
child pornography offences from the present five to ten years.

Clause 11 also introduces an admission of guilt provision for the less
serious offences in the Act, as well as providing for extraterritorial
jurisdiction in cases where South African citizens commit acts outside the
country which would have constituted offences under the Act had they been
committed inside the country. This amendment also provides for presumptions
and proof to facilitate more effective prosecution.

Clause 15 seeks to amend Schedule 1 of the principal Act as far as
including incest or rape as additional grounds for classifying a
publication as XX.

Clause 16 amends Schedule 2 of the principal Act in order to cover those
cases provided for in Schedule 1(2).

Clause 17 provides for age restrictions for publications.

Clause 18 deletes clause 1 as the clause is unnecessary.

Clause 19 deals with the prohibition of promotion of hatred.

Clause 20 deletes Schedule 11 of the principal Act in total.

Clause 21 provides for the short title of the Act, being the Films and
Publications Amendment Act.

I urge this House to accept the Films and Publications Amendment Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Minister, I wish that we can have a
workshop at some stage, because this is a very important piece of
legislation. As I was listening to you amending and deleting, I thought it
really requires us to pay attention. It is quite important for all of us to
take this on board, given the situation in which we find ourselves in this
country.

Ms J MASILO: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, colleagues and officials
of the department, the Films and Publications Act, Act 65 of 1996,
represented South Africa’s first attempt to change from a films and
publications system that sought to restrict freedom of expression to one
that sought to provide guidance through the classification of various
pieces of written or electronically recorded materials. No longer was there
a draconian clampdown and confiscation of politically or otherwise
sensitive materials that a few people in Government decided was subversive
and therefore inappropriate for public consumption. Rather, a regulatory
framework prevailed.

Many of us were victims of midnight raids in which our materials were
confiscated and branded as inflammatory. We were then arrested or detained
for as long as the security forces believed it was necessary to purge us of
our dissident behaviour. Often it was only because we expressed our own
opinion on a matter.

Under the new ANC-led government all South Africans were given the
opportunity to make their own decisions regarding the type of literature or
information to which they could have access. This, of course, did not mean
that offensive literature could now abound without restrictions, but rather
that the production, publication, distribution and dissemination of
information could be regulated using objective criteria based on sound
principles.

In addition, the new regulatory framework offered protection to the
vulnerable and sensitive who needed to be protected until they reached the
age of consent, or could make an informed decision on what information they
chose to peruse.

The regulation of films and publications through age restrictions and
symbols indicating the nature of the content of the publications was
therefore used to indicate to parents and other concerned individuals what
to expect before viewing a publication or film. The legislation also
provided that those publications dealing with potentially offensive
materials needed to be clearly marked, so that parents, for example, could
restrain children who wanted to watch films depicting extremely violent or
graphic material.

Subsequent amendments sought to keep up with new technological innovations
which provided new methods and means of creating, producing and
distributing images or publications which could be offensive. In addition,
as the target audiences for which these publications were intended got
younger, the images became more perverse, but it was especially the fact
that young children were being enticed, forced or otherwise coerced to
participate in pornographic acts that brought about a need to tighten up
the legislation.

The 1999 amendments expanded the definition of “publication” to include
child pornography and expanded the definition of “visual presentation” to
take on board all the new technological innovations used to create and
spread images of children engaged in explicit sexual acts.

The current amending Bill tries to go further to keep track of new
technological innovations, and therefore seeks to ensure that Internet
service providers take more responsibility for the information that ends up
on their Internet sites. The Bill makes it mandatory for these providers to
report any offensive materials that find their way onto their websites
through using their services.

The Bill also seeks to expand the meaning of “possession” to include the
downloading of materials from computers, even in private homes. But the
most important innovation by far in this Bill is the fact that it bans all
forms of child pornography outright.

These changes are long overdue. Finally those paedophiles preying on our
children will be brought to book. Our children will have the reassurance
that their protection is assured. The Films and Publications Board will
have the muscle to prosecute even those found in possession of pornographic
materials depicting children in lewd, sexual acts. A more effective
classification system will also be instituted to better protect children
from potentially disturbing and harmful materials.

Finally, all legs of the distribution chain have been curtailed, because
distributors and exhibitors will be compelled to submit all films and other
materials for classification prior to distribution or exhibition, and these
distributors and exhibitors have to be registered.

In conclusion, the committee is satisfied that this amending Bill will
assist the Films and Publications Board in its endeavours to protect the
most vulnerable of all - our children. The select committee therefore
supports this Bill without amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Madam Chairperson, hon members, the DA agrees with the
initial intentions of the amendments of the Films and Publications
Amendment Bill before this honourable House. Children need to be protected
from all forms of abuse and we note with great concern the brutal killing
of an innocent child in Limpopo province in the Moeletsi area recently.

Pornography also destroys and kills the mind of a child, who grows up in
great confusion about defining what the correct family and societal values
are. We believe that children should be protected from seeing pornographic
material, to ensure that our moral high ground as a society is improved and
maintained.

Tighter control over child pornography should be what this Bill attempts or
intends to do. We believe that these amendments will seek to stop
paedophile-related activities that seem to be on the increase. All relevant
agencies, such as the police services, should be provided with the
necessary resources to ensure easy and efficient implementation of the
amendments that are to be included in the principal Act.

The proposed amendments seek to separate the possession, creation and
distribution of child pornography, which is commended. The separation of
offences makes it easier for the law enforcement agencies to effect
arrests, secure convictions and mete out appropriate sentences.

We are also pleased that the independence of the role of the national
Director of Public Prosecutions, which we all know about, is fully
clarified, and we appreciate this. The Bill also imposes an obligation on
all citizens to report suspicious activities, because if investigations
find a failure to report, it becomes an offence - of course, if permission
from the national Director of Public Prosecutions is obtained. We strongly
support this step and all efforts to stop child pornography.

In our villages and homesteads our children are exposed to pornography, and
some believe that it is a good thing, because they have been misled by
abusers. The unfortunate reality is that most of our parents in the rural
areas need to be educated on this, so that they are aware and know how to
deal with incidents that the Bill and the Act as a whole try to address. It
is good to have a law, but it is not correct if it is not advocated to the
target group, stakeholders and the public in general.

I need to know from the Minister whether advocacy is to be undertaken, as a
process to make the public aware of this Act. Quite often, ordinary people
do not know what to do when confronted with incidents of child pornography.
We should engage those institutions where vulnerable children are to be
found. If they know, then they will report. Otherwise it becomes futile, if
the law exists and yet the victims do not know of it or how to go about
reporting.

The creators and publishers of pornographic material must be aware of the
consequences of using children for their business. They just have to know
who to use for this type of business activity. We will support anything
legal that tends to protect children, because they are the leaders of
tomorrow.

The development of the Internet has its own positive and negative effects.
The positive side is that it is good business and aids research too. It
also makes communication efficient and manageable. The down side of the
Internet is that it is used by some to access pornographic material,
without regard for the welfare of our children. It is for this type of
activity that tougher controls are critical and relevant. The adult
population can make itself available for pornographic activities, because
they have a choice to make about their lives. The choices are made on
various grounds, one of which could be religious. Choices determine one’s
lifestyle and prospects in life, and this should be respected. We hope the
objective of this and the principal Act will be achieved. I thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, thank you very much. I believe this Bill is
instrumental in the protection of our children and in ensuring that the
people who commit such offences against children are dealt with
accordingly.

Child pornography holds adverse effects for the development of children who
are exposed to it. It is therefore of the utmost importance that stringent
laws are applied in order to safeguard and protect our children and
communities from images that would allow them to begin thinking in the
direction of pornography.

While taking steps to protect our children and communities, we have to bear
in mind that the images that adults see on television could also be causal
factors in the creation of pornographic images. We have to take a holistic
approach when dealing with this issue. This means that we have to look at
possible causal factors.

One such possibility is that of showing images that are too explicit even
for adults to watch, which could lead to harmful behaviour towards
children. Adults who watch explicit movies on television become
desensitised towards such movies. For the ill-disciplined, irresponsible
and deviant adult it would be easy to become desensitised, which could
possibly lead to adverse effects, resulting in child pornography. Even
explicit images on television that have an age restriction do not
necessarily protect all the children of our nation. There are children who
do have access to such movies, even in their own homes. This could lead
children to engage in videotaping themselves, wanting to emulate what they
have seen on television.

Restrictions also have to be placed on showing movies that we know some
children would be watching, irrespective of age restrictions. For the sake
of moral regeneration we have to ensure that we do not create a platform
for such evil to mushroom. This means that we have to be conscious at all
times of what the consequences of explicit movies will mean for the
wellbeing of our nation and the protection of our children.

Isikhathi esisangisalele sesincane kakhulu. Ake sikhulume nangokushicilelwa
kwezincwadi. Kuyabonakala, mhlawumbe ngenxa yezimali, ukuthi labo babhali
bezincwadi abasafufusa abanalo uxhaso olwanele ukuze sibe nemitapo engcono
lapho kugcinwa khona izincwadi. Ezamafilimi sezize zathatha leyo ndawo
ngoba izingane ayikho into ezisayifunda.

Nezincwadi ezazibhalwa ngababhali ababenamakhono okubhala futhi okwakuthi
uma uzifunda uzwe unogqozi lokuthi ufunde uqhubeke ukuze uthole namasiko
neziluleko ezazingcono kulezo zincwadi esasinazo, indawo yazo isithathwe
ezamafilimi. Uma uthi uyabheka nje emtatshweni wezincwadi uzothola ukuthi
izincwadi ezibhalwe ngolimi lwabomdabu zinciphile.

Ngakho-ke ngithanda ukukhuthaza uhulumeni ukuthi ake agxile ekutheni
sikwazi ukuxhasa laba babhali abasafufusa, balandele ekhonweni lababhali
abanjengo-B M Makalo Khaketla no-K E Ntsane esiSuthwini;  futhi ngeke
ngalibala-ke oDkt Nyembezi, izinsizwa ezabhala izincwadi ezifana
neNqolobane Yesizwe. Aka kubuyelwe lapho kulowo mtapo khona izingane zethu-
ke zizokwazi ukuthi esizukulwaneni esizayo zifunde izinto ezingakha isizwe
ngoba phela yize kukhona le migomo elawula iminyaka yobudala mayelana
nezinto ezibukwa komaBonakude, izingane ziyawabuka nalawo mafilimi
aseminyakeni engaphezu kwazo. Umuntu uye athole ukuthi kubhalwe ukuthi
``violence’’ no-``n’’ u``nudity’’ ngakho-ke izingane zibuke uthi kwenzekani
lapho. Yimuphi-ke umehluko olapho ngoba lokho kuyafana ne-pornography?
Umqondo wengane uthatha leyo nto eyenzeka bese ifuna ukuthi iyenze nayo.

Ngakho-ke siyacela ukuthi uhulumeni ayibheke leyo nto yokuthi imigomo
elawula iminyaka yobudala mayelana nezinto ezibukwa kumaBonakude kuyinto
engasho lutho. Izingane zibuka lukhulu kulezo zinto ezenzeka lapho.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I have a few minutes left. Let us talk about the publication of books. It
appears that because of funds the emerging authors do not get adequate
funding so that we could have improved libraries. The film industry has now
closed that gap, because children have nothing to read any longer.

The gap left by the books that were written by the experienced authors, the
ones that we used to read, and that inspired us to continue reading, that
conveyed culture and gave us good advice, has been taken by the film
industry. When you look at the libraries you find that there are only very
few books written in our African languages.

I would like to encourage the government to support those emerging authors,
they must acquire the skills of authors like B M Makalo Khaketla and K E
Ntsane of Sesotho; nor I will forget Dr Nyembezi, who wrote books like
iNqolobane Yesizwe. Let us go back to that source of supply so in the next
generation our children can learn about things that will build the nation.
Although there are restrictions indicated for the programmes that are on
television, children also watch the films intended for adults. A person
will find that it says  “violence” and there will be an “n”, which stands
for “nudity”, but children will watch it anyway.  What is the difference,
because that is pornography? The child’s mind takes in what is happening
and wants to experiment.

We therefore request the government to look at these rules that govern age
restrictions for television programmes. Children learn bad things from
those programmes.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members, in the
past few years the ANC has been horrified at the increase in the number of
cases of child and baby rapes across the country that have been reported in
newspapers and on television. Everyone, regardless of race, colour or
creed, has been equally outraged that such abuses are taking place in our
homes and neighbourhoods.

As a collective, we waited with bated breath while justice took its course,
and allowed the perpetrators of these heinous crimes to get their just
desserts. However, increasingly we have seen our young children becoming
the targets of different kinds of abuse and find that as Government we
cannot legislate fast enough to keep up with these new injustices.

For example, the Child Justice Bill, currently still under discussion by
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Affairs, focuses on
children in conflict with the law. The reality is that cases have been
reported of young children being used as fronts for more established
criminal syndicates, and evidence being planted on them. The crime bosses
are well aware that the children, because they are underage, will receive a
lesser punishment.

The Children’s Bill that is currently with the National Assembly’s
Portfolio Committee on Social Development deals with all aspects of the
welfare of children, especially focusing on defending the human rights of
children. Parents or guardians physically and mentally abuse children, and
with the advent of the HIV and Aids pandemic, children are also becoming
primary care-givers of their siblings, through no fault of their own. This
means that our ANC-led government has to find a creative solution that will
allow children to reach adulthood through the normal passage of years
rather than having it thrust upon them through medical circumstances.

The Traditional Medical Practitioners Bill looks at outlawing the use of
body parts in the use of traditional medicines. Children, and particularly
babies, are again the targets of abuse. They have had their body parts cut
away, sometimes while they were still alive, as was the case with a 10-year-
old boy who was looking for his neighbours’ donkey. This young innocent
child’s eyes, ears, genitals and other body parts were cut off, as if he
were less than human, and he was left to die. He must have suffered
excruciating pain before eventually dying of his injuries.

Before us today we have yet another aspect of child abuse to contend with.
Specifically, we are concerned with the sexual exploitation of children in
publications and films. Here children are often forced, either
intentionally or unintentionally, into lewd and sexually compromising
situations that give sick pleasure to a group of child-    sex offenders.

A case in point of the nature of these atrocities was described during our
committee’s deliberations, when we were told of a father who raped his own
daughter and filmed this occurrence to comply with a sick admission policy
into an exclusive group specialising in an extreme version of child
pornography.

These examples may seem far-fetched to someone unfamiliar with the
phenomenon, but one only has to listen closely to our neighbours and our
community members to realise that behind closed doors all kinds of abuses
occur. Our children are indeed far more vulnerable than we realise, and we
have to do whatever we need to do to protect them from the scourges within
our society.

Already section 27 of the 1996 Films and Publications Act prohibits the
production, importation or possession of material involving children under
the age of 18 engaged in sexual conduct or a lewd display of nudity. But
clearly, for every new piece of legislation that we formulate, the
perpetrators of crime against children will find loopholes and continue
with their exploitative activities.

The new Bill before us therefore seeks to expand the definition of “child
pornography”, because in our innocence we thought that the previous
definition covered all eventualities. Now we know better. Thus you may now
fall foul of the law if you engage in activities that include being in
possession of any image, however created, or of any description of a
person, real or simulated, who is depicted or described as being under the
age of 18 engaged in sexual conduct; participating in, or assisting another
person to participate in, sexual conduct; or showing or describing the
body, or parts of the body, of such a person in a manner or in
circumstances which, within the context, amounts to sexual exploitation, or
in such a manner that is capable of being used for the purposes of sexual
exploitation.

As the ANC we are also acutely conscious of our constitutional obligations,
especially section 28(1), which deals with the fundamental rights of
children. In the context of this Bill, and constitutionally, children must
be protected from maltreatment, neglect, abuse and degradation. We believe
therefore that this Bill will assist in the protection of the rights of
children, especially with regard to sexual exploitation. The ANC therefore
supports this Bill. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr J O THLAGALE: Chair, hon Deputy Minister and the honourable House, the
purpose of this Bill, among other things, is to make further provision for
the prohibition of child pornography, to provide for an obligation to
report offences involving child pornography, and to increase penalties for
such offences.

We as grown-ups and parents have an irrevocable obligation to nurture and
bring up our children in an atmosphere of peace and mental freedom. So
anything that can be used for the sexual exploitation of our children, who
are our sacred trust, is abominable, and deserves to be crushed to pieces.
Nothing in this world is more important than our children and
grandchildren, not even the treasures of this world.

Whilst the UCDP is totally in support of this Bill and the measures
connected with it, I am of the opinion that the Bill should have gone
further to deal with adult pornography and the screening of obnoxious films
by eTV during the midnight hours over the weekends. To me these are the
contributory factors to the high incidence of child molestation, murder,
rape and the destruction of the spirit of ``ubuntu botho’’.

The penalties provided by the Bill for the different offences are
appropriate and should be applied accordingly. I may be interpreted as a
very cruel old man, but it must be remembered, hon colleagues and comrades,
that when it comes to our children, we need to be resolute and not gamble
with their lives. The UCDP supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T S SETONA: Madam Chairperson, an important aspect of the Films and
Publications Act, and indeed this amending Bill, is a shift from censorship
to the regulation of the content of films and publications, so that people
can be aware before they begin to view or read materials of what they are
letting themselves in for. They will then be in a position to make an
informed choice based on their own moral conscience, religious belief
system or whatever guides them whether to continue to engage in a specific
publication or film, or not.

As an example, one need only look at the age restrictions placed on films,
TV productions or Internet websites. How often has one seen the
classification on them and not realised that a great deal of thought has
gone into the protection of our citizens? When confronted with a PG13 film,
a parent can decide whether to allow his or her child to view the material
or not. Of course, this is a very mild example. More often than not, people
have to make choices about whether to watch extremely violent, sexually
explicit or racially prejudiced materials or not.

For this purpose, the 1996 Act created three classification categories
against which content of publications and films are measured. The first of
these are XX classifications: this classification deals with materials that
are banned primarily because they contain explicit examples of child sex,
explicit violent sexual conduct, bestiality and explicit sexual conduct
which degrades a person and constitutes incitement to cause harm. All
images of the above are banned. But in the case of child sex written
descriptions are also banned.

Classification X18 deals with materials which can be shown, displayed or
sold in specially created and licensed adult shops, such as the one that
has just opened across the road from Parliament. This classification may be
applied whether it concerns simulated or real sexual conduct, or includes
an explicit visual presentation of genitals. Classification R18 deals with
materials in this category that can be distributed to people aged 18 and
over.

Publications or films that advocate religious hatred are also banned,
unless they amount to a bona fide discussion, argument or opinions on a
religious matter of public interest. We certainly do not wish to have a
country where a white or black separatist can have unlimited access to
promote racist tendencies. I think our Constitution is quite clear on that
aspect.

Bona fide scientific, documentary, dramatic, literary or artistic films or
publications are exempted from the above categorisation. However, artistic
films or publications are not exempted if they deal with child sex.

Of course, as the use of the Internet expanded, the manner in which images
were created was refined and upgraded, and at the same time new ways to
describe and classify these materials were sought. In addition, all the
possible role-players in the creation, production and distribution of these
materials were sought, and the extent of their collective and individual
responsibility was assigned. Clause 7 of the amending Bill therefore seeks
to oblige Internet service providers to provide an oversight function over
those making use of their services. Internet service providers are
compelled to report all and any material or images containing child
pornography.

Also those people who intend to distribute or exhibit must register with
the board before they can begin their businesses. This would eliminate any
fly-by-night operations. The Bill releases the responsibility of policing
matters of possession of child pornography squarely in the hands of law
enforcement agencies. This lifts the burden from the already overburdened
classification committees of the board and allows the policing authorities
to act quickly and timeously to shut down and prosecute those found guilty
of committing crimes against our children. The ANC supports this Bill. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson and hon members, I am
certain that none of you would want to view an image of child pornography,
because of the gruesomeness of such an image. You can imagine that there
are people among our police services, psychologists, magistrates and
prosecutors who have to watch these things and deal with them on a much
more regular basis. So, hon Chairperson, we are ready to do the workshop as
soon as you call on us.

Over this weekend, hon Thetjeng, we had a workshop which included NGOs
involved in the matter, Internet service providers and other government
departments. We were acting on the commitment we had made earlier that we
were going to launch a massive public campaign, which would also be
comprehensive in that it would look at various aspects of our society:
legislation, the media, Internet service providers and NGOs.

The intention is, first and foremost, to educate the children, because it
is they who are the victims of these crimes, and then to educate the
parents, teachers and any other person in our society who can play a role
in this campaign and who needs to know about it. The issues that we intend
to deal with would include urging parents to watch out for their children
and to take responsibility, not only for their own children, but also for
other people’s children. Because, as we were saying earlier, the child you
see online or in a production image is a real child who has been abused. So
before you switch on your Internet, before you receive a DVD or a picture,
there is a real child who was abused.

We’ve got to protect those children and combat the problem before it
reaches the films and publications stage. That would require, amongst other
things, that we invite various stakeholders in our society and invoke among
our people the concept of “every child is my child”, and ask parents, as
hon Setona was saying, to take responsibility for their children, what they
watch, what they do after school or during the holidays.

This is an enormous responsibility on all of us, because this brings me to
the important issue, that the people who are targeting our continent for
these crimes are doing so precisely because of the prevalence of poverty
and underdevelopment in Africa. This is going to be the most decisive
factor in combating the spread of this crime. So we have to deal with the
problems of poverty, because it’s not only issues of greed among parents,
it’s not issues of greed among the criminals. A child is also exploited
because his or her parents cannot provide for the basic needs of the child
or they are not there because of reasons of illness, death, unemployment
and poverty. So we have to deal with all these challenges.

It is our wish that we deal with those issues, but we must also make a
promise that we will launch this campaign and involve not only government
and the public and private sectors. We hope that hon members of Parliament
will play a prominent role in the process.

As hon Madlala-Magubane was saying, for every new piece of legislation we
pass, child sexual offenders will find new ways to evade the legislation.
We must also promise that for every new way they find to evade the
legislation, we will find new ways to pin them down, to arrest them, to
combat this problem. We will not relent. Whatever they try to do, we have
to be on their case. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Minister, thank you very much. I am
sure the chairperson of the committee is taking the responsibility of
ensuring that, in order for us to be able to assist the department and for
all of us to be on board, we call a workshop to deal with this matter. To
invite provinces to come and participate will also be an advantage in order
to curb this problem we are faced with.

Debate concluded.

                  SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members, South
Africa’s democracy is underpinned by a very progressive Constitution, the
supreme law of our land, which is a legacy of our struggle for freedom and
human rights. The Constitution guarantees that we shall, as a nation and
government, at all times respect and advance its best values and
principles. It is therefore provided for that any law or conduct, if it is
to be valid, must be consistent with the spirit and letter of the
Constitution and fulfil the obligations that the Constitution imposes.

It is in recognition and respect of this fact that the government tables
before this important House today the South African Citizenship Amendment
Bill, which at face value seems to introduce a small amendment, but whose
application and implication bear direct relevance to the supreme law of our
country, the Constitution.

This follows on from the provisions of section 9(1) of the South African
Citizenship Act, 1995, as amended by the South African Citizenship
Amendment Act of 1997, which conflicts with section 20 of the Constitution
that stipulates that no one may be deprived of his or her citizenship.
Furthermore, this section also cannot be justified even in terms of section
35 of the Constitution, which provides for the limitation of certain rights
set out in the Bill of Rights.

Accordingly, and in its attempts to realign legislation under its
administration with the Constitution, the Department of Home Affairs has
identified the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill as one of those
pieces of legislation that needs to be introduced in order to align them
with the Bill of Rights and democratic values enshrined in our
Constitution.

The Bill therefore seeks to bring the South African Citizenship Act of 1995
in line with section 20 of the Constitution as far as dual citizenship is
concerned. It seeks to repeal the provision that allowed the Minister to
deprive a citizen of his or her citizenship for having used the travel
document of a foreign country to enter or depart from the Republic, or to
enter or depart from a country that issued such a passport, or any other
third country.

This provision is also problematic in that it calls for the
extraterritorial application of South African law. In fact, in terms of
such provision a South African citizen who is also a citizen of another
country stands to be deprived of his or her South African citizenship, even
if he or she uses his or her foreign passport to enter or depart from the
foreign country which issued it, or to enter or depart from any third
country.

The problematic nature of this provision is not mitigated by the power
vested in the Minister to issue authorisations to citizens with dual
citizenship to use their passports abroad as set out in section 9(2) of the
South African Citizenship Act. In terms of such provision, such exemptions
can only be given under exceptional circumstances. In fact, to obviate the
difficulties arising out of this application the Minister was forced to
issue such exemptions effectively to anyone who applied for them.

Such exemptions expire on an annual basis in November. In the past they
have been renewed amidst the great distress of holders of dual passports,
many of whom use their foreign passports to enter foreign countries to
avoid the need for visa requirements imposed on South African citizens. It
was therefore urgent that the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill be
introduced in Parliament and processed on an urgent basis to avoid the need
to renew all outstanding exemptions when they come to an end in November
2004.

The Bill introduces the following provisions. Clause 1 seeks to repeal
section 9 of the South African Citizenship Act, Act 88 of 1995. Clause 2
provides for the insertion of section 26B after section 26A in the South
African Citizenship Act, Act 88 of 1995, and it will provide for the
imposition of penalties on a citizen using a foreign passport to enter or
depart from the Republic, or utilising his or her foreign citizenship while
in the Republic. Clause 3 provides for the short title of the Act, being
the South African Citizenship Amendment Act. I urge this House to accept
the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, it is an honour for me to speak on this Bill
before us today. Our Constitution is quite clear - I think the Deputy
Minister also referred to this - if one looks at section 20, which states
quite categorically that no person may be deprived of citizenship. Section
9 of the South African Citizenship Act of 1995, which sought to deprive
citizens of their citizenship merely on the basis of having dual
citizenship, is clearly in conflict with the Constitution.

However, we need to be cautious with regard to whom we grant citizenship.
Whilst our democracy should not inflict an unnecessary burden on those with
dual citizenship, we cannot endorse the continued legitimisation of
citizenship to those who have obtained their citizenship through fraudulent
means, nor can we stop people who no longer want to be South African
citizens from renouncing their citizenship. We are nonetheless concerned
that some South African citizens, after 10 years of hardwon democracy,
would continue to see the need to retain the citizenship of another
country.

Many of us were deprived of our South African citizenship when we were born
from the heart and soul of this country. The only reason we did not qualify
to be citizens was that the white racist regime decided that only white
people or those of European descent could be South African citizens. We are
therefore very sensitive to the issue of citizenship.

An extract from a speech of J T Gumede, president of the ANC at the
International Congress against Imperialism in Brussels in February 1927
still captures the emotions at the loss of South African citizenship then,
and before our democracy in 1994. He said, and I quote:

      South Africa is my country in which I was born, the country of my
      forefathers. I regret to tell you this evening that we have no place
      to lay our heads. We are proud South Africans who sometimes cannot
      fathom why anyone would even want to be a citizen of another country
      when they could have South Africa as their first choice.

We will not tolerate people abusing dual citizenship in any way. The Select
Committee on Social Services has interacted with this Bill and seeks to
support this Bill without amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Chairperson, I support the
select committee. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON CONVENTION
  BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE CABINET OF
      MINISTERS OF UKRAINE FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE
        PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

Ms F NYANDA: Chairperson, members of the House, the purpose of the
agreement is twofold. Firstly, it provides the avoidance of double
taxation, and secondly, it puts in place mechanisms for the exchange of
information between the tax authorities of the two countries.

This agreement concluded between the Republic of South Africa and Ukraine
adheres to the key requirements of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development. Widely known by its abbreviation, OECD, it is an
organisation of 29 mainly industrialised member countries. South Africa is
not a member of the OECD. In addition, the state law advisers of the
Departments of Foreign Affairs and Justice have consulted on the agreement.
It is the recommendation of the Select Committee on Finance that this House
adopts this agreement. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall ascertain whether all delegation
heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are all
delegation heads present? In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote, if they so
wish. We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Siyaxhasa, Somlomo. [We support, Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: The Free State votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr H T SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Siyavuma. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Stem vir. [Vote in favour of.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Chief Whip, can you please not intimidate
members? You are supposed to protect these members, and if the intimidation
starts with you ... I am sure you understand what I mean.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON AGREEMENT BETWEEN
  THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
 STATE OF KUWAIT FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE PREVENTION OF
               FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

Mr D J BOTHA: Thank you, Comrade Chair. The government of the Republic of
South Africa and Kuwait have concluded an agreement on the avoidance of
double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes
on income.

It is the practice in most countries for income tax to be imposed both on
the worldwide income generated by residents and the income of nonresidents
which arises in that country. The fact of such a system is that income
generated by the resident of one country from the source of another country
is subject to tax in both countries.

As this position clearly discourages foreign investment, it is normal for
countries that have trade relationships to conclude double taxation
agreements. Such agreements commonly provide that income of a particular
nature will be taxable in only one of the countries, or may be taxed in
both countries, with one of them allowing the credit for the tax imposed on
another.

This agreement applies to persons who are residents of South Africa and
Kuwait. The agreement covers business profit; the operation of ships and
aircraft; enterprises where, for example, South Africa participates
directly or indirectly in management and control of capital in the
enterprise physically located in Kuwait; royalties; government services;
and payments received by teachers and researchers from sources in Kuwait
for purposes of education in South Africa and vice versa.

The NCOP is advised to ensure that this agreement will be accepted. I move.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber - I think they are. In
accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to
the voting on the question. I shall do so in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour, against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr H T SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We agree.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Elethu. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Mr D J BOTHA: Support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Rev P MOATSHE: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK: Support.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:14.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS




                           TUESDAY, 10 AUGUST 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 10 August 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Energy Regulator Bill [B 9 - 2004] (National Assembly -
              sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     Report of the work of the Interim Management Team (IMT) in the Eastern
     Cape for the period November 2002 to March 2004.
2.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of Umalusi - Council for Quality
     Assurance in General and Further Education and Training for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.

                          WEDNESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2004





ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 5 August 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     Progress report by Mafikeng Local Municipality on section 139
     intervention, arising from the adoption, by the National Council of
     Provinces, of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Intervention in the
     Mafikeng Local Municipality on 27 November 2003.

     Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     for consideration and report.


                          THURSDAY, 12 AUGUST 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health:

         On request of the Minister the following Bill was introduced by
         the Select Committee on Social Services in the National Council of
         Provinces on 13 August 2004:


         (i)     Sterilisation Amendment Bill [B 12 - 2004] (National
              Council of Provinces - sec 76) [Draft Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 26597 of
              27 July 2004.]

         Referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 13 August 2004
         for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.


National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Mr R J Tau has been elected Chairperson of the Select Committee
         on Public Services with effect from 4 August 2004.


         1) Ms N D Ntwanambi has been elected Chairperson of the Select
            Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs with effect from 12
            August 2004.



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Protocol on Legal Affairs in the Southern African Development
         Community (SADC), in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Protocol on Legal Affairs in the
         Southern African Development Community (SADC).

     (c)    Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, in terms
         of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Protocol of the Court of Justice
         of the African Union.

     (e)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of India on Extradition, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of
         1996).

     (f)    Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of India on Mutual Legal
         Assistance in Criminal Matters, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     (g)    Explanatory Memorandum on Treaty between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         India on Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
         Matters.

     (h)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Designation of the United Kingdom,
         in terms of section 2(2)(a) of the Cross-Border Insolvency Act,
         2000 (Act No 42 of 2000).

     (i)    Report regarding the provisional suspension of Magistrate S E
         Tebe without remuneration pending an investigation into his
         fitness to hold office, in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the
         Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the South
     African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 55 - 2003] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 12 August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 55 -
         2003] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that
         it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Films and
     Publications Amendment Bill [B 61B - 2003] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 12 August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 61B -
         2003] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that
         it has agreed to the Bill.



                           FRIDAY, 13 AUGUST 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    National Gambling Bill [B 48D - 2003] - Act No 7 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 6 August 2004).

National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees
     (1)    Mr B J Tolo has been elected Chairperson of the Select Committee
         on Education and Recreation with effect from 4 August 2004.

                           MONDAY, 16 AUGUST 2004





ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Amendment Bill, 2004,
         submitted by the Minister of Health on 10 August 2004. Referred to
         the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select Committee on
         Social Services.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
     President's Fund for 2002-2003 [RP 84-2004].



                           TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 17 August 2004:


         (i)     South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 55 - 2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


         (ii)    Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 61B - 2003]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Proclamation No 37 published in Government Gazette No 26543 dated 8
     July 2004: Commencement of the Special Pensions Second Amendment Act,
     2003 (Act No 30 of 2003).


