---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 June 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-06-24
---

THURSDAY, 24 JUNE 2004
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms C P DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I shall move the following as a subnect for
discussion on behalf of the ACDP:


  The role and future of independent schools in South Africa, especially
  in view of the attack on independent schools in Zimbabwe and present
  legislation and policy in South Africa.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

Vote No 1 - The Presidency (Resumption of Debate)
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam
Speaker, Deputy President, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, I would like
to thank the hon members for the comments and observations they made in
the debate on the Budget Vote of the Presidency.

The hon Sybil Seaton urged that to deepen democracy and promote
nonracialism, we should draw on the contributions of all political parties
and civil society. I agree with this advice. We have accordingly taken
note of the suggestions made by the various members who spoke yesterday.
This does not necessarily mean that we agree with their suggestions. What
it does mean is that we should at least consider their suggestions and not
ignore or reject them, simply because they have been made by parties other
than the ruling party.

For instance, the hon Pieter Mulder said that in 1993 and 1996 we were
forced to talk to each other on the problems relating to the place of
Afrikaners and Afrikaans in our society. Now, elections and the style in
this House force us to fight as opponents. It makes these problems worse
and does not solve anything. I'd like to assure the hon Mulder that we do
not have to fight as opponents. Like him, the Government is concerned that
everything we do should ensure that the Afrikaners and the Afrikaans-
speaking people are not discriminated against, and are being treated with
the sensitivity and dignity that must be accorded to all our people,
regardless of race or colour or gender. I am certain that a former member
of this House, Cassie Aucamp, will not object to my mentioning the fact
that he has not accepted the pessimistic views expressed by the hon
Mulder. I say this because not long ago he approached me to raise matters,
not different from those mentioned by the hon Mulder. We will respond to
the suggestions he made, precisely to ensure that such suggestions as
those mentioned by the hon Pieter Mulder are addressed, and I'd like to
assure the hon Mulder that we will discuss the same issues with him.

In this regard I'd like to draw the attention of the hon Mulder to the
remarks made by the Deputy President concerning the operationalisation of
the Commission for the Promotion of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities, and I am certain that it would help all of us if
the hon Mulder approached the Deputy President to see in what ways this
important commission could help us to address the issues that he raised.

I agree with the hon Seaton that in the interest of all our citizens, we
should ensure that the Presidency functions smoothly and efficiently, and
that the interaction between the Presidency and Parliament should continue
to be, as she puts it, both streamlined and seamless. The matter she
raised, namely the salaries of MPs, has been affected by new amendments to
the relevant legislation. These have meant that the independent Commission
for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers had to follow new procedures
to determine their salaries. The consultative process was also delayed by
the elections. However, the commission is giving urgent attention to this
matter.

The hon Patricia de Lille made the point that we should align our poverty
alleviation programmes so as to achieve maximum impact. Already the
cluster system that we have announced in this House has begun to have a
positive impact on the Government's planning, implementation and
monitoring of its programmes. Although the hon De Lille said she was
looking forward to fulfilling her function of watching closely, I would
suggest that she extends that role to finding ways of practically
assisting in the implementation of all of these programmes whose main
objective is to bring about a better life to all our people. [Applause.]
This, I believe, is the task of our public representatives, namely to
ensure that they are not merely content to watch the unfolding processes
from the sidelines, but that they become active participants in the
transformation of our country into a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and
prosperous society.

The hon Motsoko Pheko is correct when he says that the National Youth
Commission should work for the development of all young people,
irrespective of party affiliation, geographic location or gender. Indeed,
the National Youth Commission should communicate better so as to reach
more young people. I am certain Minister Pahad will respond in a practical
manner to the proposals made by the hon Pheko.

Both hon Meshoe and Nefolovhodwe have made appeals for urgent intervention
in the situation in the DRC. I can assure the hon members that we are
fully engaged in that situation and will continue to do whatever we can to
help bring peace and stability to that country which will lead to the
holding of the democratic elections which all of the signatories to the
Congolese Agreement are committed.

The hon Stevens of the UDM knows that monetary policy is the
responsibility of the Reserve Bank. He might therefore direct his comments
to Governor Mboweni. He is also aware of the steps taken by the Government
to mediate the impact of high prices of crude oil. The Government will
keep this matter under constant review. At an appropriate time, the
Minister of Health will respond to the proposal to make Aids a notifiable
disease.

I am particularly happy that most speakers agreed with the programme we
had put before Parliament and the country. I also agree with various
points of emphasis that the hon members made with regard to various
elements of the programme, including poverty eradication, youth
development, the empowerment of people with disabilities, gender equality
and the emancipation of women, and the improvement of our educational
system to produce the skilled people that we need. I trust that we will
all find ways of making our own contributions to the successful
implementation of the programme with which most of us seem to be in
agreement.

However, with regard to a wider context, I would like to thank the hon
Sybil Seaton and the hon Tony Leon for their contributions to the
discussion on the important question of what we want to do with our
country and ourselves. I trust that others among us will follow their
example and contribute their views about the future of our political and
economic systems. In this regard, surely we must agree with the often-
expressed view of the DA that a vibrant democracy necessarily means a
coexistence of diverse views. Accordingly, we should not judge any
national debate as having succeeded or failed merely by the extent to
which it has or has not led to the emergence of consensus. The fact is
that among ourselves we may and will disagree on many issues. There is no
rule that requires that any of our national debates should lead either to
agreement or disagreement. Neither does the fact that we do not agree on a
number of issues constitute a threat to democracy or translate into bad
manners or behaviour on the part of the Government.

The very persistence of different points of view, and especially the
availability of the political space in which to express and propagate
these different views, signify precisely the health of our democracy.
Sometimes, however, I get the impression that some believe that the
President of the Republic is excluded from enjoying the right to hold and
propagate views that may differ from those held by other people.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The role seems to be that the President should say only those things about
which everybody is in agreement. [Interjections.] This condemns the
President merely to project those views accepted by public opinion, or
media opinion posing as public opinion or common knowledge, prohibiting
the President from saying anything that some may characterise as
controversial. I raise this matter because of the input and some of the
comments made by the hon Sybil Seaton. She called for an acceptance of
criticism. This has never been a problem. The problem arises when our
response to criticism, to exercise our own right to hold and express our
own views, is read as frightening intolerance of criticism. [Applause.]

In a speech he delivered a fortnight ago on 10 June, the hon Tony Leon
conveyed this message when he said that there is fear across the country
that one might incur the displeasure and wrath of the ANC, that one might
be denounced as a racist, that one might inadvertently express agreement
with or support somebody or someone who has already been denounced as a
racist, someone like the leader of the DA, for example. It will actually
surprise everybody, certainly the ruling party, to hear from the hon Leon
the sad truth that there is precious little intellectual independence from
the ANC in business, in the media, civil society and universities and
that, indeed, even in the rest of the opposition, there is no real
independence from the ANC. In the light of all of this, the hon Leon says
we desperately need in our country a plurality of views, and true
intellectual and moral independence from the ruling party.

This conclusion is based on an assessment of what is happening in the
country and with which we disagree. Indeed, if we had the time, we could
demonstrate quite easily that what the hon Leon believes is desperately
needed, is precisely what characterises public discourse in our country.
Of course, it may be that when he speaks of a desperate need for a
plurality of views, he is calling on everybody to differ with and oppose
the ruling party, regardless of the merits of the propositions of the
ruling party. This amounts to arguing that to agree with what is patently
correct, is to suppress a plurality of views. Apart from anything else,
this amounts to an attempt to frighten everybody with false propositions
in order to encourage opposition to the ruling party, merely for the sake
of opposition, for obvious reasons.

The strategy of the use of fear is reflected in the comments made in
response to the pronouncements of the Ministers of Mineral and Energy and
of Agriculture and Land Affairs. To take only the latter: The Minister of
Agriculture was correct to call for a national discussion on the issue of
foreign land ownership. To stop this discussion, which will take place,
the hon Leon seeks to frighten the country with the notion that,
``restrictions on foreign ownership are a red flag for foreign
investors''. [Interjections.] And yet many countries have such
restrictions. They include Switzerland and Canada - to cite only two. We
know of no reports that this has served as a red flag to the foreigners
who have invested in these countries. Quite why Switzerland and Canada can
have such restrictions without frightening foreign investors, while
similar restrictions in our country would produce an opposite response
from foreign investors, is difficult to fathom.

There will be a time in future to discuss the ideological construct
advanced by the hon Leon which results in his talking about a so-called
fundamental contradiction, the racial nationalism of the ANC on the one
hand, and the liberal democratic values of our nation's Constitution on
the other. Suffice to say for now is that what he has sought to do, is to
superimpose this construct on our history and contemporary reality; not to
improve our understanding of that history and reality, but to obscure
them, to create a space for the hegemony of the socioeconomic paradigm
that Will Hutton describes as American conservatism.

The end point he wants us to arrive at is explained in a speech on Youth
Day, 16 June, when he spoke of an economic policy with such elements as a
minimum budget deficit, lower taxation, a deregulated labour market,
privatisation, enterprise zones, opportunity vouchers and the like. He
believes, among other things, he must convince us that the African
majority in our country was not oppressed and exploited as Africans, but
as individuals. [Interjections.] The legacy of that past impacts on this
majority, not as Africans, but as individuals. This derives from the
proposition contained in the same speech, namely that for the DA:


  Society is composed at its most basic level of individuals and not of
  racially defined groups, or for that matter, of classes or ethnic
  groups. As liberals we do believe that people are more than the sum of
  the forces that are brought to bear on them or at least that the
  combination of forces produces individuals with a unique outlook on the
  world, who construct their own meaning and who are best placed to
  apprehend their own truth or truths.

If this has any meaning, it constitutes a vain attempt to eradicate our
history. Accordingly, the Africans as a national group did not and do not
exist. What we had and have are merely individual Africans who were
oppressed as individuals and who suffer from the legacy of racism as
individuals. Africans did not come together as a national group to fight
oppression, but  struggled as individuals each constructing his or her own
meaning, being best placed to comprehend their own truth or truths.
Necessarily, therefore, our response to challenge or eradicate the legacy
of racism is wrong. It is also wrong to seek to uplift the Africans as a
national group. Rather, we should seek to change a lot of the individual
Africans, unique in himself or herself. Since there are no classes but
only individuals, the workers are also wrong to have combined in trade
unions. All this is a celebration of individualism and an attempt to
create a society in which individuals shoulder their burdens and exercise
their rights alone, of which Will Hutton writes. [Interjections.]

I do not know what will happen to the hon Tony Leon when he wakes up one
day and discovers that there are individual Africans who belong to the
ANC; that there are individual workers who belong to the working class and
individual capitalists who belong to the capitalist class; and that all of
these have all along been combined to act together, exactly because they
share common interests as racially defined groups or, for that matter, as
classes. They did not believe the hon Tony Leon when he told them they
were merely individuals with a unique outlook on the world ... [Applause.]
... that they were merely individuals with a unique outlook on the world,
constructing their own meaning, and who are best placed to comprehend
their own truth or truths. To understand better our response to the
liberal ideology propagated by the DA, hon members may also find it useful
to have a look at what we said in 1999 in our response to the state of the
nation address after the then elections.

In another speech on 10 June, the hon Tony Leon said that the consensus
the ANC calls for, which is a consensus on the programme of
transformation, fundamentally misses the point. Indeed, it subverts the
spirit, if not the letter of democracy. I am happy to say that, as
reflected in this debate in this House yesterday, the majority of our
people disagree with this point of view. They are determined to join hands
to fundamentally transform our country into a true nonracial, nonsexist
and prosperous democracy in which the racist legacy of the past will cease
to define us as Africans, Coloureds, Indians and whites; giving all of us
an opportunity to be merely South Africans. There are millions of our
people who would deeply appreciate the contribution of the hon members to
this outcome, as I would. I thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                        APPOINTMENT OF NEW CHIEF WHIP

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I would like to announce that the hon Nhleko has
resigned as Chief Whip of the Majority Party with effect from today. The
hon Mbulelo Goniwe replaces him in that post. [Applause.]

                      SUBJECT-RELATED AD HOC COMMITTEES

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, we move a motion in
the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party as printed on the Order
Paper, as follows:


  That -


  (1) the House dissolves the subject-related ad hoc committees, including
       the Ad Hoc Committee on International Affairs, established by
       resolutions of the House on 6 May 2004 (Minutes of 6 May, items 13
       and 14);


  (2) bills and all other matters that have been referred to these ad hoc
       committees stand referred to the portfolio committees established
       by the Speaker on 23 June 2004; and


  (3) the mandate given to the Ad Hoc Committee on Finance to consider the
       subject of the financial administration of Parliament as instructed
       by the House on 18 June 2004, accordingly be transferred to the
       Portfolio Committee on Finance with the same timeframes.

Agreed to.
                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                (Decision of Question on Votes and Schedule)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to thank political parties for advising
the staff on which Votes they will make declarations, on which they will
record their objections and on which they intend dividing. This
information indeed greatly assisted the process this afternoon. I will put
each Vote and ask parties for declarations of votes as they have
indicated. Members may make declarations of votes from the floor
microphones if they wish, especially if they are very far from the podium.
After this I will put the Vote for decision. By agreement declarations
will be limited to two minutes. When we come to divisions, the bells will
be rung for five minutes for the first one, and subsequently one minute
for all others.

Vote No 1 - The Presidency - put and agreed to.

Vote No 2 - Parliament - put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Foreign Affairs - put.

Declarations of votes:

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the Foreign Affairs Vote presents a
difficult choice for the DA. There have been some major foreign policy
successes, which we applaud. Included in these are the African Renaissance
concept, Nepad, the interaction with the G8 countries, the multilateral
approach, the leadership role in many continental and international
institutions, and the expansion of our country's representation in all
parts of the world. We also generally support humanitarian and peace-
making initiatives in a world which badly needs countries with liberal
democratic constitutions to take the lead.

The problem is that there are some blemishes and some bad judgments which,
we believe, have marred an otherwise praiseworthy conduct of South
Africa's foreign affairs. One must mention the Zimbabwean tragedy,
misguided solidarity with the deposed Haitian president, the Mashabane
affair with its implications for our commitment to women's rights, our
pursuit of relationships with some rather odd world leaders, and the
complicity in the alleged mercenary saga are some examples.

The DA believes that our foreign policy should be strong on human rights
and should concentrate on advancing South Africa's real interests. There
should be far more emphasis on promoting our country's greatest needs,
that of economic growth, investment and job creation. Anything that
retards those imperatives should be discarded as an unnecessary luxury,
and everything that promotes those imperatives should be pursued with
single-minded determination. I will interact with the Foreign Minister and
support her where this is possible, while opposing her where this is
necessary.

This year, the DA gives a qualified ``yes'' to the Foreign Affairs Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Prof A K ASMAL: Madam Speaker, I think this is a very miserable response
by the DA. We live in a very dangerous world, and South Africa has trodden
a path of extraordinary virtuosity, courage and understanding. I don't
think this House needs a qualified support of the DA.

This House will enthusiastically welcome the initiatives taken in the 10th
year of our freedom, where South Africa has played a remarkable role in
the Commonwealth, in the United Nations and elsewhere. The conferences
that were held here were not held here because the world wants to repay
South Africa for its glorious changes in 1994. They were held here because
South Africa could provide leadership on the issues of racism, of
sustainable development and the South Atlantic. All these conferences were
a tribute to South Africa's leadership and virtuosity. That is why the ANC
believes in a positive approach. In the areas where, in fact, there are
difficulties, the South African Government will take a considered view.

With regard to Zimbabwe, it is quite clear, as we have said again and
again, that there is no such thing as public diplomacy, there is no such
thing as hectoring diplomacy. The diplomacy that takes place is a
diplomacy where we want to influence and affect positions in Zimbabwe. In
the same way, we are quite clear what the Diaspora demands from South
Africa, as the Foreign Minister said, namely that we make common cause
with the victims of slavery and colonialism. We are not going to apologise
for this.

The Foreign Minister has said that we will have a conference in the
Caribbean on the Diaspora. Next year we are considering an international
conference on the Diaspora. We are part of what George Orwell called ``the
great unwashed'', and we are not going to apologise for those who come
with silver spoons in their mouths. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 4 - Home Affairs - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, we indicated to the ANC Whips that we would
not be making a declaration on this Vote.

The SPEAKER: The ANC? Does the ANC wish to pursue the declaration of vote?
Mr Chauke?

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, the ACDP does have a declaration on this
Vote. We did forward it to the table staff.

The SPEAKER: Please, quiet.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker, the ACDP has consistently over the years
supported the cause for greater financial assistance to this department,
and we are pleased that the budget allocation has been significantly
increased. This department is a window to Government for citizens and
visitors to our country, but underresourcing in the past has made it
extremely difficult for the department to achieve many of its strategic
objectives.

Whilst the ACDP is thus prepared to support the budget and give the
department a period to implement its turnaround strategy, we are clearly
concerned about various budgetary items in the programmes. Particular
concern relates to the Government Printing Works and the Auditor-General's
adverse audit opinion for the previous financial year to the effect that -


  ... the financial statements do not fairly represent in all material
  respects the financial position of the Government Printing Works as at
  31 March 2003. Clearly much attention needs to be given to the
  Government Printing Works as it is transformed to a state-owned
  enterprise.

The ACDP, in conclusion, holds the view that we need to encourage the
department in its turnaround strategy and give it grace and an opportunity
to see whether it can implement this strategy, whereafter we can again
evaluate the situation, and therefore the ACDP will support the Budget
Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Are there any other parties wishing to make a declaration of
vote? Hon Chauke?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Yes, Madam Speaker. The problem is that we were not made
aware by the ACDP that they would make a declaration. Hence we understood
that it was going to be only the DA. However let me just respond to a few
things.

The allocation of R2,2 billion will go a long way in making sure that the
Department of Home Affairs with its turnaround strategy will reach our
people, in particular in those villages where people are still struggling
hundreds and hundreds of kilometres towards the offices of the Department
of Home Affairs. The service will now be delivered directly to where
people are. We will have mobile units. We will be going to people. We will
be making sure that each and every child who qualifies for a birth
certificate will be given a birth certificate.

At the same time, I think that the budget allocation will be addressing
the shortage of staff within the department. It will allow the department
to employ 1 000 extra personnel. The control over border posts is
currently weak. So, with this allocation, we believe that with the support
of the Minister, the Deputy Minister and the department, they will be able
to employ additional officers who will be on the ground to make sure that
everybody who comes into the country or leaves it is adequately recorded
as a person who is coming in or who is leaving the country.

On this note the ANC supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 5 - Provincial and Local Government - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mnr W P DOMAN: Speaker, ten spyte van die verhoging van 38% van die
begroting, wat meer geld vir infrastruktuurontwikkeling insluit, en wat
die DA natuurlik verwelkom, kan die DA nie die begroting steun nie. Dit is
onaanvaarbaar dat die department se personeel in een jaar met 175%, van
278 na 791 goedgekeurde poste verhoog word. Die infasering oor drie jaar
moet drasties afgeskaal word. Kapasiteit moet eerder by provinsies en
munisipaliteite gebou word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, in spite of the 38% increase in the budget, which
includes more money for infrastructure development, and which the DA
naturally welcomes, the DA cannot support the budget. It is unacceptable
that the department's personnel increased with 175%, from 278 to 791
approved posts, in one year. The phasing in over three years must be
drastically scaled down. Capacity should rather be built in provinces and
municipalities.]

One of the biggest failures of the Minister and the ANC is that they could
not turn the culture of nonpayment for services around. Debt owed to
municipalities is increasing at an alarming rate. The ANC is further
eroding the financial basis of municipalities with an out-of-date
equitable share that is not covering the cost of free basic services,
which we all expect municipalities to grant to the indigent. The Minister
has failed to resolve the matter of unfunded mandates.

The ANC is also presently embarking on an unhealthy and undemocratic
governance system by executive mayoral committees that govern from behind
closed doors. Metros are highly centralised, with Government far from the
ratepayers and personnel who are suffering from transition fatigue, which
all result in ever deteriorating delivery of services. The only remedy now
will be to give subcouncils more powers.

The DA views the community development workers appointed all over the
country as nothing more than political commissars to infiltrate
communities at taxpayers' expense to drum up support for the ANC.
[Interjections.]

It is not local government that is failing the people, but the ANC that is
failing local government. [Interjections.] ANC politicians and ANC cadres
deployed in high-ranking positions in local government who are involved in
corruption, malpractice or simply not performing should be swiftly dealt
with, instead of being protected by the ANC. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, we regret that there has been
miscommunication between the table staff and us. The UCDP will not make
any declaration.

Mr Y I CARRIM: Madam Speaker, comrades and friends, a 35,8% increase in
the overall budget, a 20,6% increase in the local government equitable
share, a 67,5% increase for urban and rural development, a 52% increase
for basic service and infrastructure, R15,6 billion allocated for
municipal infrastructure over the MTEF period, what better a budget and
how much more consistent can we be with what we promised the electorate?
The point now is to use the budget effectively and productively. The more
this happens, the stronger the case for increased funds in the future,
which, given the magnitude of the task we have to fulfil, will be
necessary.

The DA, if they had any sense at all, will work with us to meet these
necessary goals; instead, we have the usual whingeing and whining, with
not a single sensible alternative to offer. [Interjections.] Mr Doman has
nothing to say in the committee meetings. Mr Leon, Mr Doman has nothing to
say in the committee meetings, when he is there at all. Presumably his
researcher prepared his speech about two years ago. [Laughter.] It sounds
very much like the same one made at that time.

Madam Speaker, is there nothing you can do to find us an opposition of
substance in our committee, please? [Interjections.] It's unfair and
boring to have no contest at all. This is after all a multiparty
democracy. [Interjections.]

Mr Doman does not know, because he does not come to meetings.
[Interjections.] Why? The department has reduced the municipal debt by
R900 million in less than three months. [Applause.] Secondly, they have
decided, in a measured and temperate way, to include the private sector -
I thought that Mr Doman's party would like this - to retrieve a part of
those arrears without contradicting the indigents policy. Thirdly, the
Intergovernmental Relations Bill will be before this House in a month's
time. This Bill will ensure a more integrated co-operative governance
system. Fourthly, the DA, this very DA, went to the Constitutional Court
to challenge the mayoral executive system. The court decided that the
mayoral executive system is constitutionally sound. On the one hand they
tell us to observe the Constitution; and on the other hand they want to
violate the Constitution. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

I have barely begun. I am afraid I can't say much more. [Laughter.]
Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, African Christian Democratic Party
and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 6 - Public Works - put.

Mr F BHENGU: Madam Speaker, now that they have changed their minds, we as
the ANC support the Budget Vote.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, can I, again, please indicate that we
informed the Whippery of the ANC this morning that we would not be taking
part in certain declarations. They were informed, and I'm sorry that it
has not come to your attention.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 7 - Government Communications and Information System - put.

The SPEAKER: Does the DA wish to make a declaration of vote?

Mr M J ELLIS: No, Madam Speaker, we will not be making a declaration on
the GCIS. [Interjections.] Madam Speaker, I beg your pardon. This time I
apologise to the House, it's my fault; we will be making a declaration of
vote. [Interjections.]

Declarations of vote:

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Speaker, he is meant to be on my side. The DA cannot
support the Budget Vote for the GCIS this year. Whatever else the GCIS
might or might not have done, the fact is that we believe that it exceeded
its mandate and overstepped the appropriate mark during the election
period by commissioning advertising that aided the ANC in its bid for
votes. This is nothing less than an abuse of taxpayers' money to promote
the electoral interests of the ruling party. On television, on radio, in
print, the GCIS created adverts that generated an enabling environment for
the ANC, and no amount of self-righteousness or outrageous objection to
this can change the fact.

The GCIS itself has drawn up leaky, flexible and ineffective rules for
governing communication during election times. I made the point during the
Budget Debate, that this is a little bit like Colonel Saunders drawing up
a bill of rights for chickens - and I see that Colonel Saunders is in the
room.
We believe that the Government's advertising policy during an election
period should be very simple. Government advertising should cease as it
does, for example, in Canada, a country the President recently mentioned
as an example of a country with good laws. In Canada you will find that
the Government's electoral communication ceases during election periods,
except for the putting out of legal notices and safety and health
information. The ANC seems to disagree with this view. Well, we cannot
support this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M K LEKGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Government must communicate
to its citizens. That the Government must communicate with its citizens is
beyond question. How they do it is a matter that politicians and
intellectuals will forever debate. That the opposition will always feel
that such communication gives the ruling party a propaganda advantage
cannot be avoided. To accuse Government of using state resources to
promote party ends is but an opposition tactic to cut this umbilical cord
between the citizens and Government.

It is also a way of trying to blame their loss of votes on somebody else
and not on their ill-considered policies that our people so much reject.
We support the Vote. [Applause.]
Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and ACDP dissenting).

Vote No 8 - National Treasury - put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms R TALJAARD: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, Minister Manuel, you
are aware that we will be supporting the National Treasury Vote. We do so,
however, subject to concern emanating from the President's Budget Vote
speech.

You will recall, I have stated that the Washington Consensus is much more
of an intellectual construction site of greater complexity, with all due
respect, than yesterday's Budget Vote had captured. When we called for
Gear 2 to be put on the table for policy clarity, along the lines of the
Asian Tigers' five-year plans, you stated categorically in your response
that Gear has not replaced the Freedom Charter or the RDP. One can but
assume from the alteration, of course, and some of your comments that
redistribution at the hands of the state will replace growth as the prime
imperative. If this assumption is wrong, you are welcome to correct it.

After the President's speech and the renewed focus on the left of the
economic policy discussion, to the extent that these tired and redundant
ideological corners have any meaning at all in a modern political world,
Government must be clear and categorical in where it draws the line
between the state and the market. Only once Government has drawn this line
between the state and the market, clearly, will the market decide what its
views are on our country's new policy shift. And that will be the real
debate; not the one between the new left and a makeshift right, or the
reheated soup of capitalism or socialism, but an appropriate debate on the
role of the state - and I might refer you to the work of Juan De Manico
Mayuon, if you would like to engage me in a debate of substance.

Perhaps the Minister can tell us whether the National Treasury is in
complete agreement with the Presidency on the newly chartered course and
where the contradictions between the Gear route and the RDP route will be
resolved and in favour of which document.

Was the President's International Investment Council similarly briefed on
Government's new direction? If they were, and they were in agreement, the
House looks forward to hearing about it. If so, was BEE their only
concern? At the end of the day, the market will decide the fate of this
new policy direction - not you, not the DA, the market will. [Applause.]

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Speaker, it is most unfortunate that a distinction is
being made between the RDP and Gear. Gear meant gross employment and
redistribution. I repeat, ``gross employment and redistribution''.

The fact that this Government has stabilised our finances to the extent
that we are not paying so much money to service our debt and we can now
look at the interests of the poor, and, yes, redistributing to the poor
through the social grants, which the DA used as a major platform in their
election policy, to the extent that the state is able to redistribute, to
the extent that the state is able to enter into a public works programme
to redistribute opportunity, employment, and much-needed employment to the
poor, we are proud of it.

This is not a policy shift. This has always been central to the ANC-led
Government. We are at once committed to growth, and we are at once
committed to redistribution. I think it is mischievous to say that we are
moving and shifting into a new policy direction. We are merely building on
the momentum which we have achieved over the past 10 years, and we are
proud to do so. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 9 - Public Enterprises - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister laid great
emphasis, when replying to his Budget Vote, to the effect that there was
no change of policy in respect of the privatisation of assets in his
department.

The DA, as well as commentators across the spectrum, saw it differently;
seeing at least a distinct change of emphasis, at most a u-turn. The
Minister quoted liberally from the RDP, with growth-orientated policy
documents such as Gear, the National Framework Agreement, the INCC
Lekgotla and, most importantly, his predecessor's excellent policy
framework document not even rating a mention.

These policies called for a more aggressive use of private capital in line
with the Washington Consensus. The extent of restructuring envisaged by
the Minister in the main, seems to be corporatisation, commercialisation,
with private capital having a minority stakeholder role. Three critical
lessons are ignored in this approach; firstly, as we have seen with the SA
Airways/Swiss Air deal, as well as the Telkom/Fentana deal, stake holding
limited to minority shareholdings tends to be short-term investments to be
dumped when the balance sheets come under pressure or when a quick profit
is to be made; secondly, real fixed direct investment, technology skills
transfers and efficiencies only really materialise when investors are
fully committed, and this will only happen when they have control over
their investments; and finally, the Minister's path fails to introduce a
pivotal part of the privatisation process, and that is competition.
Competition brings contestability and this creates the incentives for
fishy behaviour and lower consumer prices. Iscor and Telkom are classic
examples of failures in this regard.

If the President wants growth and jobs in South Africa, we agree with that
potential. South Africa has that potential but not the way the Minister
has outlined. Thank you.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Madam Speaker, the core function of the Department of
Public Enterprises is the restructuring of state-owned enterprises. In
certain instances this may result in privatisation, but it would be wrong
and foolhardy to mistake the Department of Private Enterprises for Sales
House. [Laughter.]

The main objective of the Department of Private Enterprises is to raise
levels of investments, to build strong state-owned enterprises in
partnership with the public and private sector in order to create work and
fight poverty. The ANC supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 10 - Public Service and Administration - put and agreed to.

Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 - South African Management Development Institute (SAMDI) - put
and agreed to.

Vote No 13 - Statistics South Africa - put.
Declaration of vote:

Mrs S V KALYAN: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS: What are your statistics?
[Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: What are yours, Minister Pahad? Especially on exports and
imports of oil. [Interjections.]

The DA agrees that sound policy can only be made on the basis of sound
numbers. We support this Vote. However, we must state our concerns in
respect of our GDP and CPI calculations, concerns that the Minister has
clearly been aware of and alive to as he articulated in his Budget Vote.

The cost to our economy of getting the figures wrong is not simply one of
credibility only. It reaches much further than that, as last week's
Economist pointed out in respect of our CPI figures in particular, for
example:


  The error had probably caused interests rates to be kept too high for
  too long.

And furthermore in respect of our GDP figures:


  Getting the figures wrong in the first place has been costly.

Some foreign investors who frequently cite concerns about weak growth may
have been deterred by the low recorded rates. Higher growth real - not
just recorded - is exactly what the country needs. Despite the convincing
arguments of the complexities involved in re-basing the GDP figures
offered by Stats SA, the consequences and lost opportunities, if we have
indeed forgone the FDI as indicated, are incalculable. The National
Assembly eagerly awaits a full report on the reasons for your decision to
move Census 2006 to Census 2011, the impact on the comparability of
longitudinal population survey data and the budget implications for Stats
SA's reallocations flowing from your decision, Minister.

In addition, we trust that in pursuit of the implementation of the
national statistics system, your Ministry will jealously guard and ensure
the independence of the statistics authority from any political
interference. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 14 - Arts and Culture - put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: In my budget debate speech yesterday, I stated that
there was no doubt in my mind that arts and culture in South Africa had
reached the point of critical mass. Nothing the Minister said caused me to
change my mind. His closing remark that he could not hand out money his
department did not have shows that he had missed entirely the thrust of my
speech. So allow me to recap.

The department has the money. It is their National Arts Council that is
the problem. This council is a veritable logjam between the money voted to
the Department of Arts and Culture and those who are to receive it. The
NAC is the body that is supposed to distribute public funds for arts and
culture, but the reality is that it, like the single most important source
of funding for artists in the country, the Lotto, is utterly inadequate
and incapable of rising to the task. The council has shown in countless
letters to artists and performers, and indeed on the countless occasions
it has simply not bothered to reply to them, that it is totally mismanaged
and, on top of that, seems to go out of its way to treat those talented
souls with utter contempt.

South Africa's artists have had enough. They are becoming increasingly
militant and this treatment is unbelievable. They are meeting as we speak
in forums around the country. Just last night, I heard more from artists
who had within the last 48 hours been told that their applications for
funding to take companies to the National Arts Festival in Cape Town had
been rejected, and now, at this late date, they will pull out and be
blackballed for three years.

The NAC has, with the delay in calling for funding this year, destroyed
lives and livelihood, and should be called to account. Yesterday, I cited
case after case in which the NAC had acted in the most inappropriate
manner towards artists, including one gross attempt at censuring an award-
winning playwright's work in exchange for funding.

As to the state of our theatres, well, I said it all yesterday. Anyone who
imagines that Charlize Theron won her Oscar because of the support of the
arts on the part of this government is wrong. No, she won it in spite of
them. [Interjections.]

For the above-cited and many, many other reasons involving mismanagement
and ineptitude, the DA will absolutely not support this budget.
[Applause.]

Ms M A A NJOBE: Madam Speaker, the arts and culture budget grew rapidly
over the past three years, at an annual average rate of 32,5%. Although
there is going to be a decrease over the medium term, at an annual rate of
5,2%, this can be explained. The rapid growth was due to capital works,
particularly transferred to heritage programmes, and in particular the
funding for the Freedom Park Project. The decline in growth over the
medium term is mainly due to the ending of the Freedom Park Project, and
therefore the budget has to decrease.

There are additional funds for intensive investing in culture programmes,
and these funds are contributing to the programmes of the Extended Public
Works Programme, which is in line with the second decade's programme of
realising the people's contract and fighting poverty.

The problem with the DA is that they want to capitalise on the current
problem of the National Arts Council, which is only concerned with
governance and administration. The matter is being looked into. The
committee received two briefings from the director-general. The latest was
to the ad hoc committee only recently. The member is a member of the ad
hoc committee and she is very well aware of the problems regarding the
National Arts Council. The briefing informed us that the matter is now in
the hands of the Minister and the Minister is attending to it. So we are
assured that the matter is being attended to. I don't know what the DA
wants now because the matter is being attended to.

The ANC supports this budget. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 15 - Education - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs O H ZILLE: Madam Speaker, after careful consideration the DA will
support this Budget Vote. We do so because of the Minister's stated
commitment to achieving quality in public education, preserving the
quality that exists and building quality where it does not, so that the
right of quality basic education can be extended to all.

We welcome the priority the Minister has given to the foundation skills of
reading, writing and calculating, to assessing learning outcomes at key
points in the system and to ensuring the development of systems of
accountability so that the appropriate people are held accountable for
learners' results.

However, we do have deep concerns about the department's continued
tendency to extend its control over those parts of the system that are
working well, rather than attending to those institutions that are failing
and require state intervention to improve. We do not think this budget
does nearly enough to address the chronic shortage of educators in key
disciplines in the school and tertiary sectors. We have significant
reservations about proposals for funding further and higher education, and
we are particularly concerned about the extent to which labour relations
take priority over educational considerations in departmental decisions
and the department's ongoing obsession with racial head counting.

On balance, however, the Minister's positive commitments potentially
represent a significant turning point, and point of departure for
education, and we will measure her decisions and actions against them and,
in turn, hold her and her department accountable for achieving them. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Prof S M MAYATULA: Madam Speaker, I think we do appreciate the change of
heart by the DA. I think it is the first time in five years that they have
approved our Education Vote and it does show that in education we are
moving a step further.

Further education training, which the member referred to, is an issue that
we also referred to: That one is a mainstay for skills development in our
country and the ANC government is going to be looking into that.

Again, if one looks at the command from the President, it does show that
the ANC Government is aware of all the concerns of the people on the
ground. Hence further education and training colleges are going to be
recapitalised. For the merger of institutions of higher education a sum of
R200 million has been set aside in order to assist that.

The problem of students learning under trees is also going to be given
full consideration, as will access to clean water and sanitation. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, my apology that the communication hasn't
reached your desk, but we did inform the ANC Whip that the ACDP also has a
declaration to make on education.

The SPEAKER: Please go ahead.

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP welcomes plans to roll out grade R,
but would like to see a far more speedy implementation. Early childhood
development, has a vital role to play, not only in preparing children for
primary school, but also in enhancing their safety and wellbeing.

The departmental plans to increase allocation for infrastructure spending,
establish a minimum learning package and make nonpersonnel allocations to
poor schools look promising, but it is unclear exactly how the budget
would support these initiatives.

The ACDP is concerned that the ECD rural schooling, HIV/Aids and life
skills grants all show underexpenditure. Underexpenditure on conditional
grants, which directly impacts on the most vulnerable and needy, is of
serious concern.

Plans to rid poor parents of the need to pay school fees and to rid
schools of the need to charge fees have clearly not been successful, and
must of necessity be a priority. In terms of the South African Schools
Act, all public school governing bodies are obliged to support the school
as best they can, including through levies of school fees, placing
principals, teachers and parents under tremendous pressure to find
additional funds. We must recognise the commendable efforts of many.

Private schooling in South Africa, contrary to popular belief, serves and
educates a majority of black working and middle-class pupils. The majority
of these schools are new, charge average to low fees and are religious or
community based, serving rural, innercity hubs and informal settlements.
This sector appears to have tripled in size, perhaps a clear statement by
parents of their lack of confidence in state education, with perceptions
of better quality, greater accountability and smaller classes drawing
many. These schools have an important role to play in the education needs
of our country and should be assisted and not hampered in their efforts.

Service levies on independent schools, for example, unfairly discriminate.
Currently independent schools teaching Grades 10, 11 and 12 are required
to reapply for accreditation, causing much concern, as only a small
percentage of those who have complied are being reaccredited. Hopefully
the Minister will bring clarity on these issues and reassure independent
schools that they are not being marginalised or targeted, especially in
light of recent state harassment of independent schools in Zimbabwe.

The ACDP is optimistic, as we detect a move away from from OBE in focusing
on numeracy and literacy skills. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms C DUDLEY: For this we commend the new Minister and the ACDP will vote
in favour of this budget. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I have received a note that the sound system is
quite poor and I would like to request that the table please make sure
that the engineers can attend to this matter. I hope, though, that we are
not being requested to stop because we still have a long way to go.
Otherwise we are going to be here for quite some time.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 16 - Health - put.

Declarations of Vote:

Mr R COETZEE : Madam Speaker, the DA is not able to give its support to
the Budget Vote on Health. While there has been significant progress in
certain areas of policy implementation over the past few years - and here
I think in particular of the immunisation programme - there are areas of
policy, legislation and implementation with which we disagree so
fundamentally, we cannot give our support for this Vote. In particular,
our objection centres on the following: The snail's pace at which the
antiretroviral roll-out programme is being implemented, or in the case of
four provinces, not being implemented at all; the staff shortage crisis
that besets our public health system - in particular the shortage of
nurses; the consequent quality of care problem in our public hospitals;
the regulations pertaining to the price of medicines and the chaos they
have caused, and the uncertain constitutionality of the certificate of
need provision in the National Health Bill. Taken together, these problems
constitute a crisis which is presumably why the Minister of Health herself
recently described the health care system in South Africa as being in
shambles. Madam Speaker, we will work with our colleagues in the health
committee and with the Government to improve the situation over the next
year, and we hope to be able to support the health budget in future. At
the moment, however, we cannot do so. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Speaker, the IFP supports the budget but we are
concerned that, because of excessive political control in the hands of the
Minister and her director-general, financial controls in the hands of the
Ministry and control over NGO funding, the budget, though adequate, will
not be spent as well as it could be. We are opposed to all certificates of
need. They are not objectively verifiable and they are open to challenge
if ever refused. The IFP advises Government to approve licences to all
practitioners who have passed their exams; scrap the certificate of need
and use incentives to draw pharmacists, dispensing doctors, private
doctors or private health consortia to where the people need them. To
bridge the gap between one of the worst public health services in the
world and one of the best private health services in the world, we should
use competitive contracts to draw NGOs, health trusts and private medical
teams to where we need them to serve the poor. Let's do it at Government's
expense and let's put our money where our mouth is. While we applaud the
additional funding for Aids, we are concerned that most of it is
channelled through conditional grants which are notoriously the most
difficult avenues through which money benefits the people. We would prefer
more autonomy and responsibility in the hands of the provinces, and
greater transparency and clarity as to who is responsible for what along
the entire chain of health services, both public and private. We would
also like to see more political will to get Aids medicines and to get them
to the people. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, recent legislative efforts to address some of
the challenges facing the health sector in South Africa have backfired,
creating additional turmoil. The long-awaited National Health Act has
placed the private health sector under perceived attack. Doctors are no
longer able to practice without a certificate of need and are at the mercy
of the director-general, who has the power to decide whether or not their
services are needed. This is creating uncertainty, undermining the
constitutional rights of private doctors and undermining health care
services in general. Controversies surrounding the Medicines and Related
Substances Act have not helped the situation, with not only doctors and
pharmacists raising serious concerns, but consumers already having faced
substantial increases in costs. While the Act has intended to lower the
cost of medication, prices have risen as partial implementation of the Act
bans discounting of drugs by manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers.
Pharmacists predict that the imposed dispensing fee which comes into
effect in August will result in over 1000 pharmacies going out of
business, and unsustainably low profits threatening the entire
pharmaceutical industry.

The ACDP consistently warned that artificial interference in pricing would
produce unintended consequences and, coupled with the prevention of
doctors from dispensing medicine, would seriously reduce access to drugs
and further contribute to the lowering of morale of medical professionals,
negatively impacting consumers rather than benefiting them. South African
pharmacists and doctors are among the most sought after in the world, yet
they feel that Government has sent a strong message that they are not
wanted.

Mental health care in South Africa has been systematically brought in line
with international trends, diminishing reliance on institutions and
increasing integration of patients into communities. Severe budget
restrictions are ensuring rapid cutbacks within institutions, but the same
lack of budget is responsible for the lack of support structures for
patient care in communities. Unless funding is found to establish adequate
community care, patients are in effect abandoned by Government, leaving
society facing greater risks and burdens. Finally, ever increasing
attempts to increase access to abortion through legislation will not only
result in the deaths of more babies, but negatively impact on women's
health and the rights of health care workers. The ACDP does not support
this Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Madam Speaker, as the ANC we are proud to associate
ourselves with this Budget Vote. We are also proud to report that during
the budget hearings the issues that hon Ryan Coetzee raised were actually
clarified. Indeed, provinces have advanced in ensuring that our health
care system is strengthened. Provinces have advanced in ensuring that the
system to roll-out the comprehensive plan for HIV-Aids is in place. We are
also proud to have learnt that in strengthening our health care system,
progress has been made in a number of areas with regard to the issue of
measles and polio. Regarding the certificate of need, which both the DA
and the ACDP have raised, they should be reminded that the President has
not signed the National Health Act. Why they raise an issue which has not
yet even come before us, I don't know. On the question of the regulation
of medicine, in the briefings we had and the discussions in the portfolio
committee, we all agreed - including themselves - that because the state
had become aware of the escalating price of drugs, it could not just stand
by and watch. It had to intervene. As the President said, the question of
a state that must watch without an intervention is not what we buy.
Therefore, the question of intervention on the pricing of medicine was
necessary because prices have gone ballistic. Indeed, the regulations have
not come into effect and therefore you cannot judge whether prices have
gone up or down. That is all that we as the ANC want to say. The path that
we have taken is the correct one and is based on the call of a people's
contract. Let us all join together to ensure that we strengthen where we
need to do so, and improve what we need to. Together we can succeed. No
one is going to succeed by shouting from this podium. Let's join and work
together to ensure that our people benefit from a better health care
system. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 271: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
  E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F;
  Bekker, H J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Blose, H
  M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia,
  I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
  Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B
  N; Davies, R H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dipico, E M;
  Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dodovu, T S; Doidge, G
  Q M; du Toit, D C; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T;
  Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E; George, M E; Gerber, P A;
  Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Greyling, C H
  F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F;
  Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Harding, A; Hendricks, L B; Herandien, C B;
  Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S P; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R;
  Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U;
  Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kati, Z J; Kholwane, S E;
  Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Kota, Z A;
  Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T;
  Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D
  C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Maduma, L D; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G
  B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahomed, F; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X
  C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N
  S; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;
  Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile,
  B L; Masithela, N H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-
  Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D;
  Mdladlana, M M S; Mdlalose, M M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, IS;
  Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P
  N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
  Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D;
  Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N;
  Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A;
  Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndou, R S;
  Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen,
  W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L
  V J; Ngele, N J; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana,
  S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
  Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L
  P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
  Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E
  G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Pheko, S E M; Phungula, J P;
  Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T;
  Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M;
  Ramotsamai, C M P; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
  Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Sekgobela, P
  S; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Siboza, S; Sibuyana, M W;
  Sigcau, S N; Sigcau, Sylvia N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J;
  Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith, V G;
  Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
  M; Stephens, M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B;
  Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Turok, B;
  Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J H; Van der Merwe, S C;
  Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T;
  Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 53: Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport,
  J T; Doman, W P; Dudley, C; Durr, K D S; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
  Gibson, D H M; Green, L M; Groenewald, P J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R
  K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; Khumalo, M S; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard,
  D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Madasa, Z L;
  Masango, S J; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R;
  Mulder, C P; Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
  Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Smuts, M; Steyn, A
  C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R; Trent, E
  W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Waters, M; Weber, H;
  Zille, H.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 17 - Labour - put.
Declarations of vote:

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, the key questions asked in the Labour Vote is
whether the department is advancing policies and programmes that address
South Africa's job crisis and offer hope to the unemployed millions who
have simply given up. The statistics are shocking. Unemployment is up by
2,2 million since 1995; a million jobs have been lost and more than 8,4
million people, 42% of our workforce, are willing to work but are unable
to find jobs - and 3,8 million have even stopped trying.

This South African tragedy is a direct result of the ANC's failure to
implement labour policies like those identified in the International
Monetary Fund's Article 4, which deals with country assessment reports.
One is to attract direct foreign investment and encourage employers to
expand their workforce, but instead we have rigid labour laws that destroy
jobs, heavy regulations that keep new firms from entering the market,
collective bargaining agreements that leave no room for small businesses
to survive and minimum wage laws that keep the jobless in perpetual
poverty and misery. So, the answer to the question remains an emphatic no!
Policy amendments need to be made to firstly improve labour market
flexibility and promote company-specific labour agreements; secondly, to
reduce labour costs, eliminate minimum wages and link pay increases to
productivity increases, and thirdly, to introduce tax incentives to
reverse the trend away from using labour to capital-intensive means of
production.

Until the ANC stops just reinforcing the walls protecting their magic
circle of those few who are lucky enough to have a job while ignoring the
plight of 42% of our workforce, the DA in all good conscience cannot
support the Budget. We owe it to South Africa's 8,4 million unemployed to
say no. [Applause.]

Mr M S MANIE: Madam Speaker, the DA will vote against the Labour Vote as
they have done for the past 10 years. They always vote against this Vote.
They want us to eliminate and remove all the laws that regulate the labour
market. What they want is a labour market that allows businesses to
operate in a way that they see fit only to allow businesses to pay what
they want, to hire and fire workers at will. We cannot support those kinds
of policies. We know that any policy that is biased unfairly towards
either business or labour is not sustainable in the long term. South
Africa needs fair and balanced policies. Our policies are aimed at
creating a better life for all, not like the DA who, through their liberal
views, believe in individualism, the survival of the fittest and the laws
of the jungle. We as the ANC are committed to taking responsibility for
the poor, the marginalised, the disabled and the aged. The DA today is
voting against not only this Vote, but they are voting against
transformation, black empowerment and against affirmative action. The DA
is voting, in other words, for a return to the old apartheid relations.
[Interjections.] In fact, what the DA has become, is the official right-
wing of South Africa. The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Particularly, in view of the rubbish spoken by the hon Salie
Manie, we have no option but to call for a division.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 282: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
  E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F;
  Bekker, H J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bici, J; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V;
  Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V;
  Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P;
  Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
  C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M;
  Dipico, E M; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dodovu, T
  S; Doidge, G Q M; du Toit, D C; Durr, K D S; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
  Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E;
  George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Greyling, L W;
  Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana,
  N E; Harding, A; Hendricks, L B; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Holomisa, S
  P; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P;
  Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R;
  Kati, Z J; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khumalo, M S; Khunou, N P;
  Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro,
  M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K;
  Ludwabe, C I; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Maduma, L
  D; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L;
  Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M
  J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S;
  Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T;
  Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masithela,
  N H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S;
  Mdlalose, M M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, IS;
  Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P
  N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
  Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D;
  Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
  Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S
  A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J
  G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nefolovhodwe, P J; Nel, A C; Nene, N M;
  Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo,
  E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nkuna, C;
  Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B
  M; Ntuli, M M; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
  Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G;
  Phala, M J; Pheko, S E M; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E;
  Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M
  M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C M P; Ramphele, T D H;
  Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Shabangu,
  S; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sigcau, S N; Sigcau, Sylvia
  N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S
  T; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo,
  J E; Sotyu, M M; Stephens, M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Swart, S N;
  Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
  Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, J
  H; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E; Vundisa, S S; Woods, G G;
  Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu,
  B Z; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 47: Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport,
  J T; Doman, W P; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Groenewald, P
  J; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R
  J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D
  K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P;
  Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
  Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
  Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van
  Dyk, S M; Van Niekerk, A I; Wang, Y; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


  ABSTAIN - 2: Dudley, C; Johnson, C B.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 18 - Science and Technology - agreed to.

Vote No 19 - Social Development - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP would like to encourage the
department to expand its links with faith-based organisations who are well-
placed and have the human resources necessary to identify needs and
channel relevant support. While almost 62 000 orphaned and vulnerable
children, and 10 000 child-headed households were identified and received
appropriate services, these achievements, sadly, pale in comparison with
projections of 800 000 Aids orphans by 2005.

According to officials, the draft finance policy for NGOs who deliver
services on behalf of the department will soon be presented at Minmec.
This is long overdue as financing for child protection services is of
great concern. Nonprofit child protection agencies are, in terms of draft
legislation, legally responsible for rendering services. Yet, the state is
not legally responsible for funding them. This is problematic and the
already stretched and underresourced child protection system is in danger
of collapsing under the strain. For many NGOs, as much as 85% of the work
is statutory and less than 50% of the budget is subsidised by Government.
At the same time, overseas funders do not want to fund statutory work.

The present disparity between social services salaries and NGOs', and
those in the Public Service is creating debilitating problems. A starting
salary for a Government social worker, for example, is about R5 600 - with
a substantial increase due soon, while NGO social workers earn between R4
000 and R4 400 - with no benefits and no prospects of an increase. This
results in staff turnover of 50% to 90%, and little to no chance of NGOs
ever having black senior staff or meeting transformation criteria.

NGOs are training staff for the public sector but are progressively unable
to provide services themselves. In one agency that looks after orphaned
children, there is a backlog of 1 500 foster care cases because they
cannot investigate the cases. The one and only person working on these
cases is overseas-funded and not state-funded.

Children are dying before case workers get to them and this further
devastates workers. State-subsidised posts have not increased in 15 years.
The contribution of NGOs is invaluable and solutions must be found. Early
childhood development, up to but not including Grade R, is the
responsibility of Social Development as well, but there is no budget for
it. The ACDP calls on Government to urgently provide a conditional grant
for this critical service in order to protect children who are vulnerable
and to empower women.

Notwithstanding the above concerns, the ACDP will support the Social
Development budget and work to alleviate poverty; rebuild family,
community and social relations.

Mr E (CASSIM) SALOOJEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC promised our people
more jobs and the eradication of poverty. We promised them a move away
from excessive reliance on social grants. Where people need grants, we
will improve service delivery.

We will provide more efficient social grant administration and payment
through the National Social Security Agency. Moving grants administration
to the agency allows the department to focus on other developmental
services, for example antipoverty programmes aimed at earning income and
developing skills.

We are going to put in place income-generating projects through the
Expanded Public Works Programme. Social Development programmes will focus
essentially on early childhood development, and home and community-based
care projects.

Budget Vote 19 sets out the required financial resources to assist us in
keeping these promises. The ANC supports this Vote. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.
Vote No 20 - Sport and Recreation South Africa - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP would like to see more money
allocated to developing sport facilities in previously disadvantaged
communities. While huge stadiums are great assets, they will only showcase
the talents of other countries and exacerbate crime if we do not ensure
that sport at a local level is developed, accommodated and encouraged.

More emphasis must be placed on ensuring that every school has easy access
to sport facilities, which must include movement and dance. Some schools
have had a tremendous advantage in the past, and where sport has been a
strong influence, good principled leadership has emerged.

It is obvious that money should be made available for development of sport
and invested where the most lack and need exist. Instead of enforcing
artificial quota systems, we should be focusing on encouraging and
developing the talent of all young South Africans.

Sport provides opportunities for children and youth to express themselves
instead of expressing their frustrations in less positive or even
destructive ways. Sport teaches youths to interact positively, compete
positively and even lose with dignity. Sport teaches us how to play the
ball with all our heart, physical strength and mind without stooping to
play the man. Sport offers opportunity for creativity, a common vision and
letting off steam. It even offers mankind a positive substitute for war,
which seems to be a basic instinct. Our children and youth are the leaders
of tomorrow, and sport inspires positive leadership skills and qualities
like commitment and self-discipline.

Sport is played out in the open with all eyes on the players. Devious play
results in penalty, showing that crime doesn't pay. Honesty and integrity
are the qualities which are admired in sport, and we desperately need
these qualities in our leaders.

The ACDP is encouraged to see a willingness to expose and deal with
corruption that is eating away at the credibility of our soccer
fraternity, and believes a harsh stand should be taken against
perpetrators. The ACDP regards time and money spent on sport development
as an investment in a better tomorrow. We will support the budget. Thank
you.

Ms P BHENGU: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP does not attend the meetings
of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, and therefore does not
understand issues. Issues that are raised here by the ACDP are dealt with
in the portfolio committee meetings and solutions are found to those
issues.

The overall objective of the ANC-led Government is to build a healthy
active winning nation. Central to the achievement of this objective are
the principles of nonracialism, gender equality and equal opportunities,
particularly for people with disabilities and rural communities.

Our strategic approach is to use sport as a tool for development through
which social problems that affect our youth would be addressed, thereby
creating a large pool of high performance players.

Our focus on school sport and mass participation, without neglecting the
high performance sport, will result in a healthy active winning nation.
The ANC supports the vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 21 - Correctional Services - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J SELFE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA is deeply concerned that at the
present moment the prison system either does not or cannot rehabilitate
offenders and that the department currently either does not or cannot
effectively reintegrate offenders into society. In part, this is because
the department is still re-orientating itself to making rehabilitation its
core business; in part, this is because of the horrifying overcrowding of
our correctional facilities; in part, this is because key staff,
particularly professionals such as psychologists, have still not been
appointed to their positions; in part, this is because the budget
allocation to the department is not yet, in my view, fully aligned to the
vision and core business as stated in its strategic plan and, in part,
this is because the problem of awaiting trial detainees remains
unresolved.
Now, the Minister and the department have expressed the commitment to
change the way in which the department operates. This will, inter alia,
see its expression in the establishment of 36 centres of excellence that
will in fact seek to rehabilitate offenders and reintegrate them into
society.

We shall be scrutinising the department and its activities very closely.
My colleagues and I will be visiting as many prisons as possible to see to
what extent the department has indeed managed to re-orientate its
activities. We expect that by the next time Parliament considers this
vote, substantial and measurable progress will be made towards the goals
stated in this strategic plan.

Under these circumstances, the DA will support the vote. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, whilst the ACDP has indicated that it
will accept the budget vote, we again wish to voice our concerns at the
high levels of overcrowding in the prisons. Severe prison overcrowding and
deplorable health conditions must continually be addressed. Overcrowding
is the root cause of health problems and the spread of diseases such as
tuberculosis and HIV/Aids in prisons, and thereafter to our communities
when prisoners are released.

We also need to continually assess how many awaiting trial detainees who
are not a danger to society are unable to pay bail - sometimes as little
as R100. There are currently 2 232 unsentenced children under the age of
18 in prisons and six children under 14 years of age. There are 1 926
sentenced children under the age of 18 years in prison and nine children
under 14 years of age.

Part of the solution in dealing with the high level of awaiting trial
detainees, particularly children, is the application of restorative
justice principles, which are premised upon the acceptance of guilt by the
offender and the payment of restitution to the victim, where appropriate,
or the rendering of community service in cases where there is no danger to
public safety. Children should not be kept in prisons where they may be
abused or sodomised in so-called universities of crime. Diversion of a
child offender who does not present a danger to society is necessary to
restore that child to play a meaningful role as a law-abiding citizen.

The key to success in the restorative justice approach is that the public
feels safe, the victim is compensated and the criminal has a change of
heart, leading to a new way of life. I thank you.

Mr L J MODISENYANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Correctional
Services has prioritised staff development and training. Management
training, policy development, conditions of youths in detention, community
corrections, probation, parole and restorative justice all aim to inspire
improvement and performance, and not just a changing environment. This
also serves to assist the department in defining its role within the
justice system.

The achievement of law-abiding behaviour is ultimately a matter of
personal choice and individual responsibility. However, many offenders who
would not otherwise seek to change will respond positively to a favourable
environment, encouragement and support by correction personnel.
Correctional services must provide such stimulation and support. Any crime
control policy, however, ultimately involves a trade-off between the crime
control effectiveness and social costs associated with implementing it.

One must also be concerned with other aspects of costs associated with
imprisonment. These costs include nutrition, correctional officials,
rehabilitation programmes, correctional managers, the welfare costs
associated with supporting prisoners' families, the lost economy capacity
resulting from the removal of workers from the labour force and the
dehumanising effects of imprisonment on the prisoners, correctional
officials, as well as society.

It is with this in mind that we must acknowledge the many ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 22 - Defence - put.

Declarations of vote:

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Madam Speaker, in principle, we appreciate,
understand and are supportive of South Africa's role in peace support
missions. However, it is equally important that this not be conducted at
the expense of national interests. It is important that certain crucial
criteria, such as clear entry and exit criteria, domestic and
international mandates, and the safety and security of South African
troops be factored into any decision to deploy our forces.

The enormous expenditure on such international obligations, such as the
R700 million budgeted, is currently conducted at the expense of the
Department of Defence. The Special Defence Account, which constitutes 39%
of the budget, contains the budget for the arms deal.

We have continuously stated in the past, and state so now, that the arms
deal, with its accompanying corruption, is undesirable and too expensive.
The fact that the department could not inform the ad hoc committee of
progress with regard to the defence industrial participation and national
industrial participation flowing from the arms deal, is incredible. It was
ultimately the cornerstone upon which the Government justified the
unaffordable spending; and the decision to undertake an internal review of
the Defence Review appears to be another attempt to justify further
unaffordable defence procurement, which could lead to another arms deal
fiasco.

The politically motivated decision to introduce strict quotas for
affirmative action is proving to be undesirable and unworkable. The lower
ranks are 95% black, whilst at the middle ranks there are unsuccessful
attempts to reduce the number of colonels, in accordance with the 24%
target for white officers. Such strict target setting has, therefore,
failed dismally.

Whilst R1 billion is required for the completion and operation of the
Rooivalk project, which is of nationally strategic importance, only R600
million has been budgeted. The DA does not support the budget. [Time
expired.] [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, the hon
member, in his declaration, made reference to the arms deal and
corruption. Now, as far as we know, Chapter 9 institutions investigated
this matter. A report was tabled in this House and certain findings were
accepted. Could we ask that you look at the hon member's statement and
rule whether what he said was parliamentary?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Nel. We will look into the statement
and come back to the House.
Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunk-Speaker, die VF Plus is op rekord dat ons gesê
het dat ons vredesoperasies steun, en ons verstaan dat daar
vredesoperasies ook in Afrika moet wees. Mev die Adjunk-Speaker, ek is
egter ook op rekord dat ek gesê het dat die regering daarteen sal moet
waak dat Afrika nie sy Viëtnam word nie. As ons vandag kyk na wat gebeur,
mev die Adjunk-Speaker, wil ek vandag vir u sê dit is besig om te gebeur.

Ons raak betrokke by sekere operasies, maar die vepligtinge word meer en
die gevolg is dat ons binnelands ons begroting so moet aanpas en soveel
druk op die begroting plaas dat selfs die moraal van die Weermag besig is
om binnelands in duie te stort. Dit, mev die Adjunk-Speaker, is vir die VF
Plus onaanvaarbaar, en daarom sal ons ook nie hierdie begrotingspos steun
nie. Ek wil vandag vir u sê daar is baie potensiaal in ons Weermag en ons
moet dit begin ontgin.

'n Ander aspek is dat die agb Minister mnr Lekota gesê het dis tyd dat ons
verby kleur moet kyk, dat ons almal Suid-Afrikaners moet wees. Ek wil hê
hy moet ook met sy agb Adjunk-Minister praat, want die agb Adjunk-Minister
het in sy toespraak gekla oor die senior offisiere, veral in die
reserwemag, ``because they are too male and too pale''. So die Adjunk-
Minister weerspreek die Minister. Ek wil voorstel dat die Minister sy
gesag 'n bietjie gebruik en die Adjunk-Minister aanspreek daaroor, want hy
is nuut in Verdediging. Hy was altyd by Veiligheid en Sekuriteit, maar ek
aanvaar omdat hy nog nuut is by Verdediging, moet hy 'n bietjie
aangespreek word.

Mev die Adjunk-Speaker, die VF Plus sal nie hierdie begrotingspos steun
nie. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus is on record as having
said that we support peace operations, and that we understand that there
must also be peace operations in Africa. However, Madam Deputy Speaker, I
am also on record as saying that the government must guard against Africa
becoming its Vietnam. If we look at what is happening today, Madam Deputy
Speaker, I want to tell you that this is what is beginning to happen.

We become involved in certain operations, but the responsibilities
increase and the result is that we have to adjust our budget internally
and place the budget under so much pressure that even the morale of the
internal Defence Force is collapsing locally. This, Madam Deputy Speaker,
is unacceptable to the FF Plus, and we will therefore not support this
Budget Vote either. I would like to say to you today that there is immense
potential in our Defence Force and we should start developing it.

Another aspect is that the hon Minister Mr Lekota said it is time that we
look beyond colour, that we should all be South Africans. I would like him
also to speak to his hon Deputy Minister, because the hon Deputy Minister
complained in his speech about the senior officers, particularly in the
reserve force, because they are ``too male and too pale''. So the Deputy
Minister contradicted the Minister. I would like to suggest that the
Minister applies his authority a little and speak to the Deputy Minister
about this, as he is new in Defence. He has always been with Safety and
Security, but I believe that, because he is still new in Defence, he needs
to be taken to task a little.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the FF Plus will not support this Budget Vote. Thank
you.]

Mnr M S BOOI: Baie dankie, mev die Adjunk-Speaker. Ek wil eintlik nou
vervolg op wat die agb lid gesê het, want dit is baie belangrik. Terwyl hy
gepraat het, het ek gedink aan toe ons in die Gesamentlike Komitee oor
Verdediging gesit het. Ek het gedink aan wat eintlik in die komitee
aangegaan het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr M S BOOI: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I would actually
like to follow up on what the hon member said, as this is very important.
While he was talking, I was thinking of the time when we were sitting in
the Joint Committee on Defence. I was thinking of what was actually
happening in the committee.]

What I want to say is that most of the things they are saying, which are
related to the committee and to losses and to Africa, have already been
related to the committee and, objectively, the Department of Defence has
taken it up and has been quite clear about what the DA is raising.

The Special Defence Fund is meant to assist in times of emergencies, at
times when the President puts a request to the department to take up these
issues.

We have acknowledged, as people from different communities, that the
African mission is our responsibility. Although the Minister of Foreign
Affairs clearly has a responsibility, the Defence committee has to play a
major role in that as well.

Regarding the department itself and how it begins to change its focus, the
department has said that it has taken up that responsibility. Additional
to what we have said with regard to the internal responsibility related to
the role we are playing in assisting the SA Police Service within the
country itself, is the responsibility that they themselves have been able
to pinpoint, namely that if we continue releasing pressure from them, they
will be able to take some of the resources and help us with what we are
doing within the African continent.

So, there is no way that we can say those resources are not helping with
some of the missions that are taking place on the African continent. I
must also say, quite eloquently, that I have been able to deal with the
speaker from the DA, during our presentation ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance, Independent Democrats and Freedom
Front Plus dissenting).

Vote - Independent Complaints Directorate - put.
Declarations of vote:

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Deputy Speaker, the DA cannot support a budget that
muzzles an important watchdog in our society. The Independent Complaints
Directorate is an important organ of state whose task it is to apply
oversight over the SA Police Service.

The intake of cases that the directorate had to investigate from 1 April
2003 to 31 March 2004 amounted to 5 882, which is an increase of 32,4%
from the previous financial year. There was a substantial 47% increase in
serious criminal offences allegedly committed by SA Police Service
members. The suspension of about 4 000 police officers who sit at home, at
any given time, on full pay, is estimated to cost the Department of Safety
and Security about R500 million per year. This is clearly unacceptable,
since these police officers are needed on the streets of our country,
where about 23 000 people will be murdered and about 52 000 raped this
year alone.

Even though the Independent Complaints Directorate budget increased by 13%
to R42 114 000 for the 2004-05 financial year, this remains inadequate,
given the huge increase in cases under investigation and the resulting
cost to the department. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Madam Deputy Speaker, fighting crime and streamlining the
justice process continue to be the ANC's central priority. The DA tried
their best, when they were campaigning for the election, to use crime as
their point of entry, and the masses failed to believe in them. So, they
decided to sign a contract with the ANC, and fight crime and create a safe
and secure environment.

Mr Jankielsohn is being fed information by people outside. He wants to use
the portfolio committee as a court of law. There are procedures that are
created for you to follow if you experience any maladministration within
the Independent Complaints Directorate. The problem with you is that you
don't go to the Independent Complaints Directorate to get the correct
information; you are being fed information by the media, and you want us
to accommodate that in the committee, which we are not going to do. I
thank you. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and African Christian Democratic Party
dissenting).
Vote No 24 - Justice and Constitutional Development - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA takes the current inability
of the Government to fight crime effectively and bring criminals to book
very seriously. However, we decided to support the Justice budget this
year because we believe that we must give the new ministerial team at the
top, which seems to be absent today, a chance to turn the Department of
Justice around.

However, the problems which have dogged the department since 1994 have not
disappeared. Chief among them is the serious under-resourcing of its core
function - our courts. So we are very glad that the Minister of Finance is
present here today to hear that our courts are still in a sorry state,
according to no less a person than our Chief Justice. We agreed with him
when he told Parliament last week that the courts and the judiciary were
being seriously undermined because of budgetary constraints.

The result of under-resourcing is vast numbers of vacant posts - some 26%,
more than a quarter of the total - which negatively affects service
delivery to the public. There is a dire shortage of interpreters and
security personnel. Some 3 000 more are needed to secure the country's 742
courts properly. The constant attacks on magistrates, court personnel and
witnesses in courtrooms is the result, and this demeans the status of
justice in our country. With few exceptions, court buildings are
dilapidated.

The new management system Re a ga boswa, in terms of which management is
devolved according to clusters and smaller units, is also doomed to fail
according to the Justice Department's own chief financial officer, unless
vast numbers of these vacant posts are filled.

Court backlogs mirror the lack of resources and remain constantly and
unacceptably high. The district courts, which dealt with a record one
million cases last year, recorded a backlog of 150 000 cases last year.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that this department
is facing severe challenges, as highlighted during the extended committee
hearings that were conducted into the budget. There is no doubt, further,
that the court services programme is totally under-resourced. This
programme thus experiences a significant increase of 16,2%. The question,
however, is whether this is enough? Clearly, in our view, it is
insufficient to render an accessible, fair, speedy and cost-effective
administration of justice.

The ACDP is further extremely concerned about the suspense and deposit
accounts. Whilst we appreciate that the amounts in the suspense account
are due to write-offs inherited from the former TBVC states, the
department needs to finalise this matter as soon as possible.

As far as the deposit account is concerned, we remain concerned that
whilst the potential losses may now have been ring-fenced, we still do not
know what the exact extent of the loss is, which may run into millions of
rands. Approximately R2 billion per annum flows through 530 lower court
cash-holds countrywide. As this is a largely manual and paper-based
transaction environment, fraud and corruption are rife. I raised this
issue last year and am concerned that not enough is being done to address
this issue. The state will undoubtedly be held liable to make good these
losses which, as I indicated, may run into millions of rands.

However, that being said, we look forward to an unqualified Auditor-
General's report next year and we will support the new team in the Justice
Department and the Justice Ministry, and we will support the Budget Vote.
I thank you.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KOTA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise to assure you that not
all our courts are in a sorry state. The Chief Justice knows that for
every one court that is bad, there are five other really good courts.

I wish to note the 16,2% increase effected to the court services unit in
next year's budget. This is in addition to an extra R40 million allocated
early last year, specifically to fill the vacant posts that the hon Mrs
Camerer refers to.

The focus and challenge, however, for the department is to ensure that we
get value for money. Additional resources are inextricably linked to value
for money, and before I start sounding like Trevor Manuel, we are already
notching up significant successes. At the district court level 10 000 more
cases were finalised this year than last year. This excludes our Saturday
courts that have shown phenomenal results. The case management system is
deriving more and more stats. For the very first time we will be able,
with scientific data, to plan ahead for the future.

I wish to take this opportunity, and I think I would be remiss if I
didn't, to thank the hundreds and hundreds of good South Africans who
every single day go to work and commit themselves in a dedicated fashion,
and make the justice system work. And it does work. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote 25 No - Safety and Security - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R JANKIELSOHN: Deputy Speaker, in his state of the nation address, the
President made important statements regarding Government's intentions to
deal with crime in South Africa. These include the deployment of 152 000
police officers on the streets by 2006, in line with the DA posters, and
the identification and apprehension of the top 200 criminals in South
Africa.

Furthermore, the Minister of Safety and Security stated that he would
review the salaries of police officers and extend the death grant to off-
duty policy officers killed in the line of duty. This is important, since
60% of police officers who are murdered are off-duty at the time of their
murder.

Cabinet also indicated that the Government would put measures in place
that would bring down contact crimes by between 7% and 10% annually for
the next ten years.

The DA therefore supports this budget, but will monitor the targets and
timeframes set by the Government to ensure that the Government carries our
its traditional function, which is to protect its citizens from violence.

Hon Sotyu, our job as members of Parliament is to do this, not rubberstamp
the Government's decisions, most of which originate from Luthuli House,
not from the ground. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms M M SOTYU: Deputy Speaker, at least this time the member acknowledged
that the ANC came first with the deployment of 152 000 police officers.
[Interjections.] You stole it from the ANC in 2001!
In the ANC's manifesto of 2004 the ANC committed itself to fighting crime
and corruption, strengthening the law enforcement agencies and the
criminal justice system as a whole, and improving the safety and security
of all our people without discrimination.

Regarding police killings, or rather suicide, I think the Minister
explained this to members the day before yesterday. He even explained all
the programmes we have to address this issue. A summit was even held in
May 2003, where everybody was present. The police, as a stakeholder, was
part of that summit where this issue was addressed.

Regarding section 49, we were made to believe by the ICD that the police
are at currently very positive about it and understand the issue of
section 49. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 26 - Agriculture - agreed to.

Vote No 27 - Communications - put.

Declarations of vote:
Ms M SMUTS: Deputy Speaker, the hon Minister of Communications can take
pride in a number of aspects of Programme 2: Telecommunications of this
portfolio. The IPO of Telkom has been a brilliant success and she can take
real pleasure in the profits that it has brought to first-time
shareholders. The original partial privatisation of Telkom has also
brought benefits such as skills transfer during the period of her
shareholder stewardship. It has produced at Telkom an absolutely
formidable team of executives.

In addition, the main problem at Telkom, the pricing, is not of her
original making. This Minister was locked, in my view, into the role of
protecting Telkom's revenues well after the rebalancing of rates was
concluded and the setting of the price cap formula passed to Icasa. The
fact is that Thintana agreed to invest around R40 billion over five years,
on the basis that they would earn later and that Icasa's proposed price
cap in 2001 for 2002 suddenly changed this paradigm.

So although we cannot condone her stance then, the fact is that she has
undertaken during our debate this week, in response to our remarks, that
she would not block a reasonable rates regime in 2004 for the year 2005,
and we welcome that.
The left wing of the ruling alliance may wish to note that it was the RDP
Minister who got us into all the Telkom trouble. It was Jay Naidoo who
struck the deal with Thintana. So many million lines had to be rolled out,
even whilst modernising the network, and simultaneously rebalancing rates
in preparation for competition.

We are going to object to this Vote, notwithstanding what I have said,
because Telkom should long since have had competition, however limited and
collusion-prone this is under a duopoly, once again part-owned by the
state. That could, in fact, have had some effect on Telkom's pricing. Now
the hon Minister, in our view ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms M SMUTS: ... can't hope to report to the President by end of winter.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, as we said in the debate on the Budget Vote,
although we are supporting the Vote, we had one very severe reservation. I
want to say that although we haven't attended all the meetings, it doesn't
mean that we cannot express such a reservation. Our reservation is with
regard to Icasa and the way in which Icasa has been ruling with regard to
instances of allocating licences. Here we particularly refer to community
radio stations.

With regard to the litigation - and I think that's the problem we have -
there is no check on the amount of money Icasa is spending on litigation,
particularly in respect of community radio stations. We do not seem to
have an idea of how much money from this budget is going to be allocated
to litigation. We think it is in the best interests of the public, when
they evaluate the performance of Icasa, to do so.

There have been quite a number of complaints, and particularly one
complaint coming from the Roman Catholic Church with regard to Radio
Veritas. This is what they are saying. I just want to quote briefly:


  South Africa's Catholic Church received a proverbial kick in the teeth
  when Icasa refused permission for Radio Veritas broadcasts to Durban and
  Cape Town. Aggravating the affront was the regulatory body's obdurate
  negligence in notifying Radio Veritas until only three days before the
  scheduled start of its broadcasts. The short notice ended carefully laid
  plans at a cost to Radio Veritas. The timing was callous and dismissive
  of the hard work done by Veritas' small staff and its volunteers.

We support the Budget Vote, but we do want to send out a message to Icasa
to be very careful when allocating licences to community radio stations.

Mr M K LEKGORO: Madam Speaker, I wish to point out that to pick an area of
dissatisfaction and cite that as a reason to object to the whole budget is
unreasonable. I also want to indicate to Mr Green that what he is raising
now, could have been raised a number of times with Icasa when they
appeared before us, but as usual his attendance to our committees was few
and far between. Some of his questions were raised and adequate answers
were provided by Icasa.

From the budget hearings that we had with the portfolio organisations
under the department, it is evident that they are at work to implement
what the Government has set itself to do. To state but a few successes:
Telkom's recent results; the Post Office's turnaround strategy; Icasa's
continued diligence in regulating the industry; Sentech's continued search
for how far they can maximise multimedia services to the people; and the
SABC's continued excellence in informing, educating and entertaining the
nation constitute evidence in that direction.

In the words of the chair of health, we can only say we are proud to
associate ourselves with the budget. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to. (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 28 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism - agreed to.

Vote No 29 - Housing - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP would like to assure the ANC that
our 7th member of Parliament who was blocked from attending this housing
committee up until now, will be in full force in the times to come.
However, we also commend the previous Housing Minister for the work done
to address this critical issue. However, we feel that if the corruption
and mismanagement relating to Government's low-cost housing schemes is not
seriously addressed all that hard work would be wasted. In many areas the
issue of housing has been heavily politicised, and nepotism, corruption
and bribery are rife.

The ACDP would like to urge the new Minister to come down hard on
officials caught transgressing or benefiting from corrupt practices
relating to the building programme. The ACDP feels strongly that more
money should be made available for an integrated housing rental policy.
The ACDP urges Government to actively pursue a programme aimed at
providing low-cost housing for rent as an additional thrust to the housing
policy. We recognise that migration of rural communities to sprawling
urban centres has placed severe strain on the limited resources available
to national, provincial and local Government structures, especially when
it comes to delivery of housing and access to central services such as
water and electricity. We believe greater emphasis on rural development is
key to addressing this problem.

It is incumbent on Government not to merely go into crisis control mode to
look at ways of housing millions of people in small confined urban areas
where both housing and jobs are scarce. More incentives for industry to
relocate to suitable rural areas and rural resettlement programmes with
incentives for individuals are needed. The ACDP will support this Housing
Budget Vote, which promises to deliver much-needed relief for many. We
welcome positive initiatives and will work to help individuals and
communities access housing which will empower both men and women and
protect our children. I thank you.

Mr G D SCHEEMAN: Deputy Speaker, I would like to say to the hon member of
the ACDP that we welcome their commitment to becoming involved in the
housing process, because in the last Parliament they did not actively
participate with us. If they had attended the Budget briefings that were
given by the department, they would have known the various issues that the
member has raised, were addressed by the Department of Housing, for
instance the establishment of an investigative task team in the Department
of Housing to deal with corruption.

For the past decade the housing delivery programme has improved the living
conditions of millions of our people. The Budget before us today continues
along the path of building sustainable communities through the provision
of new houses, the upgrading of informal settlements and the provision of
social and rental housing. Emphasis will also be focused on accessing well-
located land, close to places of work, with easy access to transport. This
will include building new suburbs which reflect a nonracial and an
integrated society, both in urban and rural areas.

We in the ANC have no hesitation in supporting Budget Vote No 29 because
we know that our Government is committed to improving the living
conditions of all South Africans. The confidence of the 70% of South
Africans who put their confidence in the ANC was further strengthened
yesterday here in the Western Cape when voters in two wards, controlled by
the DA up until yesterday, rejected the DA and placed their confidence in
the ANC. [Applause.] We in the ANC support this Budget Vote.

Vote No 29 agreed to.

Vote No 30 - Land Affairs - agreed to.

Vote No 13 - Minerals and Energy - put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Deputy Speaker, Eskom is faced with a tough
challenge to provide affordable electricity, whilst also ensuring that
South Africa does not suffer widespread blackouts. Urgent steps should
therefore be taken to provide new generating capacity for the growing
energy needs from 2007 to 2008 which, we are made to believe, is under
way.

The integrated national electrification programme aimed at improving the
socioeconomic conditions of households and communities which is to be
speeded up from the target period of 10 to 11 years to the more preferred
period of 8 years is supported. The implementation of the Minerals and
Petroleum Resources Development Act is leading to dissatisfaction and
disillusionment with international investors in the mining industry. These
companies, which have invested billions of rands in the industry, have
been threatening to withdraw due to requirements relating to new
exploration application. This matter should be urgently revisited.

We believe that a review of the petroleum market should and ought to be
undertaken. Had the petrol price been based on the crude oil price only,
the rise of the past 12 months could have been limited to an increase of
only 7% as compared to the 30%. Government's steps to limit the latest
increase on the price of fuel by 30c per litre is welcomed. Considering
the above the DA supports the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports the Budget Vote
precisely because of our commitment to, and the contract we made with the
majority of the people of our country to fight poverty and create jobs. To
this extent, this department and Minister have played a key role in both
the conception and implementation of black economic empowerment. The
Minister and the department attach considerable importance to mining and
energy, as this sector constitutes about 40% of the entire trade value
chain in South Africa. It has also contributed to the deracialisation
patterns. Perhaps this is the most sticky and problematic point to the DA,
but we will continue on this agenda, because the ANC would further urge
the Minister and the Ministry to tackle this at an even greater speed.

The transformation of the economy is central to our agenda and this is one
of the departments which is going to make that a reality. We will continue
empowering the majority of the people of South Africa, especially because
we have this devotion and commitment to better their lives. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Vote No 32 - Trade and Industry - agreed to.

Vote No 33 - Transport - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S B FARROW: Madam Deputy Speaker, during my speech on the Vote I
maintained that the DA and the department were not poles apart in trying
to achieve similar goals for transport in South Africa. It was refreshing
to hear in the Minister's speech the commonalities, shortfalls and
problems within the department which we have recognised, and his genuine
desire to address them through overhauling, transforming and re-energising
his department's programme and budget.

These focus areas have now been clearly defined and time frames put to
them. The DA will eagerly await the completion of these reviews and
strategies in September and November of this year in order for the
portfolio committee to engage in a more proactive role in preparation of
future budgets for this department. In this way Parliament and its members
will be able to play a better role in ensuring that its strategic
priorities are adequately reflected and that their oversight role can be
properly fulfilled, particularly in respect of the numerous badly managed
and corrupt agencies like the RAF, Samsa and CAA according to various
internal and external audits.

Transport has not been getting its adequate share of the Budget, and the
shortfalls have led to severe backlogs and bottlenecks over many years;
yet cash cows like Acsa generate billions of rands with no clear agenda
for redistribution of its shares, listing to employers and empowerment
groups alike. The DA looks forward to significant adjustments taking place
in the MTEF reviews later this year and trust that the Minister of Finance
will be sympathetic to the Minister's appeals. No other department is more
capable of offering per capita a job opportunity per rand invested than
road and rail construction and maintenance. Yet this remains the biggest
backlog while essentially being the backbone to the growth of our economy.
I wish the Minister success in his bidding process, and hopefully it will
not be necessary for me to stand here again next year, objecting to this
Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP welcomes the increase in the amount
allocated to this Budget Vote. We hope from the Minister of Finance that
this is going to be a trend for the future and that this is going to be
continued, because I think these funds are sorely needed. However, the one
concern that we have is the Road Accident Fund, and we know about the
crisis that is happening in this fund. We also note the many media reports
regarding this fund and also the unilateral decision not to pay any claims
where the claimants refuse to accept payments by installments. Now, this
issue was a subject of protracted public hearings, and there were many
discussions and deliberations on the Roads Accident Fund Amendment Bill,
but the ACDP held the view that the payment of general damages and loss of
earning capacity to victims of road accidents in instalments as opposed to
the existing practice of paying a lump sum, is unacceptable.

Whilst we appreciate that the Road Accident Fund is in a financial crisis
and that the proposal would have assisted the Road Accident Fund with its
immediate cash flow, we hold the view the cash flow problem was merely
being deferred to a later stage at the expense of victims' immediate
needs. That is why we want the Minister of Finance to look at the budget
again and possibly next year increase substantially the allocation to
Transport. Thank you. The ACDP will support this Vote.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are some very strange ideas
about transport that seem to prevail over there. I am not referring to
you, Mr Farrow, but to your colleague, Mr Ian Davidson, because I see he
has returned. He told us earlier in his declaration on Public Enterprises
that, unless we sell wholesale our public enterprises, we will not get a
long-term commitment from the private sector. He used as an example SAA
and Swiss Air. Members will remember that SAA sold off 20% to Swiss Air.
What happened there is that Swiss Air did not have a long-term commitment.
In fact, it didn't have a medium-term commitment and it didn't have a
short-term commitment. Swiss Air went ``bang!'' Can you imagine what would
have happened if we followed your instructions and advice and sold off
SAA? Where would our national carrier be today? It would be in a puddle at
the bottom of a Swiss glacier. That is where it would be at present.
[Applause.]

Fortunately we did not do that. The ANC - and this is not a u- turn by the
way - the ANC is strongly committed to a strong developmental state, a
strong developmental parastatal sector - no u-turn. We have always been
committed to that. Nothing underlines that commitment and that necessity
more than the key strategic priorities that the Department of Transport
has set for itself in the coming years. Firstly, there has to be major
infrastructural investment in line with Government's commitment, and
although the Minister has his fingers in his ears, he himself has
committed to a R100 billion worth of public spend over the next five year
in infrastructure - not all of it on transport, but a significant
component of it on transport - to address the bottlenecks and to ensure
that there is labour intensiveness in the construction of airports, of
roads and all of those key priorities.

Secondly, we need to address the issues of public transport to ensure that
subsidies travel to the poorest of the poor, so that we are delivering a
decent public transport. On its own the private sector is not going to do
that. It needs a strong public and parastatal sector to ensure that it
happens. Thirdly, we have to ensure that there is safety on our roads.
Those are the key priorities, and for these reasons, the ANC strongly
supports this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, you go so fast sometimes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh! I am so slow in learning, to be slow; but anyway,
I will try to be slower.

Mr M ELLIS: So would you please, despite everything, note the objection of
the DA?

Vote No 33 agreed to (DA dissenting).

Vote 34 - Water Affairs And Forestry - agreed to.

Question put: That the Schedule be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 243: Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Asmal,
  A K; Balfour, B M N; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F;
  Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-
  Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim,
  Y I; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I;
  Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H;
  Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dipico, E M; Dlali, D M; Dlamini-
  Zuma, N C; Dodovu, T S; Doidge, G Q M; du Toit, D C; Fraser-Moleketi, G
  J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E; George, M E;
  Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T;
  Greyling, C H F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hajaig, F;
  Hanekom, D A; Harding, A; Hendricks, L B; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A;
  Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Joubert,
  L K; Kannemeyer, B W; Kasienyane, O R; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M;
  Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T;
  Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T;
  Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Maduma, L
  D; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B; Mahote, S; Maine, M S;
  Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N;
  Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N
  N; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane,
  L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masithela, N H; Masutha, T M; Mathebe,
  P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
  Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S; Meruti, M V;
  Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlambo-Ngcuka, P G; Mlangeni,
  A; Mnandi, P N; Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D;
  Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A;
  Monareng, O E; Moonsamy, K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W;
  Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M
  B; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M
  J G; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W
  S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V
  J; Ngele, N J; Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S
  J; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H;
  Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L
  P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A;
  Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Pahad, E
  G; Phadagi, M G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E;
  Radebe, B A; Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,
  M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
  Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Seaton, S A;
  Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Siboza, S;
  Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
  Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonjica,
  B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E;
  Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P;
  Turok, B; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Vezi, T E; Vos, S
  C; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L;
  Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 45: Botha, C-S; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman, W
  P; Dudley, C; Durr, K D S; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
  Green, L M; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V;
  King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D; Lowe, C M;
  Maluleke, D K; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R;
  Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
  Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S;
  Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van
  Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.

Schedule accordingly agreed to.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY, with leave, moved without
notice:


  That, concerning the appointment of presiding officers to assist the
  Speaker and Deputy Speaker as provided for in section 52(5) of the
  Constitution, the House resolves that -


  (1) Assembly Rules 14, 15, 16(2) and 17 and all other provisions in the
       Rules relating to the Chairperson of Committees and Deputy
       Chairperson of Committees be suspended;


  (2) three positions of House Chairperson be established;


  (3) the House must appoint three members as House Chairpersons;


  (4) in addition to the Deputy Speaker, the House Chairpersons must
       preside at a sitting of the House whenever requested to do so by
       the Speaker;


  (5) the Speaker must allocate functions and responsibilities to the
       House Chairpersons and announce such allocations from time to time,
       including any functions currently assigned in Rules and orders to
       the Chairperson of Committees and the Deputy Chairperson of
       Committees;


  (6) whenever both the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are absent or unable to
       perform the functions of the Speaker, the Speaker or, if the
       Speaker is not available, the Deputy Speaker must designate one of
       the House Chairpersons to act as Speaker; and


  (7) the Rules Committee must present to the House proposed Rule
       amendments adapting the Rules accordingly.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY, with leave, moved without
notice:


  That the House appoints the following members as House Chairpersons:


  Nhleko, N P; Doidge, G Q M; Botha, C-S.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading Debate)

Mr N M NENE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President and hon
members. On tabling his budget speech on 18 February 2004, the Minister of
Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, reminded us of the five thematic tasks that
have guided the ANC-led Government over the past ten years of our
democracy.

These tasks, as set out in the Reconstruction and Development Programme,
are that of meeting the basic needs of all South Africans, building the
economy, democratising the state and society, developing human resources
and implementing and building the capacity and the institutions to
deliver. The Appropriation Bill before us today is one of our policy
instruments that confirm the ANC's commitment to the fulfilment of the
objectives of the RDP. In our ten years of democracy, South Africans have
much to celebrate in terms of the improvement of their standards of
living, building the economy, democratising the state and society,
developing a skills base and setting up delivery machinery.
This Appropriation Bill also goes to the heart of the ANC's election
manifesto and the President's state of the nation address, which set clear
programmatic targets for all key departments to deliver on our contract
with the people of South Africa. The allocation of funds to various
departments is informed by the material conditions as they obtain in the
society as a whole. As you are aware, the departments have tabled their
strategic plans for the coming MTEF period. Our task as public
representatives is now to ensure that these strategic plans reflect the
urgency and the seriousness of implementing the policies that the ANC
Government stands for.

This task of oversight is not only confined to the members of the ANC, but
to all public representatives across the political spectrum and all
spheres of government. As the ruling party, the ANC signed the people's
contract to create work and to fight poverty on behalf of all political
parties represented here. The people's will will be respected as such.

Allow me to remind this House of some of the key features of this year's
budget. Firstly, the expansion with regard to housing delivery, water and
community services have been the fastest growing categories of expenditure
over the past decade; secondly, the continued extension and improved
spending on health services, which has also grown in real terms by 4,3% in
the past decade; thirdly, the broadening of the tax base in the interest
of fairness and efficiency; fourthly, the continued management of public
finances in a responsible manner that ensures that debt service cost
decline as a share of expenditure and of GDP; fifthly, the releasing of
resources for productive service delivery.

These commitments are further confirmed by the President's state of the
nations address, as I have indicated, where he presents a detailed
programme of action to respond to the challenges of the second economy.
The Expanded Public Works Programme, according to this programme, will be
launched in all provinces by September 2004, with particular focus on the
21 urban and rural nodes. Once these are launched, the role of public
representatives, once more, becomes crucial in monitoring the
implementation of these programmes such that social and economic
infrastructure is developed. The programme also affords an opportunity for
human resource development, enterprise development and poverty
alleviation. To facilitate the financing of these programmes, the
President refers to the financing protocol relating to the urban renewal
and rural development programme, which will be finalised by July 2004 and
is intended to improve effective coordination between the three spheres of
government and the different departments.

The Apex fund, dedicated to the extension of micro credit, will also be
operational by the end of this year. These and many more are concrete
measures that the ANC-led Government is in the process of honouring
regarding its side of the people's contract. Ours again will be to oversee
the implementation of this programme instead of voting against it, as we
have seen the DA do in terms of objecting to a number of Budget Votes that
matter to the people of South Africa, especially the poor.

The DA objected to the Budget Vote for provincial and Local Government.
They voted against the Public Works Vote. They objected to the Public
Enterprises Budget Vote. They objected to the Arts and Culture Budget
Vote. They objected to the Education Vote. They objected to the Health
Vote. They objected to the Votes on Labour, Defence, ICD, Communications
and Minerals and Energy. They even objected to the Transport Vote. They
went on to vote against the Health and Labour Budget Votes. This is all
done in the name of opposing, without considering the plight of the poor,
whom they claim to represent outside this Chamber, but vote against the
improvement of their lives in the process. The ANC supports this Budget
Vote.

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, may we state for the record that we
consider it undesirable to conduct a First Reading and a Second Reading
debate in two different Parliaments.

The Appropriation Bill before this House budgets for expenditure of R369
billion in this financial year and a budget deficit of 3,1%, which drops
to 2,8% the following year - an important signal to the markets as it
constitutes a continuation of the sound fiscal management commended in a
recent Article IV IMF report. Regrettably, this report, which was critical
of other key areas of Government's economic policy, did not inform either
the First Reading debate during the Budget or the election, because the
Minister of Finance took a unilateral decision that this would not be the
case.

However, given the President's speech yesterday and the policy shifts it
contains - or call it a renewed emphasis, if you wish, hon Cronin - there
is no doubt that the next Article IV consultation report will lead to an
even more interesting debate, as will the next meeting of the President's
International Investment Council in the wake of his speech yesterday.

In this modern political world we find ourselves in, nothing is entirely
of the left, nor is anything entirely of the right. It is not only cuisine
that has become eclectic; policy itself has become, as well. We certainly
also do not merely live in a binary political world of the neo-
conservatives or conservatives and the ideological pool of the broadly
described left, as the President chose to characterise it - a convenient
ideological divide that is often constructed in South Africa more in the
interests of political expediency than in the interests of enlightened and
enlivened debate. Liberalism exists, but, as was clear again today, it is
anathema to the ANC, as it was anathema to the NNP. It is not anathema to
the DA and it never will be, not locally and not globally.

The realities of global economic liberalism have led the SDP and New
Labour to adopt clear reforms according to the PFI and other initiatives
taken that were referred to in this House yesterday. Minister Manuel,
those who live in eclectic policy glasshouses that mix and match
ideological positions must refrain from throwing political stones. In
modern-day politics there are not many political parties with economic
positions that meet this clear ideological purism articulated before this
House by the President yesterday. As the left was indicated, it is also
equally not as ideologically pure any longer.

The Bill before us and the allocations that it contains go to the core of
the debate on the role of the state in a modern society. The real debate
in South Africa's political economy discourse is not a binary one between
libertarian free-market economics and a developmental or enabling state,
as the President called it at the progressive governance conference. It is
and should be a lively debate about the appropriate role of the state in a
modern economy and the tolerable line between the state and market in a
modern, globalised economy.

Again, as this House was reminded yesterday, ours is a view that says: as
much market as is possible and as much state as is necessary. Anything to
the contrary is disingenuous and dishonest. Perhaps the best answer in
starting a debate on this will be the debate on the appropriate role of
the state and the rise of the regulatory state, which is the feature of
the modern economy. This is certainly where a more productive and fruitful
debate is to be found.

It is interesting to note some of the points of comparison between the neo-
conservative economic policy the President complained about in the USA and
the ANC's version of elite-based black economic empowerment. The neo-con
agenda in the United States has mastered the art of enmeshing private
interest and policy access in a feeding frenzy of economic access for the
politically connected few. While the US policy has been ridiculed by those
of the de-elect Bush campaign as the ``leave no billionaires behind''
policy - and those who want to see this can see it; it's one of the
campaign issues in America - it's quite clear that the ANC's BEE strategy
increasingly harbours and borders on being nothing short of the Bushites'
``leave no billionaires behind'' policy, instead of being truly and truly
convincingly broad-based.

One of the key challenges will continue to be the financing of BEE and it
will continue to be a focus areas that we will engage quite critically in
the lead-up to the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. It was also one of
the key areas in the IMF report.

Unfortunately, Minister, we are unable to support ... [Inaudible.] [Time
expired.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think I must mention to the Minister
of Finance that it is unfortunate that history has destined us to eat from
the same plate because of the nature of our constituencies sometimes.
Because of that, I would just like to say that contributions have been
made and concerns have been expressed by the IFP and various other parties
in this matter. The IFP urges the hon Minister to take these on board
during the next Budget cycle.

The IFP supports the Bill. Thank you.

Mr Y WANG: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, thank you. It is quite clear
that there is never enough money to address the pressing needs in South
Africa, so the ID supports the vote, but we would like to note that we
must get the priorities right. The priorities are that we must fight
poverty, HIV and Aids, crime and unemployment.

I would just like to inform all the hon members that there is one question
that keeps coming up for me, namely that I still haven't got my ID yet,
but I'll keep you updated. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This year's
Appropriation Bill has clearly outlined the aims, objectives and
priorities of the South African Government. The alleviation of poverty and
social and economic development appear to be our primary focus for the
faculties and departments.

The MF is proud of our achievement over the past 10 years and applauds our
efficient Department of Finance under the auspicious leadership of our hon
Minister of Finance, hon Trevor Manuel, for implementing our funds to the
best advantage of South Africa.

Hon Minister, a good plan has been devised for the 2004-05 financial year.
We eagerly await the ENE and efforts of each department to utilise these
funds wisely to enable the benefits we aim to achieve. We are, however,
noting shortfalls and needs in each department. We hope for no rollovers.
Use these allocated funds to the best of your abilities to fulfil the
needs of our masses.

The MF supports the Appropriation Bill. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker and hon members.
Firstly, may I express appreciation for the general support on the First
Reading debate of the Schedule. We'll come to the Second Reading debate in
a moment. However, it's important to see this Budget in the context of
continuity, and in the context of continuity, certainly, when the
President stood at this podium on 21 May and gave us our marching orders.
These are the spending plans for those marching orders.

When we tabled the Budget in February we were pretty clear about the
outcome of the election. We knew that the message of the ANC would
resonate with people and, indeed, on 14 April that came to pass. Now we
have to implement, and in implementing I think we know how rooted we need
to be in the people.

In this context it's important to ask: What on earth happened to the hon
Taljaard? It may have been the stay at Yale or some other place where the
neo-cons hang out, because there's total confusion at the moment. There's
a market fundamentalism that pretends not to be a market fundamentalism.
There was a statement earlier that the Washington Consensus is a work in
progress and a statement by the hon Davidson earlier, saying, ``Oh, please
let's have the Washington Consensus only.''

She says there isn't a binary debate, but every position she takes comes
from far, far, far right. You're stuck, Madam. You're stuck and that's the
problem. We have to resolve these issues going forward, but perhaps what
is most important is that the people have spoken, but in the people
speaking there are other issues, as well.

In fact, she'd be surprised to learn that in the meeting of the
International Investment Council there is such a broad support for the
positions of the ANC. There is support amongst all of those businesspeople
that black economic empowerment is necessary in South Africa. There is no
criticism about that. Even the Article IV report, both last year and the
work done by the Article IV mission this year, would confirm that
position. The DA, however, would like us to be stuck.

You saw earlier the difficult position that the hon Seremane was in. He
stood up to applaud the President; his leader pulled him down. They were
totally embarrassed, because we know the messages that resonate with all
South Africans. [Applause.] We will not be atomised, as the position of
liberalism says: we have no place, we have no base, we have no roots, we
have no class, we are just atoms thrown together in a sovereign territory
for a short period of time. Those aren't the positions of the ANC.

Chair, I'd like to thank the Joint Budget Committee for their work in
preparing this process. I'd like to express appreciation to the ad hoc
committees for their engagement with the Budget issues, and I'd like to
welcome the chair of the Budget committee, Nhlanhla Nene. We look forward
to close collaboration in the future. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.


  The House divided:


  AYES - 212: Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Asmal, A K; Bapela,
  K O; Batyi, F; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Biyela,
  B P; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, N G
  W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S;
  Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S
  C; Davies, R H; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dipico, E M;
  Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dodovu, T S; Doidge, G Q M; du Toit, D C; Fihla, N B;
  Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N
  E; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gore, V C; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M;
  Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus,
  L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, M; Joubert, L K; Kannemeyer, B W;
  Kasienyane, O R; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B
  M; Kondlo, N C; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S; Likotsi, M
  T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Maake, J J; Mabe,
  L L; Mabena, D C; Maduma, L D; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B;
  Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M
  J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A;
  Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T;
  Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masithela,
  N H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M S;
  Meruti, M V; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A;
  Moatshe, M S; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
  Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
  Montsitsi, S D; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Moss, L N;
  Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Ndzanga, R A; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
  Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
  Ngiba, B C; Ngwenya, M L; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A
  A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Nwamitwa-
  Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant,
  D A A; Oliphant, G G; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, A G H; Phadagi, M G;
  Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M
  M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramphele, T D H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;
  Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Seaton, S A;
  Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Siboza, S;
  Sigcau, S N; Simmons, S; Smith, P F; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M
  R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
  Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Vezi, T E; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S;
  Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu,
  N E; Zuma, J G.


  NOES - 38: Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Delport, J T; Doman,
  W P; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M; Haasbroek, S F; Henderson,
  R K; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T
  D; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Morgan, G R; Nel,
  A H; Phala, M J; Rabie, P J; Schmidt, H C; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J;
  Smuts, M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R;
  Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille,
  H.


  ABSTAIN - 4: Durr, K D S; Green, L M; Khumalo, M S; Swart, S N.

Bill accordingly read a second time.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms B A HOGAN: Madam Speaker, the Bill before the House today is a Bill
that amends our taxation laws. We amend our tax legislation in this House
at least twice a year. This Bill that is before us now is one of the
simplest of the Bills. The Bill that is going to come to us later is much
more complex. It is a compendium Bill. It deals with amending a whole
range of taxation laws, and, therefore, it is not a Bill that starts at a
point and moves on to the end.

A lot of it deals with bringing into legislation the income tax schedules
that were announced in the Budget. I don't propose dealing with those, and
my colleague, Ms Rhoda Joemat, will deal with those. I am not going to
deal with this Bill in a great deal of detail. There are not many
significant clauses to the Bill which I think need special recommendation.

There are one or two amending clauses that, I think, are important. One
particularly relates to the biofuel industry. This is an alternative fuel
source for energy, environmentally friendly and important for
environmental changes. Up to now, the only depreciation allowed to people
in the biofuel industry has been for farmers who grow crops. However,
after that, in the production on biofuels, no special tax depreciation was
allowed. This Bill rectifies that problem.

So, we now have a comprehensive depreciation range for the biofuel
industry, and that is indefinitely to be welcomed. We note that laws
protecting the environment, particularly as regards the taxation and
levying of matters relating to the environment, are increasingly coming
into our taxation law. That, I think, is very important.

I do want to make a couple of comments, though, about our taxation regime
as a whole. In the past couple of years we have put through a raft of
changes to our taxation laws. One of the many changes that we introduced
is tax incentives for different industries. These tax incentives have been
specifically focused on giving incentives to different kinds of
industries.

My problem at this stage is that, in fact, we do not have a proper
mechanism for determining how effective these tax incentives are, and I
would request the Ministry and SARS to look at a system in co-operation
with the relevant departments of just assessing how effective these tax
incentives are being used. There is one incentive that has enjoyed
enormous popularity, and we are already seeing the benefits thereof. That
is the tax incentive given to those developers who want to improve the
inner cities of our country. It is very pleasing to note that this is
going to be an ongoing tax incentive, it is not limited, and already we
are seeing the enormous interest in our cities in this tax incentive, and
how development, which would not normally have come there, is flowing into
those areas. We see here that the inner city of Cape Town has been
transformed as a result thereof.

I certainly hope, though, that with this tax incentive we do focus on
making our inner cities liveable for all kinds of people, not just simply
for the rich or the middle class. It is encouraging that here in Cape Town
they are talking of suburbs outlining the inner city, such as Woodstock,
Salt River, etc. However, I do believe these tax incentives need to be
focused so that we do not create havens of luxury in the midst of outlying
suburban poverty.

We do not need a rewrite of our taxation laws. Anyone who has seen the
taxation handbook knows it is thick. We in the committee, especially my
colleague, Dr Woods, have for a long time been calling for a revision of
our taxation laws and a pulling together. At the moment we just have laws
that are amended every year, and a huge book on amendments. It is very
difficult to actually get the legislation just in Act form. We need that
rewrite. SARS has committed itself to it, but in the interests of all our
taxpayers, I think we do need to have a complete rewrite, also one that is
still user-friendlier.

There was a period in time in Parliament, particularly during the writing
of the Constitution, when emphasis was on writing laws that were simple,
particularly in English, never mind other languages. Tax law is complex;
you do have to be precise. Often it is incredibly inaccessible. I know
members on our committee often battle just with the complexity of the
language of the law itself. I do believe that tax compliance means that we
need to be making it easier for people to understand our laws.

Another area that I think we need to look at, and this had been addressed
in the budget review, is the question of to what extent our laws and other
matters in the regulatory environment are friendly to small to medium
enterprises. We have focused on many tax laws that give a special
dispensation to small to medium enterprises. I still believe though, from
personal experience, and I am not a small businessperson myself, but from
the experience of people whom I know, that the tax dispensation for small
to medium enterprise is very confusing. People have to fill in endless
forms and submit them, and they often do not understand the purpose of
these forms. I really do believe, and it has been said, that National
Treasury and SARS will have to look at this. I think it needs to be looked
at as a matter of urgency.

Finally, this has been a particular issue of mine, and I have spoken about
it time and time again, amending money bills legislation. At this stage we
are still in a situation where the committee looks at a draft of a Bill.
We can make recommendations about changes to that draft, but no one is
obliged to even take into consideration those amendments.

I have always been very encouraged by the meticulous and scrupulous
attention that SARS and National Treasury have always paid to our
recommendations, and also to every issue raised by every person who comes
before our committee. In fact, they are exemplary in this way and have
always responded to every matter raised by every person who has come
before our committee.
Still, it does leave Parliament disempowered, and in my thinking about it
I have thought that maybe we need to distinguish between two types of tax
legislation; the one deals with actual figures and says that our schedules
will mean that taxes will go up and down by so such or such a percentage,
that transfer duties will be this and that, and certainly, you want the
National Treasury to be able to drive a process without undue interference
from a legislature.

However, then there are other tax laws that do not refer to quantum, and I
think there we do need to look at bringing in Parliament. God help us, I
really hope that in this session of this Parliament we will bring in a
taxation Bill to empower Parliament to amend money Bills. That would mean
that taxation laws would at least be amendable before our committee, but
perhaps we need to look at distinguishing between the two types of
taxation laws.

With that I commend this Taxation Laws Amendment Bill to this House. The
ANC is in support of it, and I wish my following speakers great resolve in
being creative in speaking on this Bill. I think we need to give a
creativity award to all members who speak on taxation laws, because it is
dead boring. Thank you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon members,
the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill is a technical Bill which, in essence,
will implement the taxation proposals set out by the hon Minister in his
Budget Speech in February this year. Clause 1 of this Bill encourages the
acquisition of property by law to middle-income households, especially
regarding transfer duties. The exempt threshold is increased from R140 000
to R150 000 from 1 March and this is commendable. The effective tax relief
is also granted for all properties valued at one million rand and below.
In actual fact, this will reduce the tax burden in all property
transactions by R500. Stamp duties on mortgages and negotiable
certificates of deposits are removed. Economic growth and the variables
that trigger growth are extremely complex. The proposing clause 1 of the
Bill will enable thousands of South Africans to become home owners which,
in turn, will result in increased investor and consumer confidence.

Vergrote huiseienaarskap skep welvaart onder die vaste bates wat as 'n
potensiële hefboom vir die verkryging van addisionele bates kan dien.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Increased home ownership creates prosperity as fixed assets serve as a
potential lever to obtain additional assets.]

Personal income tax, income tax relief and income tax interest exemption
have been increased. The specific tax rate adjustments are set out in
clauses 3 and 6 of the Bill. Thousands of retired South Africans are
dependent on savings. The Democratic Alliance welcomes the increase in the
primary rebate from R5 400 to R5 800 and the secondary rebate for persons
65 years and older from R3 100 to R3 200. These changes have increased tax
thresholds for individuals under the age of 65 to R30 220 and for
individuals above 65 years to R50 000. Interest and dividend exemption for
the tax year 2004-2005 below 65 will be R11 000, and above 65, R16 000.
These rate changes are welcomed and may provide some financial relief to
the retired members of society.

Clause 11 of the Bill that relates to fuel is significant seeing the
context of the present high cost of crude oil and the limited potential
future reserve of fossil fuels. In the submission to this Portfolio
Committee on Finance, it was mentioned that Germany invests something like
6 billion a year in renewable funds into the energy industry and that this
sector employed 120 workers in Germany.
Afgesien van omgewingsfaktore soos besoedeling, is dit gebiedend
noodsaaklik dat die openbare en private sektor hierdie wetgewing benut wat
klousule 11 van hierdie wet aan hulle bied. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Apart from environmental factors such as pollution, it is essential that
the public and private sectors use this legislation which clause 11 of
this Bill offers them.]

The production of biofuels is most cost-effective if it is produced near
the source where the oil sea crops are harvested, resulting in significant
employment opportunities in rural areas. The rate of unemployment in
especially some of our rural areas is of great concern and we hope this
particular legal provision will alleviate this problem. This Bill also
provides a preferential tax depreciation write-off to farmers, provided
that the assets must have been brought into use for the first time by the
farmer if he cultivates oil seeds and so forth.

The amendment to Section 13 in the Bill removes the deadline for
municipalities to earmark areas eligible for tax incentives in respect of
urban development and renewal of zones. The new provisions of the
Municipal Finance Management Act linked to Section 13 of this Bill, will
assist municipalities to speed up their inner city renewal projects across
the country. The degree of urban decay in some of our inner urban CBDs is
also a matter of concern and the DA welcomes this particular provision.

This Bill also provides for customs and excise schedule amendments. The
Portfolio Committee on Finance studied clauses 2(1) and 26 and 42(t). The
tax changes in 2003 ensured that the new mineral resource dispensation
created by the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act - MPRDA -
from transfer duty. Capital gains tax, VAT under the current law, and
existing mineral right orders can convert or renew old order rights to a
new order right tax free, also from transfer duty. What is significant,
however, is that this does not apply to new rights that the state may wish
to award.

Another class of minor taxation that remains in the ambit of the transfer
duty is the acquisition of mining rights between private parties. The
current profit income tax for mining companies will stay in place until a
holistic mining policy is completed and finalised by the end of 2004. This
Bill also provides for further miscellaneous provisions, the tightening up
of areas around the capital gains tax - a tax that we from the DA oppose.
It is an expensive and extremely complex form of taxation and it is very
costly to administer. Mr Minister, I could not disagree with you more.

South Africa is becoming part of a global economic village where people
vote with their feet and sell their skills in the global market. A number
of South African companies have recently listed themselves overseas and
can be truly categorised as multinational companies. One of the
shortcomings of this proposed legislation is that it leaves corporate
rates and the company schedule of the Income Tax Act unchanged.

Daar het heelwat verligting van persoonlike inkomstebelasting die afgelope
aantal jare plaasgevind. Hierdie is `n positiewe verwikkeling. In
vergelykende terme betaal die Suid-Afrikaanse belastingbetalers en
ondernemers egter veel meer direkte en indirekte belasting as hul eweknieë
in van ons belangrike handelsvennootlande. Vergun my die geleentheid om te
meld dat die koste van veiligheid en sekuriteit, gesondheid en onderwys
dikwels vanuit finansiële persoonlike bronne aangevul moet word en nie
volkome deur die openbare sektor gedek word nie. Is dit nie miskien tyd
dat daar op `n deurtastende wyse deur die Tesourie gekyk word waar
belasting besnoei kan word nie? Bo en behalwe word ondernemers en
belastingbetalers toenemend deur tweedevlak- en
derdevlakregeringsinstellings geteiken vir verdere belasting. Hierdie
voortdurende vergrote of addisionele belastingheffing behoort indringend
hersien te word, en daar moet gekyk word na voorstelle wat die
belastinglas vir die gewone belastingbetaler kan verminder. Die enigste
liggaam wat dit wel kan doen, is die Nasionale Tesourie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In the past few years there has been considerable personal income tax
relief. This is a positive development. In comparative terms South African
taxpayers and entrepreneurs are paying much more direct and indirect tax
than their peers do in some countries of our important business partners.
Grant me the opportunity to mention that the cost of safety and security,
health and education often has to be augmented from personal financial
sources and is often not completely covered by the public sector. Isn't it
perhaps time for the Treasury to take a thorough look at where taxes could
be cut? Over and above this, second and third-tier government institutions
are increasingly targeting entrepreneurs and taxpayers for further taxes.
This constantly increasing or additional levying of taxes should be
comprehensively revised, and suggestions should be looked at that could
reduce the tax burden of the ordinary taxpayer.The only body that can, in
fact, do this is the National Treasury.]

Clauses 5 and 7 of this Bill enable the South African Revenue Service to
delegate the approval function to the Financial Services Board to create a
one-stop approval system. The DA supports this proposal. At present no
provision exists for the payment of interests on refunds for overpaid tax
on retirement funds. The DA is in agreement that refund interests be
provided by SARS. The DA supports this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Mr Chairman, at one stage I was tempted to go through the
Bill clause by clause, but since I believe that the previous speakers have
done that adequately, I will not dwell on that. Most of these amendments,
if not all, are contained in the Minister's Budget Speech and were, in
fact, debated and laid to bed in the same debate. The transfer duty
amendment is heartily welcomed by the IFP as it encourages the acquisition
of property and grants effective tax relief to the low-income earners. The
IFP, however, regrets that these things have come too late, as the
previous victims of the Group Areas Act can no longer benefit from these
reliefs.

We pray that all these amendments will mean the dawning of hope to the
majority of our people who have been waiting patiently for sustainable
employment opportunities and the alleviation of poverty. The IFP hopes
that these amendments will contribute materially to improving growth
prospects, development and employment creation to the personal income tax
relief and encouragement of investment measures to boost household savings
and reforms to stimulate enterprise development. In conclusion, the IFP
supports the Taxation Amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. It is always taxation legislation
that is eagerly awaited by many and they look for suitable adjustments in
our hon Finance Minister, Trevor Manuel's Budget Speech. The Minority
Front notes the importance of tax used for state revenue, bearing in mind
that this is the revenue that betters the lives of the poor. Often taxes
are a burden to many who slog long hours to earn their money. The Minority
Front is pleased with matters of tax regarding transfer duty on
properties, but finds the rates of tax on larger properties are a bit
stiff. Tax on mineral rights holders appears to have a strategy to
encourage new players into the market. Tax regarding rebates appears to be
suitable. Pension funds tax adjustments in the light of SARS are agreed to
and the interest exemptions are fine.

Taxes on biofuels are seen as an adjustment, but the Minority Front does
not really support the high petrol price that hinders South Africans' cost
of living. The adjustment to toll roads taxes is approved, but the
Minority Front feels that charges at these stops should be maintained at a
minimum, unless it is for business travels and for trucks. We are
especially pleased with taxes on cigarettes and alcohol, but feel that the
advertising of alcohol should also be prohibited, as in the case pf
cigarette advertising, so as to assist in campaigning against intoxication
and alcoholism. I am sure that the retroactive repeal of stamp duty on
mortgage bonds pleases many, as well as stamp duty on negotiated bill
certificates. The Minority Front supports the Taxation Laws Amendment
Bill.

Since I have a few seconds, may I also take this opportunity to make an
announcement that the Minority Front won the by-election in ward 52 in
Phoenix, KwaZulu-Natal. Once more they gave the DA a good thrashing. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Chairperson, hon members, as we celebrate 10 years of
freedom this year, South Africa has much to be proud of. The public
finances are well managed and we have a sound, growing economy. In the
past week we have been listening to the debates on the Budget Votes of
various departments, and they outlined their strategic plans for their
departments. Strategic planning is all about mapping out a framework and
vision for the departments and projecting an estimated budget to finance
that vision. The departments did that very well, because we are the ANC-
led Government.

However, the DA's projected figures were incorrect for the outcomes of
2004 elections. They projected a percentage of 25%, and in certain
instances they even projected 30% support, but they only received 12,37%
of the national vote. That is what you call overestimation by
approximately two million voters. We must be glad that Mr Gibson is not
the Commissioner of the SARS. The country would have been in serious
financial trouble!

To project is to have a realistic figure and a realistic vision.
Implementation and delivery are the most important aspects of all of these
projections and visions. This Taxation Law Amendment Bill is all about
implementation. The Minister of Finance made announcements in his Budget
Speech that have tax implications, and by passing this Bill, we are
implementing those announcements. When we listened to the Budget Speech, I
am sure we all wondered who would benefit and who would have to share.

I will give a broad outline of the beneficiaries: Personal income tax is
cut again; interest income exemption is raised to R11 000 for people under
65 and R16 000 for senior citizens; the 2004 tax proposal seeks to further
encourage acquisition of property for low and middle-income households;
effective tax relief is granted for all properties valued at R1 million
and below; transfer duty's threshold is raised from R140 000 to R150 000,
thus reducing the tax burden on all property transactions by R500; and
stamp duties on mortgage loans were eliminated as from 1 March 2004. This
is to encourage and assist many low and middle-income tax payers who
struggle to find the necessary funds to acquire their first property.

My father used to say: "Buy a plot to build a house. It is the best
investment, because God is not going to make more land available for the
people." The area for the beneficiaries is the elimination of ad valorem
excise duties on certain products. We know with this relief there is a tax
relief for everyone.

Let us also unpack the givers or the sharers - those who can still afford
to indulge in the sins and luxuries of life. As the preacher said, "You
shall pay for your sins". Excise duties are increased: Malt beer is up 4c
per can; wine is up by 21c; and spirits is up by R1,76 per bottle. That
leaves a dry feeling in the throats of many of these consumers. However,
there is hope, because no increase is proposed on sorghum beer, but the
price of cigarettes is increased with 64c per pack of 20 and the fuel levy
was also increased.

The transformation of the SARS into an example of efficient and good
management is an inspiration for all of us. The tax relief that is made
possible is accredited to the efficient tax collection of SARS and the
implementation of a new enforcement strategy by SARS that targets areas of
high risk and aggressive tax planning practices. This has resulted in a
significant increase in the total revenue contribution of individuals and
corporate tax.

The President reappointed the Commissioner for another term and we want to
congratulate him. The SARS team must also be thanked for the excellent
work they are doing and, finally, just a friendly reminder to all in the
House and the public, as we are well aware or not aware, the cut-off date
for the submission of tax returns to SARS for the 2004 tax year is 9 July.
We urge all to comply so that we can make this country a better place for
all to live in.

The ANC supports the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, you know democracy requires that I
speak here this afternoon. The speakers' list says that I have 25 minutes,
but I have been lobbied across the House not to use all of my time. We
can't undermine democracy in that way. [Laughter.]

This is clearly the least controversial Bill. It says a lot about where
we've come from and where we are. There can be few other parliaments
around the world that would deal with the significant changes to tax law
in the way that it is being dealt with here. The committee has been very
diligent and the hearings, I think, have been quite exhaustive so the
debate here reflects pretty broad consensus on the issues. Some of the
ideas that emerged in the debate, and some that preceded the discussion
here in the House we will clearly take forward. The mammoth task of going
through a tax rewrite is something we've spoken about.

The challenge of trying to get it into plain English, I don't think so.
You know these lawyers; it's all that they have, and if you try to take it
away from them, you will get into very serious trouble. Are you out of the
coffin handle business now, Michael?

Mr M J ELLIS: Absolutely, long ago!

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: But the tax law rewrite is something we must
undertake. The hon Rabie appealed for tax cuts for persons. Now, it's very
important that we recognise the study by the International Management
Development Institute in Lausanne on South Africa in comparison with other
countries. We were rated number one in the world regarding personal income
tax rates and the effectiveness thereof. So, we have a tax system that is
effective, certainly in respect of persons. However much people lobby and
however much people dislike tax, it is important to recognise where we are
on those league tables and the effectiveness thereof. So, the reduction of
rates is not something we would commit to now.

The second point that the hon Rabie raises is that it is important that we
transfer taxing abilities to second and third tiers of Government, as he
suggested. Some may be very sensitive and insist on using the word spheres
here, but I agree with the tiers notion. If you look at Germany, the
fiscal difficulties in Germany are as a consequence of the inability of
German cities to raise the taxes that they are meant to raise. The
transfers have increased and deficit is blown out of proportion in
Germany, so we need to be very careful. We have an effective machine in
the SARS, and we shouldn't destroy it merely for the sake of handing over
taxing powers, because we are looking at economies of scale and
efficiencies as well.

I've got another 20 minutes left, so let us speak a bit slower and express
our sincere and profound appreciation for support on this Bill. Thank you
very much. [Laughter.]

[Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:32.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 11 June 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of
         Portfolio Committees, viz:


         Communications:


         Appointed: Wang, Mr Y (Alt).


         Finance:


         Appointed: Davies, Dr R H; Green, Mr L M.
         Discharged: Durr, Mr K D S; Nene, Mr N M.


         Foreign Affairs: Subcommittee on International Affairs:


         Appointed: Wang, Mr Y (Alt).


         Justice and Constitutional Development:


         Discharged: Gaum, Adv A H.


         Minerals and Energy:


         Appointed: Mthethwa, Mr E N.
         Discharged: Goniwe, Mr M T; Greyling, Mr L W.


         Provincial and Local Government:


         Appointed: Green, Mr L M (Alt); Greyling, Mr L W (Alt).
         Discharged: Batyi, Ms F; Khumalo, Rev M S.


         Public Enterprises:


         Appointed: Carrim, Mr Y I.
         Discharged: Martins, Mr B A D.
         Sport and Recreation:


         Appointed: Khompela, Mr B M.
         Discharged: Carrim, Mr Y I.


         Trade and Industry:


         Appointed: Durr, Mr K D S; Martins, Mr B A D.
         Discharged: September, Ms C C.


         Water Affairs and Forestry:


         Appointed: September, Ms C C.
         Discharged: Khompela, Mr B M.


     (2)    Mr N H Masithela has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs with effect from 24
         June 2004.


     (3)    Ms M M Sotyu has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Safety and Security with effect from 24 June 2004.


     (4)    Mr S L Tsenoli has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Arts and Culture with effect from 24 June 2004.


     (5)    Mr F Bhengu has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Works with effect from 24 June 2004.


     (6)    Ms E Thabethe has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism with effect from
         24 June 2004.


     (7)    Ms F I Chohan-Kota has been elected chairperson of the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
         with effect from 24 June 2004.


     (8)    Ms Z A Kota has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Housing with effect from 24 June 2004.


     (9)    Mr P J Gomomo has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
         Committee on Public Service and Administration with effect from
         24 June 2004.


    (10)    Ms T J Tshivase has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Social Development with effect from 24 June 2004.


    (11)    Mr J P Cronin has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Transport swith effect from 24 June 2004.


    (12)    Mr B A D Martins has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Trade and Industry with effect from 24 June 2004.


    (13)    Ms C C September has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry with effect from 24
           June 2004.


    (14)    Mr E N Mthethwa has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Minerals and Energy with effect from 24 June 2004.


    (15)    Mr Y I Carrim has been elected chairperson of the Portfolio
           Committee on Public Enterprises with effect from 24 June 2004.


    (16)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the
           Subcommittee on Review of the National Assembly Rules:


         African National Congress
         Jeffery, J H
         Masutha, M T
         Thabethe, E


         Ngaleka, E (Alt)


         Democratic Alliance
         Schmidt, H C


         Inkatha Freedom Party
         Van der Merwe, J H


         United Democratic Movement
         Bici, J


         African Christian Democratic Party
         Swart, S N


         Minority Front
         Rajbally, S


    (17)    Adv M T Masutha has been appointed as chairperson of the
           Subcommittee on Review of the National Assembly Rules with
           effect from 11 June 2004.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services Board
         on the Road Accident Fund - 10th Report for 2002-2003.


     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2003.


     (c)    Government Notice No 423 published in Government Gazette No
         26203 dated 31 March 2004: Amendment of the Rules of the
         Government Employees Pension Fund in terms of the Government
         Employees Pension Law, 1996 (Act No 21 of 1996).
     (d)    Government Notice No 445 published in Government Gazette No
         26219 dated 31 March 2004: Supplementary adjustments to local
         government allocations for 2003-2004 in terms of the Division of
         Revenue Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).


     (e)    Government Notice No 446 published in Government Gazette No
         26220 dated 1 April 2004: Local Government allocations for 2004-
         2005 in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5 of
         2004).


     (f)    Government Notice No 444 published in Government Gazette No
         26230 dated 1 April 2004: Allocations made to the provinces in
         terms of section 7 of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act No 5
         of 2004).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     Report of the Public Protector on an investigation into allegations of
     improper conduct in connection with the maintenance shutdown at and
     subsequent failure of the PetroSA refinery near Mossel Bay.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Public Enterprises on Budget Vote
     9 - Public Enterprises, dated 23 June 2004:


         The Ad Hoc Committee on Public Enterprises and Administration,
         having considered Budget Vote 9 - Public Enterprises, reports
         that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

CREDA INSERT - Insert No 2 from "ATC0624e"
CREDA INSERT - Insert No 3 from "ATC0624e"
CREDA INSERT - Insert No 4 from "ATC0624e"
CREDA INSERT - Insert No 5 from "ATC0624e"

