---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 24 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2004-11-24
---

WEDNESDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2004

                                    ____


                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING

                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.


                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING


The Speaker announced that she and the Acting Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, had called a Joint Sitting of the
National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces in terms of Joint
Rule 7(2), to honour the late Ms Joyce Lesawana Kgoali, Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, who passed away on Sunday, 21 November 2004.

 TRIBUTE IN HONOUR OF THE LATE MS JOYCE LESAWANA KGOALI, CHAIRPERSON OF THE
                        NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
Sheikh M MOERAT: In the name of Allah, most gracious, most gracious, most
merciful, Bismillahie Rahman nier Rahiem. I greet you with the universal
greeting of Islam, assalaamoe-alykoem, which means peace be unto you. Al-
hamdoe Liel’laahie Rab’biel Aalamien, thanks to the almighty Lord of the
universe.

Our salutations on our beloved Prophet Muhamad (Peace be upon Him.)

The Almighty has stated in the glorious Qur’an:


  Wherever you soever find yourself, death will overtake you. Indeed, from
  the Almighty you come, and unto Him you shall return. Praise be to the
  Almighty in gratitude to Him.

We have heard during the course of the memorial service today great
attributes of our late comrade. We wish to pray to the Almighty that those
attributes she put forward continue in our lives and that the Almighty
bestow His blessings upon her soul. We beseech thee, almighty Allah, to
instil in the hearts of her loved ones perseverance and patience and
tranquillity, for indeed she was a servant of the Almighty because she
served his creation.

Almighty Allah, enjoin our hearts; unite our hearts in truth. Lord of the
universe, grant us faith in our hearts that can immerse in the certitude by
which we will know that nothing will befall us except that thou hast
prescribed for us. Let us be contented with our lot, for thou art the
Overlord in this world and in the hereafter. Indeed, the Almighty declares:


  From the soil we have created you, to the soil we shall return you, and
  from it we shall resurrect you.

We beseech thee, Almighty, to bless the soul of our comrade. Thank you very
much. [Singing.]

The SPEAKER: I now call upon the Rev Lesley Scott of the African Methodist
Episcopal Church, which was the hon Kgoali’s denomination.

Rev L SCOTT: Shall we bow our heads in prayer? Our gracious and eternal God
and Father, we come this afternoon to thank thee for a life, to thank thee,
Lord, for a servant, to thank thee for a child of thine who was able to
exercise the talents thou endowed her with. Lord, we come as a nation, we
come as a people, we come as a family, Lord, to mourn her loss. But, Lord,
we thank thee that thou had allowed her to be of service to thy people.

This afternoon, oh Lord, we would just ask thee to bind the hearts that are
broken, to wipe the tears from the eyes of those who mourn. Thou hast
promised that thou would be with those who weep. Come, oh Lord, and be with
them this afternoon.

But as a people, Lord, as a nation, Lord, we ask this afternoon that thou
would inspire us, that we may labour for the Master from the dawn till the
setting sun, that we might talk of all thy wondrous love and care so that
when all of life is over and our work on earth is done and the roll is
called up yonder, Lord, we may be there. Help us, Father, that we may never
shirk our responsibilities, but do what we can while we can for Christ’s
sake. Amen.

The SPEAKER: I now call upon Guru Krishna of the Hindu community.

Guru KRISHNA: Peace be unto her soul. The passing away of our comrade, Ms
Joyce, is felt very keenly by all who believe in high ideals in life and
practical goodness in human relationships; who believe in her noble soul;
and who live a life of lofty dedication, selflessness, sacrifice and
ceaseless service unto our beautiful country.

She strove to uphold the great concepts of Satya, truth; Ahimsa, non-
violence; and Sudhindra, freedom. We pray for her soul to attain the
highest of spiritual illumination and the divine felicity. May God Parmatma
grant her supreme peace and blessedness. [Incantation.]

The Rigvedi slogan says: O’ God, thou art the dispenser of justice. Thou
recompensate everyone according to his or her deeds. Peace be to the spirit
in the westward direction. May there be peace to this spirit also in the
east, the north and the south, and all of the directions. O’ all-
illuminator God, thou art the creator, the sustainer and the destroyer of
this universe, may thou bestow a worthy abode to this noble soul.
[Incantation.]

The Rigvedi slogan says: O mortal, by the austerity and enlightenment, and
by thy good deeds, attain the bliss in the heaven and join the company of
their ancestors. Be free from all sins and, once again, may thy spirit
inherit and enlighten the body that is full of lustre and, once again, may
thy come to this world to perform noble deeds. Om shanti, shanti, shanti.
Peace, peace, peace upon the noble soul.

The SPEAKER: I now call upon Rabbi David Hoffman of the Jewish community.

Rabbi D HOFMANN: This poem of the call to service encapsulates both the
life of service of Joyce Kgoali and our ambivalence at her sudden summons
to higher service.

Praise me, says God, and I will know that you love me. Curse me, says God,
and I will know that you love me. Praise me or curse me, and I will know
that you love me. Sing out my graces, says God, raise a fist against me and
revile, says God. Sing out graces or revile.

Reviling is also a kind of praise, says God; but if you sit fenced-off in
your apathy, says God, if you sit entrenched in, I don’t give a dang, says
God. If you look at the stars and yawn, if you see suffering and don’t cry
out, if you don’t praise and you don’t revile, then I created you in vain,
says God.

This poem-song was written by Hannah Sennesh when, in desperation, she
parachuted behind enemy lines to rescue her parents from the Nazis.
[Incantation.]

My God, may these things never cease: the sand and the sea, the rush of the
waters, the thunder claps in heaven and the prayers of our hearts.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Hon Speaker, Deputy
Speaker, presiding officers of all nine provinces of the Republic of South
Africa, former presiding officers - I have recognised Dr Ginwala, a former
Speaker of this House, in the public gallery; I am told that the Minister
of Education is also in the House – premiers of all provinces, members of
the diplomatic corps, members of Parliament, members of the family present
here, ladies and gentlemen . . .
. . . kulesi sikhathi engimi ngaso lapha phambi kwenu okwamanje, kuthi
mangisho ngaleli elami iphimbo nginibikele ukuthi esinye isitho esiwumzimba
wethu sihlephukile. Kuthi mangisho, nginibikele ukuthi amanzi achithekile .
. . (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[. . . now, as I am standing in front of you, I want to convey our
condolences in my own voice. We have lost a very important part of our
body. Let me say, or put it this way, it is like water that has been
spilled.]

We are gathered here today in memory of the late Joyce Lesawana Kgoali,
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. We are here today to
reflect and to take stock of the road she has travelled.

Ladies and gentlemen, the hon Joyce Kgoali was an icon of the struggle. We
are here today to take stock of the important lesson she has taught us in
the remarkably short space of time she has been with us as Chairperson of
the National Council of Provinces. Today, while she is no more, we have to
make sense of the meaning and value of her presence among us.

Indeed, her presence amongst us has left an indelible mark on all of us who
have had the privilege of working with her. She has left a mark of fond
memories, characterised by hard work and forthrightness in dealing with the
business of the National Council of Provinces. She has indeed created a
void that will be difficult to fill in the years to come.

From humble beginnings, Joyce rose to be a champion of workers’ rights. She
confronted the system that systematically exploited workers with the zeal
and vigour that is unparalleled within the workers’ movement. The apartheid
regime condemned her to a factory floor, hoping to reduce her to a
subservient instrument for the accumulation of wealth for the few. This
was, however, not the case, as Ms Kgoali emerged from the factory floor to
become a fearless leader who would shake capitalism and its apartheid
machinery to its very core.

Indeed, Madam Speaker, so true are the words of Maya Angelou when she
wrote, and I quote:

  You may write me down in history
  With your bitter, twisted lies
  You may trod me in the very dirt
  But still, like dust, I’ll rise.

These words are so true in that Ms Kgoali rose from humble beginnings to be
one of the shining lights and the unwavering symbol of the struggle for
democracy in our country.

Ms Kgoali was not only the champion of workers’ rights, but she was also a
seasoned campaigner for children’s and women’s rights. She constantly put
forward on the national agenda issues that are pertinent to women and
children. As a member of the ANC Women’s League, she always reminded us of
our civic duty towards the empowerment of women and the protection of
children. I have been privileged to have had the opportunity to work with
her as one of the presiding officers in the National Council of Provinces.

As the Chairperson of the House, Ms Kgoali quickly established herself as a
strategic thinker who was very strong and assertive about her views. She
was always on hand to assist us, providing that leadership in our quest to
position the National Council of Provinces as a strategic institution best
placed to champion the interests of the provinces and municipalities.

In less than two months in the office, she developed what we call  “Vision
2009” for the National Council of Provinces. This vision outlines the
strategic role the National Council of Provinces will play in the next five
years. Vision 2009 places an emphasis on the need to strengthen capacity
for provinces and municipalities for the implementation of government
policies and programmes that will ensure a speedy delivery of services to
the poor. Through Vision 2009, Ms Kgoali challenged us to leave our comfort
zones and go to the people, and interact with the people on the issues of
reconstruction and development.

As recently as the beginning of this month, she led us through the length
and breadth of KwaZulu-Natal, holding meetings with communities as part of
the NCOP programme of taking Parliament to the people. The incredible
success of this programme is indeed a testimony to her outstanding
leadership. So, as we mourn her death, we should find solace in her
achievement. It will indeed be a fitting tribute to her if we were to
acknowledge and celebrate her achievements, following on the path she has
cleared for us.

She was indeed a gallant fighter, a visionary who had so much to offer to
our fledgling democracy. We had indeed expected so much from her, tapping
on her wisdom as we went about confronting challenges of poverty and
unemployment in our various provinces and municipalities. However, until
death strikes, we seem to think that reality is reserved only for certain
people. We think there is no need for death to lurk around people whose
daily commitment and hard work in their lifetime brings light to those who
are in darkness and hope to those who are filled with despair.

Yes, death has robbed us of a soldier for the homeless, a comforter for
those in need, a voice of the poor and a fighter for those whose rights are
frequently trampled upon by the rich and the poor. The manner in which she
carried herself as a leader, driven by passion and love for her people, as
a tough politician, as a parliamentarian who was rooted amongst the poorest
of the poor, has surely carved her name in the great annals of our history.
We salute her and lower our revolutionary banner in honour of her sterling
contribution to that cause of the poor in our country.

We also remain resolute and steadfast in our commitment to carry forward
the work she has started in the NCOP.

Ulwile, walwa ukulwa okuhle. UJoyce uhambile, kodwa uJoyce ukhona lapha
phakathi kwethu. UJoyce angeke siphinde silizwe izwi lakhe, kodwa uJoyce
liyezwakala izwi lakhe ezindlebeni zethu - liyohlala lizwakala njalo.
UJoyce asikho isithunzi sakhe okwamanje phambi kwethu, kodwa ngomqondo
wethu siyohlala sisibona njalo. Angeke asuke ebusweni bethu. Usishiye
ngokukhulu ukuzuma. Lala ngoxolo qhawe lamaqhawe! Sengathi uThixo angaba
nawe! (Translation if isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[She fought, and fought victoriously. Joyce has passed away, yet her spirit
is amongst us. We will never hear her voice again, but it will keep echoing
in our ears and will echo forever. Although we cannot see Joyce with our
naked eye, we will always imagine her picture. She will not disappear from
our minds. She left us so untimely. Rest in peace, heroine among heroines!
May God bless you!]
May her soul rest in peace! I thank you, Speaker.

Mr T S SETONA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members, fellow comrades and friends, I indeed feel honoured to be counted
amongst those who rise on the occasion of this special Joint Sitting of
Parliament to bid a fitting tribute to Comrade Joyce Lesawana Kgoali. I
rise to join those who spoke before me to pour their heartfelt condolences
to the family of Comrade Joyce Kgoali, the ANC and its family of
organisations, particularly the ANC Women’s League, which Comrade Joyce led
with distinction.

Having worked with Comrade Kgoali, firstly in the NCOP, and then as
deployed by the ANC National Executive Committee in the Free State
province, I have come to embrace her not only as a leader, but also as a
mother who would never shy away from being a torch-bearer, even under the
most difficult circumstances.

That fateful, Sunday 21 November 2004 - the day of her tragic death - will
be counted amongst those days that will be remembered by generations to
come.

I don’t have words big enough to measure Comrade Joyce Kgoali, but suffice
it to borrow from one of the late stalwarts of the ANC, the late Comrade
Caleb Motshabi, who once said: ``Discipline and commitment are the only two
defining marks of a true revolutionary.’’

For us, the young generation of our movement, Comrade Joyce epitomises the
type and quality of a new cadre that the ANC seeks to build. Comrade Joyce
Kgoali always stood out as a field worker, an organiser and the leader of
our liberation movement. This is the role she has shown at her last public
appearance during the visit to the province of KwaZulu-Natal. We shall
always remember her as a visionary who was taking the NCOP, as the House of
Parliament, to new heights through Vision 2009.

Comrade Lesawana Joyce Kgoali understood that the revolution is not about
polemics in library armchairs, but rather a process that needs action to
make a profound impact on the material conditions of the lives of our
people. It is this quality alone that distinguished Comrade Kgoali as a
leader of the ANC, as a mother of the nation and as one of the stalwarts of
the ANC Women’s League.

Comrade Joyce Kgoali never feared to take action, even when many of us
would be sceptical about the kind of line or the kind of march we needed to
take - in most instances it would be under most difficult circumstances.
Comrade Joyce Kgoali believed in action, and nothing else. She steered the
NCOP at a time when some believed it was no longer relevant. Through her
leadership, she turned the NCOP into the true People’s Parliament that
Oliver Tambo, Chris Hani and many others have died for.

We will miss her for her steadfastness of principle and humility that
defied the logic of a dogma. Hamba Kahle, Comrade Joyce! [Go well, Comrade
Joyce!] Robala ka khotso! [Rest in peace!] We will remember you, our fallen
combatant! I thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Speaker, hon members, the family of the deceased Joyce
Kgoali, ladies and gentlemen, today, exactly two weeks ago, I stood by an
open grave in Secunda in Mpumalanga. It was at the funeral of my departed
dear friend, Albie Harmse, who passed away after many years of suffering. I
was joined there by many of our colleagues, because the deceased was also a
councillor and the DA caucus leader in the Govan Mbeki Local Municipality.

Looking around me on that sorrowful day, I noticed how sad and touched most
people were - all of us who were his friends and colleagues. There, at the
head of the grave were the immediate family – his wife and his children
together with his father, his brother and other members of their family.
They were so overcome with heartbreak and sadness that they were virtually
unaware of those around them.

Today we are gathered here to honour the memory of a colleague who, in
life, was a very senior official of this revered establishment, Parliament.
Unfortunately I, along with most of my DA colleagues in the NCOP, did not
know our departed Council Chairperson very well, but when I think back of
my own feelings at the grave of my friend, I can understand and share the
all-round sadness of her colleagues, particularly of those in the ANC and
its structures.

We did, however, get to know the hon Joyce Kgoali as a hard task master,
absolutely dedicated to her work and very strict as a chairperson, not only
of the NCOP itself, but also in the ancillary committees that were chaired
by her.

We also know that she was very concerned about the plight of the
disadvantaged, and adamant that the NCOP should play a leading role in
ensuring that poverty relief is adequately addressed by means of service
delivery and job creation. Her drive in this regard was very evident in
terms of the increased oversight role of the NCOP and indications that
efforts would be speeded up even more in the years to come.

However, Madam Speaker, if we as colleagues and those of you who counted
yourselves as her close friends, are saddened by her sudden departure, how
much more grief-stricken must her family be? If I think back again to my
experience of two weeks ago where death was the culmination of years of
suffering, I realise that the family and the loved ones of Joyce Kgoali
were suddenly and unexpectedly deprived of one as close as only a mother
can be. I realise that her husband will never be able to share his thoughts
with his life partner again. I realise that her two sons will never be able
to embrace their mother again and I realise that an extended family have
lost a mother and a sister forever.

Whilst it is, therefore, my wish that all her friends and colleagues find
comfort in these times of sadness, it is particularly those closest to the
hon Joyce Kgoali that I think of today. My wish and the wish of the DA is
that they find comfort in her memory and in the knowledge that so many
others share their great loss with them. We pray that they will be
strengthened by the promise that the Almighty Father will be with them and
that His all-encompassing love knows no end and heals all the wounds.
Tsamaya hantle, hon Joyce! [Go well, hon Joyce!]. I thank you.

Mr M B SKOSANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Ministers who are here, hon
members of the NCOP and the National Assembly, friends and colleagues,
somebody once wisely said: The moving finger writes, and having written, it
moves on.

Today we speak of Joyce Lesawana Kgoali, who, I believe, has woven with her
life a tapestry of the struggle of the African people in this country. She
has now, sadly, moved on, leaving behind memories precious to some and
enigmatic to others.

Since Joyce Kgoali’s sudden and shocking death last Sunday, many tributes
have been offered and written throughout the country, bearing testimony to
her selfless commitment to the political and economic emancipation of her
people. In particular, hers was a dedicated fight for the rights and
freedoms of workers and women, thus distinguishing her from those who
brought about these conditions on her people.

I must say, friends, that her journey to her last destination, that of
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, has been a long and
arduous one.

Now that Joyce Kgoali is no more, what words do we say to beautify the lost
and earthly companionship we cherished with her and to make Joyce stay
among the present gods and angels? The IFP prefers an extract from a poem
written by Alan Paton in 1970 and published in the New York Times in 1971,
titled Flowers for the Departed. It goes like this, in my own words:

  Joyce Kgoali, for you this flower, desert-born in distant land, suddenly,
  in rain, miraculous, flamed into life and lit with orange fire, the arid
  plain. So may your seed return untimely to the earth, bring back the
  beauty to your desert land.

The life and struggle of Joyce Lesawana Kgoali, I believe, should also
embrace, in consciousness, the spirit of many thousands of the fallen
unsung African women, many of whose graves are unmarked. This should keep
on reminding us that they have sacrificed their lives, chipping away at the
unjust laws in their multiple obscure ways.

Loretta Ngcobo, in a novel titled And They Did Not Die, looks at the
discomfort of white authorities at the assertion of women in the 1950s. One
official says of the defiant African women, and I quote:

  These women, this strange breed of womanhood, thin and ragged and not
  like women at all - they think they rule the world, they spill men’s
  beers, they herd cattle, they plough fields, they run this community.
  That’s what it is, that’s why this defiance – they’ve  lost respect for
  manhood, for all authority, but they haven’t got the sense to do it
  properly. In the absence of their husbands they’ve lost the need for men,
  if nobody stops them, they’re going to ruin this country. In spite of
  what others think, it is these women we have got to deal with, not those
  far away men in the cities.

Now this is the type of attitude, the attitude of officials, that Joyce
also had to deal with throughout her life.

The IFP then says to Ntate Simelane, her husband, their sons, Sekgalo,
Moeketsi, Thabiso and Tsidiso, to the ANC and the people of South Africa,
that like many heroines, daughters of the soil who went before Joyce
Kgoali, she did not die. May her soul rest in peace. Thank you.

Mrs A N D QIKANI:  Madam Speaker, Ministers who are here today and hon
members, firstly allow me, on behalf of the UDM, to extend our heartfelt
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of the late hon Joyce
Kgoali.

Hon Speaker, though we cannot take away the pain that we are feeling right
now, today we can stand in solidarity with you and remember her
contribution to this institution and to our country. Our thoughts and
prayers are with you during this time of bereavement. We hope that we’ll be
able to draw consolation from today’s proceedings, a fitting tribute to a
woman who touched the lives of many.

Only last week the NCOP concluded its business for the year and we took
leave of one another. Many of us have returned to our families or are on
the verge of doing so. It comes, therefore, as a shock to learn that our
farewell to the hon Kgoali was a permanent one. Our hearts go out to her
family who, unlike ours, will not get the opportunity to spend a well-
deserved time with a person who has dedicated the largest portion of her
time to the service of the public.

During my farewell speech in the NCOP last week, I spoke of the relevance
of the NCOP to Parliament and participatory democracy. I referred
specifically to the vital tasks that we need to attend to. Among other
things, I said that the relevance of this House to participatory democracy
has often been questioned and that it is our duty to prove the relevance of
our work.

Firstly, I said that we must remain vigilant in our consideration of Bills
referred by the National Assembly. Secondly, we must extend our ability to
represent the needs and aspirations of the provinces that we represent
here. Thirdly, we should not hesitate to exercise our oversight role with
regard to the executive.

In addition to all of these important duties, we have barely begun to
deepen the level of public participation in our activities. I raised these
points, aware that the late Chairperson of the NCOP was herself determined
to address the relevance and performance of this institution. We were all
aware of her intention in this regard, and I sincerely hope that whoever
picks up the mantle will pursue these goals with equal vigour and
enthusiasm.

The NCOP only recently returned from provincial visits in the Eastern Cape
and KwaZulu-Natal. During this time of taking Parliament to the people, the
late hon Kgoali actively demonstrated her commitment to enhancing the
relevance of the NCOP for the sake of the people of South Africa.

Having witnessed firsthand her energy during these provincial visits, I was
truly shocked to learn the news of her passing away. She was still so young
and so full of life. Nevertheless, as many have testified here today, she
had a full and productive life, spent largely in service of others.

She will be remembered for her dedication to duties and her party. She was
a committed democrat.

Kubantu bonke abakhoyo apha, ngakumbi kumakhosikazi ombutho wakhe
nakwibandla lonke lamakhosikazi, singamakhosikazi e-UDM, sithi: NguThixo
onikayo, ikwanguye nothathayo. Akukho namnye oya kuma phambi kwakhe, koko
igama likaYehova malidunyiswe. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[As the women’s section of the UDM, we say to everybody present here, to
the ANC Women’s League specifically and to women in general, the Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken. No one can stand in His way. Blessed be the name of
the Lord. Thank you.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Speaker and hon members, it is with deep sadness and
regret that the ID received the news of the passing away of the hon Joyce
Kgoali.

We remember her as a hardworking and strong-minded person. She had a strong
personality and was diligent in the performance of all her
responsibilities. Despite her strength of character, I found that she had
an unspoken gentleness about her. What stands out in my mind is her
boundless energy.

She would be here at Parliament in time for meetings, irrespective
of how early in the morning or how late at night those meetings were held.
In this area she was indeed exemplary to us all.

Following the national election this year, Ms Kgoali was appointed as
Chairperson to the National Council of Provinces. She was determined to
take the NCOP to new heights through her leading the process of adopting
the vision of the House called Vision 2009.

She will indeed be remembered as hardworking, determined and a passionate
political leader. She was an asset to Parliament and the ANC. Her
contribution to the democratisation of this country is indelibly imprinted
in the national memory of this nation. She has achieved this revered status
through her work in the trade union movement during the dark days of
apartheid.

The ID expresses its admiration and reverence for this remarkable woman.
The leadership of the ID conveys their collective condolences to the
family, especially to her husband who has lost a wife and her four sons who
have lost their mother.

In closing, I would also like to apologise for the fact that the hon De
Lille is not here today to deliver this tribute, because she had to honour
a long-standing appointment. I thank you.

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Speaker, members and most importantly the husband,
children and family of the late Joyce Kgoali, when we say goodbye to
someone, we assume that we might see each other again.

The last time I said goodbye to the hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Joyce
Kgoali, I assumed the above. I was wrong. Our friend, colleague and comrade
has moved on.

Today we pay tribute to a fighter, a liberator, a woman and a person who
stood strong for what she believed was right. I, on behalf of the New
National Party, want to convey our sincere condolences to her husband, her
children, her family and her political home, the ANC.

We want to honour her for the role that she played in putting the NCOP on
the map. She was instrumental in creating the NCOP’s vision, Vision 2009.
This was to make the institution a more effective and efficient instrument
of oversight.

Agb Speaker, ter afsluiting van die huldeblyk, hou ek ‘n gedig voor van
Claryné Freeman-Barends van Upington, uit haar bundel Ashoopkind: Sy noem
dit, “So sal ek jou onthou.” [Hon Speaker, in conclusion to this tribute, I
would like to present a poem by Claryné Freeman-Barends from Upington, from
her volume Ashoopkind. She calls it “So sal ek jou onthou.”

God het geoes
vir sy smeltkroes
warmte uit jou gevloei
het ons harte laat bloei
sagtheid van die hart
deur sware smart
skaduweeboom van rus
het menigte sorge weggekus
toonbeeld van godskind
was altyd by jou te vind
so sal ek jou onthou
die herinneringe aan jou
sal ek koester, dra en vertroetel.

Hon Speaker, the memories of the late Joyce Kgoali will certainly be
remembered by this Parliament. We salute her. I thank you.

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, members, family, friends and
loved ones of the hon late Joyce Kgoali, it is with shock and great sadness
that we learnt of the untimely death of the hon Kgoali, Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces.

The ACDP wants to pay tribute to the hon Kgoali. She was a great asset to
Parliament and will be sorely missed by all MPs and the entire staff of
this institution.

She was a strong woman, a great leader, a visionary and a hard worker. She
has given her life to fighting for the rights and freedoms of all South
Africans and had worked very hard at bringing Parliament closer to the
people. Her most outstanding contribution was what she did for the poor and
the destitute. She has served the cause of freedom and democracy with
loyalty, commitment and enthusiasm.

What the hon Joyce Kgoali has taught us is that we must work hard and
selflessly to improve the lives of those who are less fortunate and those
who are desperately poor and needy. We must work while we have the time and
energy, because we do not know the day or the hour when our journey on this
earth comes to an end, and when we have to appear before our Maker to give
an account of what we have done with our lives.

The hon Kgoali has used her full potential and all her talents to improve
the living conditions of those who are destitute and needy. Her selfless
life will speak volumes to generations yet to come. Her selfless life will
be a shining example to those who are left behind.

The ACDP wishes to convey its most sincere condolences to the husband,
children, and family and loved ones of the hon Joyce Kgoali, as well as the
friends and colleagues she worked with both at Parliament and in the ANC.
In a time such as this, when we experience the death of a colleague, we do
not have the words to express our sorrow, but the Lord himself consoles us
with his Word.

Let me console the family and loved ones with the Scripture in closing from
the Book of Romans, Chapter 8. I quote from the Living Bible.

  Yet what we suffer now is nothing compared to the glory He will give us
  later, for all creation is waiting patiently and hopefully for that
  future day when God will resurrect His children. For on that day thorns
  and thistles, sin, death and decay, the things that overcame the world
  against its will at God’s command will all disappear and the world around
  us will share in the glorious freedom from sin, which God’s children
  enjoy.


  For we know that even the things of nature, like animals and plants,
  suffer in sickness and death as they await this great event. Even we
  Christians, although we have the Holy Spirit within us, have a foretaste
  of future glory also grown to be released from pain and suffering. We too
  wait anxiously for that day when God will give us our full rights as His
  children, including the new bodies he has promised us – bodies that will
  never be sick again and will never die.


May the soul of Joyce Kgoali rest in peace. I thank you.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mevrou die Speaker, namens die Vryheidsfront Plus, die
volgende: Die VF Plus se benadering teenoor persone in ‘n gesagsposisie is
tweeledig; in die eerste plek, gehoorsaamheid, en in die tweede plek,
respek teenoor persone in gesagsposisies. En dan verder, ja, om te
kritiseer, om tereg te wys wanneer dit nodig is - as, en wanneer dit nodig
is - én om saam te werk wanneer dit nodig is.

Die VF Plus is tans een van die kleiner politieke partye, maar het reeds
een lid in die NRVP, en dit is in dié hoedanigheid wat ek graag wil hulde
bring aan wyle Mev Kgoali. Ek het reeds verwys na die VF Plus se
benadering, te wete gehoorsaamheid, enersyds, en andersyds ‘n kwessie van
respek. Dit verg dikwels groot selfbeheersing en soms ook tandekners om aan
hierdie benadering uitvoering te gee. Sekere persone in posisies van gesag
maak die navolging hiervan soms moeilik – uiters moeilik – en andere weer
maak dit maklik en meer hanteerbaar, en in dié laasgenoemde geval wil ek
graag Mev Kgoali, wyle Mev Kgoali, klassifiseer.

Die VF Plus het haar beleef as ‘n persoon in ‘n posisie van gesag, wat ferm
en beslis, sonder om dominerend te wees, opgetree het teenoor ons party,
soos ek haar waargeneem het, en ook teenoor ander partye. Sy was altyd
hoflik en het geluister na ander se sienings en menings. Sy het menings
gewissel en ‘n vrywillige oor gehad om ook  na ander standpunte te luister.

Dis eweneens my waarneming dat sy graag die NRVP sou wou vestig as ‘n Raad
van die Parlement met ‘n eiesoortige karakter, ‘n doeltreffende, waardige
eie karakter en identiteit. Dít sou sy nie beleef nie, maar die grondslag,
die wegwysers, die roetes is reeds deur wyle Mev Kgoali gelê. Sy het
enersyds statuur en waardigheid aan die NRVP verleen en andersyds aan die
posisie van voorsitter, wat navolgingswaardig is vir wie ook al haar mag
opvolg. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Speaker, I would like to say the following on
behalf of the the FF Plus: The approach of the FF Plus to people in
positions of authority is twofold; in the first place, obedience; and in
the second place, respect for people in positions of authority. Then
further, yes, to criticise to indicate the correct way when necessary – as
and when it is required – and to co-operate when it is necessary.

The FF Plus is currently one of the smaller political parties, but already
has one member in the NCOP and it is in this capacity that I would like to
pay tribute to the late Mrs Kgoali. I have already referred to the approach
of the FF Plus, namely obedience on the one hand, and the issue of respect
on the other. If often requires great self-control and sometimes also
gritting one’s teeth to execute this approach. Certain people in positions
of authority sometimes make this difficult – extremely difficult – and
others make it easy and more manageable, and I would like to classify the
late Mrs Kgoali in this last category.

The FF Plus experienced her as a person in a position of authority who
behaved towards our party, and other parties as well, in a manner that was
firm and resolute, without being domineering, by my observation. She was
always courteous and listened to the views and opinions of others. She
would exchange views and was prepared to listen to other points of view as
well.

It is my observation that she would have liked to establish the NCOP as a
House of Parliament with a unique character, an effective, dignified
character and identity. She was not to experience that, but the
foundations, the signposts, the routes, have already been established by
the late Mrs Kgoali. She lent stature and dignity to the NCOP on the one
hand, and to the position of chairperson on the other, which is worth
emulating by whoever may succeed her.]

Madam Speaker, it is always sad to lose a loved one, and more so in these
days approaching Christmas. This is a time of the year when families,
friends and relatives get together to cherish and strengthen ties of
friendship and families. Mrs Kgoali’s place in the future is going to be
empty in these circles.

The FF Plus prays that her relatives, friends, colleagues in the ANC, and
also us in the other parties will be comforted by pleasant memories about
her. I thank you.
Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon members, it was with the
greatest sense of shock that we heard of the untimely death of Ma Joyce, as
she was affectionately called by her colleagues and comrades. Her sudden
departure to higher service has robbed us of a true friend and loving
mother.

May I indicate how Mr Tlhagale remembers her:


      Our recent Parliamentary programme to KwaZulu-Natal was very strenuous
      to us all, but it was more strenuous to her as the pilot who had to
      steer the ship in the tempestuous waters of the ocean. Mrs Kgoali was
      a very respectful lady, and she always addressed me as Ntate [Mr]
      Tlhagale. That in itself is not only honourable to the person who is
      addressed as such, but it is more honourable to the person who uses
      that qualificative.

The late Mrs Kgoali was an energetic hard worker and a kind person;
somebody with a likeable disposition.

Ba ga Khoali le ba ga Simelane, lalang ka ntho madi a tshologa, lo di
gamuketse botlhoko, di tlaa fola. Morwadialona, ngwetsi ya lona edirile tse
e neng e tshwanelwa ke go di dira. O di weditse ka matsetseleko le ka
motsotso o o neng o tshwanela. Ka nako e o tshwanelwa ke ditebogo le
kgalaletso.

Tatlhegelo ya lona, le le Ma-ANC, ke tatlhegelo ya rona botlhe fela mo
Aforika Borwa. Mme yo o ne a dira go tokafatsa matshelo a batho. O ne a
dira, a direla batho. Modimo o tlaa lo fa motho yo o tlaa tlatsang
phatlatiro e e tlhodilweng ke loso lwa Mme Joyce.

Modimo o ne o re adimile senatla, o re adimile palesa go ikgabisa ka yona.
E ne e tshwanetse go nna jalo. Mogale yo o neng a na le maikaelelo o
robetse. A re lebogeng Modimo ka mpho e e dirileng gore re itsewe lefatshe
lotlhe. Modimo o ne a neile, mme gape o tshotse. A go bakwe leina la gagwe.


Bagaetsho, re tshwanetse go gakologelwa gore Modimo o ne o file Mme Khoali
sebakanyana mo lefatsheng le, mme o se dirisitse ka botswapelo. Go setse
rona. A re mo tlogeleng a robale ka kagiso. (Translation of Setswana
paragraphs follows.)

[The Kgoali and Simelane families, you feel the pain, be strong. You,
daughter daughter-in–law, did what she was supposed to do. She did it
appropriately and at the right moment. At this time you deserve to be
thanked and praised.

Your loss, as the ANC, is a loss to all of us in South Africa. She worked
for the people and to better their lives. God will give you someone to fill
in the vacancy caused by Mrs Joyce’s death.

God has given us a heroine, a flower to beautify us. It was meant to be
like that; a committed heroine is now being laid to rest. Let us thank God
for the gift, which made us well known in the whole world. God has given to
us, and he has taken away from us again. Let His name be praised.

Countrymen, we must remember that God has given Mrs Kgoali an opportunity
to live in this world, and she has used it wholeheartedly. We are the ones
who are left behind. Let her rest in peace.]

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, you know full well that I am not
very good at speaking on such occasions. I could not speak at the funeral
of my own mother, and so I hope I will execute my duty as I should.

It is with great sadness that we gather here this afternoon. This is the
first ceremony of this type in our democratic Parliament. We have come to
mourn one of our presiding officers, the hon Joyce Kgoali. We have also
come to pay tribute to her invaluable contribution to the liberation of our
people, and of women in particular.

Comrade Joyce was born into the working class, and although she came to
occupy one of the highest offices in our country she never cut herself off
from her roots. From those humble roots grew the driving force of a dream
to be part of the liberation of her people, a dream that was so cruelly cut
short a few ago.

Comrade Joyce, I am duty-bound and compelled to execute this parliamentary
duty, within it I must express our deepest condolences to your family, your
friends and your dear comrades. We sympathise with them all on this day of
lament, yet, strangely, also a day of celebration for a life well lived.

Dear family, friends and comrades, Sis Joyce leaves a huge vacuum in the
National Council of Provinces. She will be sorely missed. She was dearly
loved, admired and appreciated for her sterling role in the struggle
against apartheid, but more dearly remembered and renowned for her
struggles for the rights of workers and for the full emancipation of women.

She has passed on while occupying one of the highest offices in our land.
As presiding officer of one of the Houses of Parliament, she was a firm
reflection of commitment to and activity for the strengthening of those
aspects of Parliament that work for building and sustaining our infant
democracy.

It will not be fair to speak of Comrade Joyce only in abstract terms, in
terms of principle, or in terms of historical biography. A personal note is
required for such a worthy comrade, for she was, and in having been, she
is.

We spent many hours together.

Re ne re tlotla ka Setswana le ka Sesotho. Re ne re utlwana, re ipitsa
ditsala. Re bua tsa tiro, tsa losika le tsa metshameko. Botsala jwa tlotlo
le botsala jwa kutlwano. [We spoke in Setswana and Sesotho. We were close
and regarded each other as friends. We talked about work, family and
sports. It was a friendship of mutual respect and understanding.]

She was a hard worker, and believed we must make Parliament function for
the people. I spoke to her a few weeks before the sitting of the National
Council of Provinces in KwaZulu-Natal. I asked:

“Modulasetulo, a le tla e kgona tiro e? Ke tiro e tona. Le sa ntse le le
bašwa.” [Chairperson, will you manage this task? It is a massive task. You
are still new.] And she firmly replied: “Re tla e kgona. Ke tiro e re e
direlang batho ba rona. Re tla e kgona.” [We will manage. We are doing this
for our people. We will manage.] And indeed, she pulled it off.

She was also a straight talker. In a meeting with human rights workers in
Romania last year, she kept asking about the rights of workers. Our hosts
kept trying to change the topic, but she politely kept on asking, and
eventually got her reply.

She was humble. She shared with me that she was initially daunted at her
election as Chairperson of the NCOP. She then said in Setswana:
“Ke ne ka emelela. Ka phimola dikeledi. Ka emelela ka dira tiro ya aforika
Borwa.” [I then stood up. I wiped off my tears. I stood up and worked for
South Africa.] I had no doubt in my own mind that she was up to the task.

Many activists give up activism when appointed or elected to high office.
When she learnt I was to be in education, she called and said:

Tsala, [Friend . . .] you have a school in my constituency. It is named
after you. Visit it. Get it right. We are worried about it. I did exactly
what she said, because she was that straight talker. It was an instruction
from my Chairperson. I found, when I got to the school and the community,
that she did her constituency work regularly. The community knew her, and
told many stories about her interventions in the community. Our party, the
ANC, has lost a sterling cadre. Women have lost in this month of activism
in support of a violence and abuse-free society and world.

To her family, be comforted and be strengthened by her example. Always
remember where her eyes were cast. She was proud of her family and
committed to our country.

To the ANC, pick up the spear; it is a heavy one, carried by a person of
weight and courage. Wield it with honour, as she did. To Parliament, build
on the democratic design and plan she had begun executing. Be true to the
people of South Africa. Serve them as she did.

Robala ka kgotso mme, Comrade Joyce, tsala. Re e tshwere tiro ya gago.
[Rest in peace, Madam. Comrade Joyce, friend. We are continuing with what
you started.] “Lala ngoxolo, Qabane wethu.” [Rest in peace, Comrade.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I made my own remarks at the memorial service
earlier on, so I will be very brief from the Chair.

I have lost a colleague whom I met every week for the past seven months
since we were appointed, because every day there was so much that we had to
consult about in the interest of the functioning of an institution we were
in charge of together for the first time after the elections.

She was a very strong leader, as everybody has said and as everybody knew
her. However, you will be surprised how reluctant she was and, in fact, I
will never forget the expression on her face, both when she was appointed
chairperson of the ANC caucus and when earlier she was appointed
Chairperson of the NCOP. She did not take anything for granted, and so you
can imagine that quality of person who is such a good leader but does not
go around promoting herself as such. In fact, I believe that in such a
person there is a lot of integrity, and that is the kind of person that we
have lost.

As the Minister of Education has said, when she was appointed Chairperson
of the NCOP, she literally cried and said: No, what am I expected to do
with the NCOP? I remember saying to her: In fact, you will do very well
and, as we have all heard, she did excellently in giving it leadership. We
really have lost a worthy South African.

I would now like to request members to rise and observe a moment of silence
in honour of her life. Thank you. Please be seated.
Hon members, a special copy of members’ contributions today will be sent to
the family to convey the sentiments conveyed by Parliament.

What now remains is for me to thank the choirs and the religious leaders
for their participation. I thank all the hon members who came from the
length and breadth of the country at short notice.  We really appreciate
your response. I thank the members of the media and all staff for their
role in organising both the official memorial service and this special
joint sitting at short notice, also.

That concludes the business of this sitting, and may I remind hon members
of the NCOP to meet briefly in the Chamber of the NCOP immediately after
the adjournment of this sitting.

Hon members must wait for the procession and remain seated while the
procession leaves the House.

The House adjourned at 15:15.


