---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 October 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-10-20
---

WEDNESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2004
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


           CONGRATULATIONS TO NATIONAL COMMISSIONER JACKIE SELEBI


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

        1) notes –


        (a)      the appointment of National Commissioner of the SA Police
              Service, Jackie Selebi, as the president of the International
              Police Organisation; and


        (b)      that Commissioner Selebi is the first African to hold this
              post.


   (2)      Recalls -


        (a)      the courageous commitment of Commissioner Selebi as Vice-
              President of Interpol for Africa since 2002; and


        (b)      that Interpol, with its 182 member states, facilitates
              cross-border co-operation and supports all authorities whose
              mission is to prevent or combat international crime;

   (3)      believes that Commissioner Selebi’s election will strengthen the
        AU’s role in the international arena, and his experience as
        Commissioner of the SA Police Service will prove valuable to
        Interpol member countries;


   (4)      endorses Commissioner Selebi’s commitment to help strengthen


   Interpol’s weaker regions; and


     2) congratulates Commissioner Selebi on his election as Interpol
        president, and wishes him all success.


Agreed to.




                      BEST WISHES TO KELEBOGILE MASEKO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J L FUBBS (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members of the House, the ANC
welcomes the assistance given by the MEC for health in the North West
Province to 16-year-old Kelebogile Maseko. She has been suffering from
kidney problems for some time and her family could not afford to pay her
escalating private medical bills for the treatment. Since her case came to
the attention of the MEC for health, Comrade Mandlenkosi Mayisela, a
possible donor has been found in her brother, Tshepo. The last blood tests
done on Kelebogile and her brother were found to be compatible.

The cost of private health care continues to exclude the poor, even in
moments of the most critical need. It is for this reason that the ANC
supports the efforts of the Ministry of Health to reduce

the general cost of health care in South Africa and for South Africans.

The ANC wishes Kelebogile Maseko a speedy recovery. [Applause.]


                          LAND REFORM DISCREPANCIES


                            (Member’s Statement)



Mr A H NEL (DA): Baie dankie, Voorsitter. Die SAKP se Rooi Oktober-veldtog
vir grondhervorming is hoogs onverantwoordelik en sal slegs meebring dat
onderhandelings vertraag word en rassespanning onnodig toeneem. Is die
werklike rede nie om ’n baie emosionele saak soos grondhervorming te
misbruik vir politieke doeleindes nie? Dit lyk asof Dr Nzimande, die leier
van die SAKP, se standpunt teen grondhervorming soos in die Grondwet
bepaal, ’n aanval is op sy alliansievennoot, die ANC se markgedrewe
ekonomiese beleid. Miskien moet die President miskien weer ’n slag die
ultralinkses vasvat. Meer onheilspellend nog, is dat Mayende, die DG vir
Grondsake hierdie veldtog verwelkom vir die politieke gewig wat die SAKP,
volgens hom, agter grondhervorming ingooi. Hierdie amptenaar van die staat
vereenselwig hom met beleidstandpunte wat direk indruis teen die Grondwet
van die land. Die algemene beleid van die regering, asook uitsprake oor
grondhervorming van die Minister van Landbou en Grondsake. Dit is hierdie
kontrasterende uitsprake tussen ’n Minister en haar amptenaar en tussen
alliansievennote wat vertroue in Suid-Afrika se ekonomiese stelsel en die
bestuur daarvan ondermyn en veroorsaak dat mense huiwerig is om hier te
belê.  [Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.]

[Mr A H NEL (DA): Thank you very much, Chairperson. The SACP’s Red October
campaign for land reform is highly irresponsible and will only result in
negotiations being delayed and racial tensions being increased
unnecessarily. Could the real reason not be that the very emotional issue
of land reform is being misused to serve political purposes? It seems as if
the standpoint of the leader of the SACP, Dr Nzimande, against land reform
as stipulated in the Constitution, is an attack on the market-driven
economic policy of its alliance partner, the ANC. Maybe the President
should tighten his hold on the ultra-left group again. What is even more
portentous is that the DG of Land Affairs, Mayende, welcomes this campaign
for the political clout that the SACP, according to him, is putting behind
land reform. This state official is identifying with policy standpoints
that are in direct opposition to the Constitution of the country, the
general policy of the government, and also pronouncements about land reform
by the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs. It is these contrasting
pronouncements between a Minister and her official and between alliance
partners that undermine confidence in South Africa’s economic system and
the management thereof, causing people to be hesitant to invest here.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Madam Deputy Chair, could
the officers please check the interpreting for us. We could not hear the
speaker because there was some American election campaign going on. So, we
couldn’t pick up the sound.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry about that, Minister. We will certainly attend to
that.


POLICE OFFICERS SUSPENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Deputy Chair, two police officers attached to
the Khayelitsha Magistrates’ Court have been suspended pending the outcome
of a criminal investigation. The two police officers were arrested on
charges of corruption after allegedly smuggling drugs to awaiting-trial
prisoners.

This type of behaviour from people who are supposed to uphold the law and
set an example is totally disgraceful. It is through these incidents that
corrupt and unlawful police officers tarnish the good name and reputation
of, and undermine the good work that is being done every day throughout the
country by many outstanding police officers.

These corrupt officers must be weeded out after thorough investigation,
dealt with if the public confidence is to be restored in the Police
Service, and fired thereafter.




                           WORLD OSTEOPOROSIS DAY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I M CACHALIA (ANC): Madam Chairperson, hon members of the House, today
the African National Congress joins the international community in
observing 20 October as World Osteoporosis Day. We affirm our commitment to
increasing the awareness of the condition of osteoporosis among South
Africans.

Osteoporosis is a condition whereby bones become porous and thus fragile
and weak, and are liable to break very easily. It is estimated that 1 in 3
women and 1 in 12 men will contract the condition during their lifetime.
Heavy drinking and smoking are significant contributors to this condition.

There are, however, natural ways to reduce the chances of contracting the
disease. Eating healthy food is one critical route; reducing weight through
natural means and exercising also plays an important role in the prevention
and management of the condition.

The ANC encourages all South Africans to adopt healthy eating habits, good
and sensible lifestyles and to exercise regularly.


                        INCREASE IN KIDNAPPING CASES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UDM): Madam Chair, the UDM is disturbed by an apparently
increasing trend towards the kidnapping of young people and children,
especially girl children, in the country.

Though some, like the case of Leigh Matthews, become headline news, many of
these cases are hardly reported in the media. However, it seems that these
cases are prevalent throughout the country.

We call upon government to create immediate response units across the
country to ensure that the moment a person is reported missing, a dedicated
team of specially trained officers take charge of the case. It seems that
often the people who are kidnapped in these circumstances have one or two
days before the inevitable murder occurs. The police’s ability to respond
quickly and effectively to make use of this window of opportunity in the
first two days is therefore of paramount importance.

While most police officers are dedicated and committed to serving their
communities, the complexities and time constraints of kidnapping cases are
factors that they are simply not trained to deal with.

We contend that the current child protection units should have dedicated,
trained officers who can be called upon whenever a case of this nature is
reported. In this way, we can save not only … [Time expired.]




           PROPOSED TOLL ROAD A THREAT TO DUNE MINING IN PONDOLAND





                            (Member’s Statement)


Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Madam Chair, the Independent Democrats call on the
government to be transparent in its handling of the proposed N2 toll road
and dune mining in the Pondoland region. The proposed developments threaten
to irrevocably change the region and a vision needs to be drawn up with all
role-players and local people for the area. This has often been stated by
Minister Van Schalkwyk, but the ID has seen very little action to back up
his words.

At a meeting with the Pondoland Royal House in July, the ministerial
delegation attempted to lock out all other stakeholders from the meeting.
Thankfully, they failed, but departmental officials did manage to bar the
media from the event. The ID finds these actions completely unacceptable
and against the spirit of transparency.

A speech was then given to certain members of the media at a press
conference held at Umtata. It was passed off as being a speech by King
Sigcau and in it support is given to both the mining and N2 toll road. I
heard every word of the king’s speech, and he certainly did not give his
support to these developments.

Minister Van Schalkwyk also assured the Royal House that he would run full
public participation processes with the people of Pondoland. It has been
three months and still we see no action. Instead we hear of media
walkabouts being planned with select members of the press and the Director-
General of Environmental Affairs and Tourism. It is not the media that the
government needs to talk to. They need to listen to the people of
Pondoland. The ID calls on the Minister to live up to his word and run
these processes in a transparent and inclusive manner.


                       GOVERNMENT’S ABORTION CAMPAIGN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C DUDLEY (ACDP): Madam Chair, health committees and provincial
legislatures have been discussing the abortion amendment Bill this past
week, but the public have been refused the opportunity to make submissions.

Government is proceeding with the further liberalisation of the abortion
law, which will put increased pressure on pro-life health professionals to
do their abortions for them. The nurses’ union, DENOSA, has repeatedly said
two thirds of their members are against abortion, but it is clear that
government is intent on imposing these amendments on South Africans; once
again determined to ignore the will of the majority on this issue as they
did in 1996.

A recent HSRC study confirms that more than half of South Africans are of
the opinion that abortion is wrong under any circumstances, with 64% of
this number being the opinion of black South Africans. Many more believe it
is wrong but acknowledge specific circumstances.

Doctors for Life in South Africa have questioned the legality of the
process going on in the provinces at present where the public and
interested bodies like themselves have been denied the right to make
submissions on the Bill.

The purpose of the new Bill is to make abortions more accessible but no
attempt has been made to rectify the appalling deficiencies of the present
legislation whereby mandatory provisions for counselling and obtaining the
patient’s informed consent are often flagrantly ignored. In addition,
despite the fact that the purpose is to increase demand and delivery of
abortions, nothing has been done to ensure personnel will be available to
carry out the task.

It is of course well known that government expects doctors and nurses to
take part in abortions regardless of their convictions and this Bill
clearly claims to facilitate greater participation.


                  GREAT ARTS AND CULTURAL FESTIVAL - MACUFE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mofumahatsana K R MAGAU(ANC): Modulasetulo, mokete o moholo wa matsatsi a
leshome wa bonono le botjhaba ba Afrika, Macufe, o sa tswa ho feta ka
katleho e kgolo matsatsing a tswa feta. Mokete ona o bontshitse moya o
motle o renang ka hara naha dilemong tse leshome tsena tsa tokoloho eo re e
ketekang. Makgolo a mabedi a dikete tsa batho a bile teng moketeng ona wa
Macufe, hoo ho bileng le ditholwana tse ntle moruong wa baahi ba
Freisetata. Katleho ena e netefaditse hore Macufe e na le thaka tse mmalwa
haholo ka hare ho naha.

Macufe e itshupile hantle jwalo ka sebaka se kgethehileng sa ho bontsha
bonono le botjhaba ba Afrika le ba matjhaba a fapaneng ka ho neha monyetla
ho bomaithutwane ho tsa bonono le botjhaba moketeng o moholo hakaale. Mmuso
wa Freisetata, bahwebi le setjhaba, ba bontshitse kamano tsena di
phapaleditse moruo matla a kgolo, haholo Mangaung.

Mokgatlo o moholo wa ANC re itumeletse ha Macufe e tsepamisa tsamaiso ya
setjhaba ka setjhaba molemong wa sona le boAfrika Borwa ba rona boo re leng
motlotlo ka bona. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]  (Translation of Sotho member’s
statement follows.)

  Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Chairperson, the ten-day African arts and cultural
  festival, Macufe, was successfully hosted during the past few days. This
  festival was a manifestation of the good spirit prevalent in the country
  over the last ten years of freedom we are celebrating. Two hundred
  thousand people attended Macufe, and that had a positive impact on the
  wealth of the citizens of the Free State province. This phenomenal
  success has ensured that Macufe has few competitors nationally.


  Macufe has proved itself beyond doubt to be a venue conducive to
  showcasing African arts and culture internationally by giving
  opportunities to beginners in arts and culture to display their talent in
  such a big festival. The Free State provincial government, business and
  the people have all shown that such relations have a great potential for
  economic growth, especially in Bloemfontein.


  As a big ANC party, we are pleased because Macufe focuses on
  administration of the people by the people for their benefit, and on our
  being South African, which we are proud of. Thank you.  [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the House knows that Macufe is a wonderful
acronym for the Mangaung Cultural Festival.


                                DARFUR CRISIS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D H M GIBSON (DA): Madam Chairperson, Chad, Sudan, Egypt, Libya and
Nigeria announced this week that Darfur is an African problem needing an
African solution. They are quite wrong. Darfur has been described as the
world’s greatest humanitarian crisis. This being so, it is a problem for
the whole international community, not just Africa.

I want to warn against declarations made, knowing that the AU does not have
the resources to make a meaningful difference in Darfur. False challenges
for the AU will simply undermine it and discredit it before it has got off
the ground. The international community has a responsibility as large as
Africa’s. We need money and resources to help alleviate the suffering and
the human tragedy which is unfolding before the averted eyes of many. South
Africa must use its prestige to persuade the rest of the world to assist
the African Union. We must not be accused of having pursued quiet diplomacy
in the face of the displacement of a million people and the rape and murder
of tens of thousands of others. [Applause.]


                         ROAD CARNAGE IN NORTH WEST


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP): Madam Chair, the UCDP has noted with concern the
carnage caused on the roads between Koster, Lichtenburg and Mafikeng in the
North West. This is because the road between Swartruggens and Zeerust has
become very expensive owing to the exorbitant charges at the tollgate.

The bypass through Boshoek, Tlokweng and Pella is also of concern as the
congested traffic passes through these villages en route to either Botswana
or Mafikeng. This traffic consists mainly of trucks. Both these roads have
now become killer roads. It should also be noted that these roads have not
been designed to carry such heavy traffic.

The intervention of the Department of Transport will be highly appreciated
because the Botswana government has also imposed a levy of 40 pula for
every car entering Botswana from South Africa. Previously, South Africans
only paid 10 pula for the whole year, as opposed to 40 pula for every trip
you undertake to Botswana. Thank you.




           CONGRATULATIONS TO WINNERS OF COMMUNITY BUILDER AWARDS





                            (Member’s Statement)


Nkskz B TINTO (ANC): Umbutho wesizwe I-ANC uvuyisana kwaye wothulela
umnqwazi lamaqobokazana angamashumi amathathu anesithandathu (36)
ngokuphumelela kwabo iimbasa ngenxa yemisebenzi ekuhlaleni. Baphumelele
imbasa eyaziwa njenge-Women Waging Peace Award. Baphumelele le mbasa ngenxa
yemisebenzi efana nokulwa ubukrelemnqa, ukulwa ukuxhatshazwa kwabafazi
kunye nabantwana.

La maqobokazana enza lemisebenzi engajonge ntlawulo okanye nzuzo koko
kukuthanda abantu. Unkskz Nono Silimela waseNyanga East, uNkskz Gladys
Mjezu wase New Crossroads, uNkskz Roeda Gallant wase Manenberg kunye nomama
Aziza Rasoel ngamanye amakhosikazi athe aphumelela lembasa. La maqobokazana
angumzekelo omhle kwaye angumngeni kulutsha lwanamhlanje ukuba lufake
isandla ekwakhiweni kwesizwe nokulwa intlupheko nendlala ekuhlaleni.
Ndiyabulela. [Kuyaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa member’s statement
follows.)

[Mrs B TINTO (ANC): The people’s organisation, the ANC, congratulates and
takes its hat off to 36 working women for winning awards due to their
service in the community. They won the award known as the Women Waging
Peace Award. They won this award due to services such as their fight
against crime and against the abuse of women and children.

These working women perform these services without expecting any
remuneration or benefit, but just for the love of the people. Mrs Nono
Silimela of Nyanga East, Mrs Gladys Mjezu of New Crossroads, Mrs Roeda
Gallant of Manenberg and Mrs Aziza Rasoel are some of the women who won
this award. These women are a good example and a challenge to today’s youth
to contribute to community building and the alleviation of poverty in our
community. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                     COSATU AND THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Geagte Voorsitter, lede van die publiek het met
verbystering kennis geneem van Cosatu se roekelose aanslag op deelnemende
regering. Die media berig dat Cosatu met die ANC se nasionale koukus
beraadslaag het en aangedring het op voorkeurbehandeling wat betref die
parlementêre strukture in die bepaling van nasionale beleid. Dit skep
noodwendig ’n ondraaglike situasie omdat Cosatu in dieselfde verklaring die
sakesektor, wat verantwoordelik is vir die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie, as
magte van vernietiging beskryf.

Cosatu maak daarop aanspraak dat hy ’n inspraak het in die samestelling van
die regering - dit terwyl sy lede net uit 1,3 miljoen mense bestaan, wat
slegs 3% van die bevolking in Suid-Afrika verteenwoordig. Cosatu behoort
duidelik kennis te neem dat hy nie deur kiesers verkies is om op ’n
politieke grondslag te regeer nie, en dat die vakbondorganisasie in terme
van individuele steun geen legitimiteit geniet as ’n politieke party nie.

Dit sal ’n kwade dag in Suid-Afrika se geskiedenis en vir die demokrasie
wees indien die ANC hom aan sy neus sal laat rondlei deur ’n klein, nie-
politieke organisasie. Dit is ook kommerwekkend dat die ANC nog nie
sedertdien standpunt ingeneem het teen Cosatu se opdringerigheid van
deelnemende regeerder nie. Dit skep die persepsie dat die ANC-meerderheid
gedienstig is aan die Cosatu minderheid se arrogante eise. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Hon Chairperson, members of the public have taken
note of Cosatu’s reckless attack on participatory government with some
perplexity. The media reports that Cosatu has deliberated with the ANC’s
national caucus and has insisted on preferential treatment regarding the
parliamentary structures in determining national policy.  This unavoidably
creates an intolerable situation as Cosatu has, in the same statement,
described the business sector, which is responsible for the South African
economy, as powers of destruction.

Cosatu lays claim to having a say in the constitution of the government –
this when its members comprise only 1,3 million people, which represents
merely 3% of the population of South Africa. Cosatu should clearly note
that it has not been elected by voters to govern on a political basis, and
that the trade union organisation cannot lay claim to any legitimacy as a
political party on the grounds of  individual support.

It will be a dark day in the history of South Africa and for democracy if
the ANC allows itself to be led by the nose by a small nonpolitical
organisation. It is also worrying that the ANC has since then not taken a
stand against Cosatu’s obtrusiveness as an element of participatory
government.  This creates the perception that the ANC majority is
subservient to the arrogant demands of the Cosatu minority. [Applause.]]

              EDUCATION NEEDED ON HIV/AIDS AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M M MDLALOSE (IFP): Madam Chair, a study published recently in the
British Medical Journal which was based on a national survey of nearly 300
000 children, aged between 10 and 19 years old, and taken from 5 162
classes in 1 481 South African schools, has revealed some very alarming and
disturbing views on sex and violence, as well as HIV and Aids.

Many of the children believe that raping someone you know or unwanted
touching are not seen as examples of sexual violence. If we are to overcome
and survive the HIV/Aids pandemic, as well as put an end to the culture of
sexual violence that is plaguing our country, we have to start by ensuring
that our youth are better educated and informed on these issues.

Government, parents, teachers and all other relevant parties should
intensify efforts to try and educate our youth on issues such as HIV/Aids
and sexual violence so as to wipe out the frightening and inaccurate
misconceptions that many still have on these issues.

                       ARTWORKS IN FOYER OF PARLIAMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D V BLOEM (ANC): Chairperson, on entering the Chamber this afternoon,
hon members would have passed an exhibition of portraits of Cabinet
Ministers, including that of President Mbeki and Deputy President Jacob
Zuma in the exhibition area within Parliament.

This is no ordinary exhibition. It is an exhibition of the artwork of a
young man named Gareth James. He hails from Belhar on the Cape Flats, and
he is incarcerated in Goodwood Correctional Centre. He is one of thousands
of young men and women in correctional centres throughout the country. He
is paying his debt to society for a crime that he has committed and been
convicted for.

His talents and skills with paintbrushes are nurtured in prison. He is part
of a generation of our youth caught up in crime. Prison should not be the
place for him and others such as him. Through the rehabilitation programmes
of Correctional Services young Gareth is given a second chance in life.

The ANC believes that we must become aware of the wasted skills and talents
that are behind prison walls. In fighting the scourge of crime, we must
give more Gareths hope for the future and assist them in becoming our
future leaders, artists and entrepreneurs. Well done, Gareth! [Applause.]



                              LAND RESTITUTION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I want to thank
my colleague, Minister Manuel, for helping we with the translation of the
statement of the hon member, which I didn’t hear. When I listened to the
interpreting earlier, I really thought I was in Washington or somewhere in
California, listening to the campaign and the assessment of how the race
for President is going in the US. But I am in South Africa.

An HON MEMBER: How is it going?

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Well, I would have loved to
tell you, but it will take my time and the hon Chairperson will ask me to
sit down.

I have noted the concern raised by the member, but I don’t agree with the
statement that the campaign by the SACP would in any way undermine the
economic policy of the ANC with regard to the land reform issue. That I
would not agree to. Probably, it is necessary for me to indicate to the hon
member that the alliance is a strategic alliance. As independent bodies
with views on matters, sometimes we agree and sometimes we don’t. That
doesn’t mean that we are not in alliance.

So, in this instance, regarding the campaign of Red October, the SACP is
within its rights to express its view, as your own party at some stage did
express its view on the basic income grant, and interestingly at that time
you were on the same side as the SACP, Cosatu and the SACC on the matter.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] That didn’t make a shift in any economic policy or
in the social policy we have chosen.

But nonetheless, on the issue of the civil servants and how they express
themselves, I’ll take note of that matter and have discussions with the
director-general regarding the matters you have raised.

Indeed, all of us will appreciate that the land matter is a very emotive
issue and not an easy one, but with humility and responsibility we need to
find the solution to this challenge. Obviously, as we move towards the
deadline of meeting particularly the restitution cases, there will be all
sorts of emotions expressed, as we have seen also in the hearings that have
taken place. I therefore hope that the member, with others and myself in
this House, will ensure that we support the resolution of this matter in a
manner that is amicable and that creates stability in our country. Thank
you. [Applause.]

                     COSATU AND THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Xa engafun’ ukusebenza ndithini? [If someone does
not want to work, how do I made them work?] Chair, I just want to inform
the House that Cosatu is the biggest labour movement in this country. It is
an organisation that has been tried and tested in the struggle in this
country. They fought for our liberation; they fought for our freedom. In
1994 workers of this country put us where we are today. This democracy
belongs to the workers of this country. It belongs to Cosatu.

Yes, we have political freedom, but Cosatu knows - like I know, like the
ANC knows, like the SACP knows - that we have not achieved economic
freedom. [Applause.] It is therefore crucially important for Cosatu to
continue to raise these issues until we achieve the economic freedom that
we have been fighting for in this country of ours. We are not here to
represent our jackets; we are representing those members who elected us.
Viva, Cosatu, Viva! [Applause.]


                       ARTWORKS IN FOYER OF PARLIAMENT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, as much as we have zero
tolerance on crime, we have to be humane when dealing with offenders. These
jackets represent human beings who wear them and who have made mistakes in
society. We have to be humane when we correct them.

I want to thank the hon member for bringing to the attention of this House
the artistic abilities of Gareth James and the plight that faces juveniles
and young people in correctional centres throughout our country. Gareth
James is serving a 10-year sentence at Goodwood Correctional Centre. He is
26 years old and is sitting up there in the public gallery.

He is one of the thousands of young people in our prisons. This is no place
for them, but they have offended society. I fully agree with this and they
must pay their debt to society. However, their incarceration should never
be punitive in nature. It should rather be directed at them as they accept
responsibility for their actions, as they correct their offending behaviour
and prepare themselves for the day when they are released and integrated
back into society.

Gareth is no different from those. He has such ideals and wants to forge a
career out of his artistic skills. Before entering prison, he had never
painted in oil and had never had formal training. He wants a qualification
that will prepare him for life after his release.

As the Department of Correctional Services, we can offer him the materials
to engage in his God-given talent. But, we are also asking society out
there to assist us. The first seat of correction is the family. If the
family is not playing its role in carrying out corrections, our jails will
be overflowing with young people who should not be in jail, such as Gareth.
[Applause.]


                          POLICE OFFICERS SUSPENDED


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Chairperson, there are three
statements that were made today that fall within the ambit of my line
function. I am going to respond to those statements. I am wondering if I
should not also respond to something that was said here yesterday.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Minister, I think you should confine
yourself to today’s discussion.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. The first matter
was, of course, raised by the hon Ndlovu. I am very happy that he raised
the question of misdemeanour on the part of some of our police officers. He
was correct when he said that there are many we arrest who act in the way
that those two police officers at Khayelitsha acted. We are going to deal
with people like that because they do not belong in the Service when they
do not service our people in ways that are prescribed in terms of our
programme for safety and security in this country.

I am therefore responding to your question and, at the same time, sounding
a further warning to police officers who act in this way. They are going to
be arrested and prosecuted. As I say, there are a number of examples of
instances when we have acted in that way.

A UDM member talked about kidnapping and made reference to the abduction
and murder of Leigh Matthews. The member also made a suggestion about
specialised units to deal with matters such as this. I would like to
indicate that, indeed, we have well-trained police officers. The mere fact
that they were able to investigate as thoroughly and as exhaustively as
they did in order to arrest the …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Hon Minister, your time has expired.
But please continue and finish off your sentence.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: I am responding to three statements.
The first statement related to what the hon Ndlovu had raised. I am now
dealing with the second statement from the UDM member.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Minister, if I understand correctly,
Ministers have two minutes within which they have to respond. There is a
maximum of five ministerial responses and we allow two minutes per
Minister’s response.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: Fine then, but not unless you are
suggesting that I have already exhausted my six minutes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, may I suggest that the hon Minister acquaints
himself with the Rules with regard to members’ statements. You are quite
right that in actual fact the Minister has two minutes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Thank you. Hon Minister, that is the
position. However, there is one more opportunity for a Minister to respond.
If no other Minister is going to respond, perhaps you would like to take
those two minutes and continue.

Mr T M MASUTHA: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order: I just wanted to
find out, if you could rule, at what stage Mr Mike Ellis acquired the
status of a presiding officer to make rulings on these questions.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): I think I could have managed that
one by myself. Thank you very much. Minister, there is an opportunity of
two minutes. If you wish, you could continue to respond.

The MINISTER FOR SAFETY AND SECURITY: I want to use those two minutes to
apologise to you if I have violated the Rules of this House. I wish to
indicate that throughout, from when we started this exercise, I was under
the impression - and in fact this what I had done - that each statement
merited two minutes in answer. But, if that is wrong, I apologise.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): Thank you very much. May I just,
perhaps, spell out for the House the Rule that does exist which states that
a maximum of five ministerial responses are allowed. A response should not
exceed two minutes. The executive is recognised in the following order: the
Minister, Deputy Minister and Minister of the same cluster. Therefore, I
wish to repeat again: There is an opportunity for a fifth response,
Minister. Feel free to use it.

Thank you. If not, then we will proceed. The Secretary will read the first
Order of the Day.

               CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE

                    ON FINANCE - SECURITIES SERVICES BILL


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                          SECURITIES SERVICES BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the Security
Services Bill brings regulation and supervision of South Africa’s capital
markets, including the custody and administration of securities, the
provision of clearing have services and the control of market abuses in
line with international standards on securities regulation. The Bill
consolidates and modernises provisions contained in the following four
pieces of legislation: The Stock Exchanges Control Act, the Financial
Markets Control Act, the Custody and Administration of Securities Act and
the Insider Trading Act. The Bill also repeals these four Acts.

The objects of the Bill before the House are, firstly, to increase
confidence in the South African financial markets by requiring that
securities services are provided in a fair, efficient and transparent
manner; secondly, to promote the protection of regulated persons and their
clients; thirdly, to reduce systemic risks in our markets, and fourthly, to
promote the international competitiveness of the securities services in our
markets.

I would like to highlight new features contained in this Bill, which relate
to previously unregulated matters. These are the following: Firstly, there
is the business of buying and selling unlisted securities. The registrar
may under certain circumstances prohibit a person from carrying on such
businesses or impose certain conditions thereon. Secondly, regarding the
reporting of off-market transactions in listed securities, it is only
prudent that such transactions are reported to the registrar and to the
relevant exchange on which the securities concerned are listed. This is
also an approach followed internationally. Thirdly, in the Bill provision
has been made for the registrar to assume responsibility for the functions
normally performed by an exchange if it is considered necessary to do so.

In future, approval to be a nominee who acts as a registered holder of
securities on behalf of other persons will be required. The nominee will
either have to be approved by the relevant exchange, the central securities
depository or the registrar. We also make provision for the demutualisation
of self-regulatory organisations under the ambit of the Bill, and for the
possibility of the amalgamation of two or more exchanges or central
securities depositories. This is a forward-looking provision that reflects
the flexibility of the Bill.

The regulation of demutualisation amalgamation of such bodies has become
necessary in the wake of international trends. At the 1999 annual meeting
of the World Federation of Exchanges at least 46 of its 52 members
indicated that they were in the process of demutualisation or were
intending to demutualise.

Lastly, let me mention that the Bill also establishes an enforcement
committee with the power to impose an administrative sanction on a person
who fails to comply with the provisions of the Bill. Insider trading is to
be dealt with severely. The fine for what is broadly termed “market abuse”
has been increased substantially to a fine not exceeding R50 million, or
imprisonment for a period not greater than 10 years, or both.

I hereby present the Securities Services Bill to the House for
consideration and approval. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Madam Chairperson, hon members, from the start I would like
to bring to the attention of the House that the Bill is also available in
isiZulu.

Certain Bills that our committee deals with are of a highly technical
nature and this Bill is one of them. I ask myself how this Bill will
improve the lives of the people in my constituency. Will it make a
difference in the lives of the majority of people who voted for the ANC? I
do not have a clear yes or no answer, but what I can say is that we need to
regulate the South African financial markets to ensure that revenue that is
due is collected, and by achieving this we then can insure that the income
that we do derive from this Bill will be spent, especially on the poor.

The word “security” basically means an undertaking of payment for loans and
to give a guarantee to do so by pledging the transaction on documentation.
As evidence of the loan, certificates of stocks, bonds, etc are used. And
if you do not honour this agreement, you forfeit whatever you agreed on as
security.

The general public is aware of security transactions when they purchase a
house or a motor vehicle. The asset that you purchase is used as security.
For security, companies also use the projected goods or stock that they
will manufacture, or in the case of a mining company the minerals that will
be mined are used as security. Countries, for example, also use their
expected revenue as security to secure loans. That is why the first thing
to be paid from our country’s budget is the service cost and interest of
our debt.

In financial markets there is buying, investing and selling of different
types of financial instruments. These services are offered by financial
institutions and individuals and therefore must be regulated.

This Act aims to increase confidence in the South African financial markets
by requiring that securities services be provided in a fair, efficient and
transparent manner; to contribute to the maintenance of a stable financial
market environment; to promote the protection of regulated persons and
clients; to reduce systematic risk and to promote the international
competitiveness of securities services in the Republic.

Therefore, organisations or individuals that offer these services will be
regulated according to the rules as spelt out in this Bill, giving
guidelines to the buyer and the seller.

The Bill before us consolidates, amends, repeals and also corrects and
improves certain Acts relating to investments. The Acts that will be
affected are: The Stock Exchanges Control Act, the Financial Markets
Control Act, the Custody and Administration of Securities Act, the Insider
Trading Act, the Financial Services Board Act, the Companies Act and the
Insolvency Act.

New features in this Bill create the possibility for emergence of separate
institutions dealing with different functions, for example trading clearing
houses and warehousing. It also consolidates and tightens up on insider
trading. Historically, little effective legislation existed and insiders
enriched themselves at the expense of the public.

This Bill provides for a modernisation and a more effective securities
trading environment. National Treasury has supported proposals for South
Africa to emerge as a securities trading centre, serving the African market
as well as the South African market.

It will bring the regulation and supervision of all aspects of South
African financial markets in line with international development and
regulatory standards. South African has been a member of the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions since 1992 and therefore must abide
by their objectives and principles regarding securities regulations, which
are internationally regarded as containing the minimum standards of a law
regulating securities services.

Our financial markets must be regulated. South Africa has been praised for
the efficient running of its financial markets. Compared to other emerging
markets, we achieved an impressive phase of vast financial market
improvements. Among 22 of the world’s emerging markets, a London-based
international rating agency placed South Africa in seventh place. South
Africa was the only African market included in the world’s top 24.

In drafting this Bill a broad consultative process was followed, and none
of the institutions and persons consulted opposed the Bill.

Finally, I am sure that I can speak on behalf of the committee to express
our appreciation to the members of the National Treasury and Sars who have
this enormous volume of work on taxation laws that they produce year after
year. I want to appeal to the Minister to closely watch for burnout and
fatigued staff members and to introduce a burnout leave system. We must
look after such dedicated staff to ensure that the good work continues. The
ANC supports the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the
Securities Services Bill is a very technical Bill and a lengthy piece of
legislation that aims at consolidating the Stock Exchanges Control Act of
1985, the Financial Markets Control Act of 1989, the Custody and
Administration of Securities Act of 1992 and the Insider Trading Act of
1998. What is significant is that the amended Act adds a significant number
of new provisions to the Bill.

The Bill also amends section 91A of the Companies Act, 1973, section 1 of
the Financial Services Board Act, 1990 and section 35A of the Insolvency
Act of 1936.

This Bill was drafted based upon principles set out by the International
Organisation of Securities Commissions, IOSCO, the Financial System
Stability Assessment Programme of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. This Bill relates directly to the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange, the only licenced stock exchange in South Africa and, in
particular, to stockbrokers. On page 59 of the Bill, a number of
significant empirical statistics are mentioned.

In March 2003, 566 individuals were members of the SA Institute of
Stockbrokers, practising in 66 member firms of the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange. The number of companies with equity shares listed on  the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange was 463, in March 2003. The average number of
trades per day, in March 2003, was 14 266. Market capitalisation of all
securities listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange amounted to R1 461
billion, on 28 February 2003, ranking the Johannesburg Stock Exchange as
the 17th largest stock exchange.

The Bill also relates to derivative instruments, namely the Financial
Derivatives Division and the Agricultural Products Derivatives Division.
The Bill also regulates the Board Exchange of South Africa, which is the
only licensed financial exchange listing debt securities in Africa.

South Africa is becoming one of the most sought-after emerging markets, as
the rand has retained remarkable currency strength against the currencies
of our major trading partners in the past fiscal year.

Suid-Afrika kan slegs sy posisie as ‘n gesogte beleggingsbestemming behou
indien daar ‘n deursigtige, regverdige stelsel van wette bestaan wat
beleggers se belange beskerm en wat gemeet kan word aan internasionale
standaarde. Die DA is van mening dat hierdie wetsontwerp sistemiese risiko
rakende finansiële instrumente sal verminder, binnehandel rakende koop en
verkoop van aandele sal ontmoedig en ‘n kultuur van sakevertroue op die
Johannesburgse Aandelebeurs sal aanmoedig. Dit kan vermeld word dat daar
met ‘n breë spektrum van belanghebbende finansiële instellings geskakel is
rakende die gegewe wetsontwerp en dat die Finansiële Diensteraad dié
wetsontwerp vir kommentaardoeleindes op hul webtuiste vir ‘n geruime tyd al
vertoon het.

Die DA ondersteun die wetsontwerp. Die waarde van dié wet is dat die
prosedure waarvolgens transaksies rakende sekuriteite vir handel duidelik
volgens internasionaal voorgeskrewe standaarde omskryf word. Hierdie
wetsontwerp se sterk punt is dat binnehandel as verskynsel deeglik omskryf
word en dat persone wat oor inligting beskik, tot voor- of nadeel van
aandeelhouers, vervolg kan word.

‘n Verdere betekenisvolle veranderlike rakende die wetsontwerp is dat die
wetsontwerp geen finansiële gevolge vir die fiskus inhou nie. Voorsitter,
ek dank u.  (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[South Africa will only be able to maintain its position as a sought-after
investment destination if there is a transparent, fair system of laws that
protects the interests of investors and that complies with international
standards. The DA is of the opinion that this Bill will reduce systemic
risk with regard to financial instruments, discourage insider trading
regarding the buying and selling of shares and promote a culture of
business confidence in the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. It is worth
mentioning that consultation concerning this Bill has taken place across a
broad spectrum of financial institutions and that the Financial Services
Board has posted this Bill on its website for comment for a considerable
period of time.

The DA supports this Bill. The value of this legislation is that the
procedure regarding transactions relating to securities for trade is
clearly defined in accordance with internationally prescribed standards.
This Bill’s strength lies in the fact that insider trading as a phenomenon
is clearly defined and that persons in possession of information, to the
advantage or disadvantage of shareholders, can be prosecuted.

A further meaningful variable regarding the Bill is that the Bill has no
financial consequences for the fiscus. Chairperson, I thank you.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Chair, this Bill seeks to consolidate the various Acts
mentioned under the scope of the Bill. Apart from correcting and improving
the repealed Acts, the Bill seeks to add a significant number of new
provisions to those Acts. Some of the new provisions relate to previously
unregulated matters. This is to bring the regulation and supervision of all
aspects of the South African financial markets in line with international
developments and regulatory standards.

The approach proposed is that off-market transactions in listed securities
be allowed between financial institutions, subject to reporting
requirements to the registrar and the exchange on which the securities are
listed. The purpose of the relevant clauses of the Bill is to give the
Financial Services Board more effective and expeditious enforcement.

A person, and not only an association of persons, as is currently the case,
may apply for an exchange licence. The same applies to a central securities
depository licence and a clearing house licence.
The alternative approach that has been adopted is that all secondary
markets should be regarded as exchanges, all of which are subject to the
same basic requirements. Market or price manipulation, as described in the
Bill, and making false, misleading or deceptive statements, promises and
forecasts, in respect of listed securities and public companies, fall under
the Director of Market Abuse.

As the Bill seeks to consolidate the repealed Acts, it is expected that the
majority of the provisions of the Bill embrace the subject matter of the
repealed Acts.

The IFP supports the Bill.

Mr Y WANG: Thank you, Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members and, indeed,
those who are watching TV now. [Laughter.]

An HON MEMBER: Will they spot you?

Mr Y WANG: Yes, they must have spotted me by now. [Laughter.] The ID
supports this Bill, because the consolidation of this legislation from bits
and pieces into one piece of legislation is consumer friendly and is good
for the public.

As a member of the Y generation, I would like us to appeal to the Cabinet
and to hon members that we would like to see more electronic legislation-
related Bills and a move towards e-government.

I fully support the Bill and I hope this hon member will remember my
appeal. Thank you.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, this Bill is a confidence builder in our
financial markets and to our securities services providers. When it comes
to markets, confidence is a vital ingredient. People worldwide have
confidence in structures that they recognise and understand.

This modernisation and streamlining of the four pieces of legislation, as
well as the updating thereof and the creating of consistency, brings us in
line with the best practice in the world. The legislation reduces systemic
risk, increases international competitiveness and reduces risk.

Of course, when one reduces risk, one reduces the cost of trading, and when
you reduce the cost of trading you stimulate business; when you stimulate
investment, you create jobs, and when you create jobs, the ACDP will always
support the measure.

Our congratulations to the Minister, the department and the over 80
different institutions that have an interest in the legislation, and which
were consulted. This has indeed been an example of taking government to the
people. We support the measure. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, the trading of shares in companies is one of
the most fascinating features of any free market. The way in which a
perfect market rewards performance, on the one hand, and punishes failure,
on the other, has formed the basis for all classical economic theories in
the past.

The markets are, however, not always accurate in establishing the true
state of affairs in a company, and some of the worst corporate failures in
history, such as Enron, in the United States, and even Saambou Bank,
locally, have come as a total surprise to most individual shareholders. It
is therefore crucial that investors in shares should be put in as close to
an equal position as possible as those people who know the companies best.

The challenge always is to limit regulation of markets to the bare minimum
necessary to force imperfect markets towards perfection. It is doubted
whether it will ever be possible to ensure that directors or other so-
called insiders do not trade their personal shares without consideration of
their superior knowledge of the company in question. Any effort, however,
to limit and punish insider trading should be applauded. We therefore
support the Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, this Bill is aimed at the consolidation of
affected, outdated Acts and their repeal, such as the Stock Exchanges
Control Act of 1985 and other related Acts.

Legislation is promulgated to protect citizens of our country from all
forms of abuse.

The Financial Markets Advisory Board was established by section 3 of the
Financial Markets Control Act. This Act was repealed by section 117 but
still exists to date. This abnormality will be addressed by the
introduction of this Securities Services Bill.

Our country is still in a developmental phase. The first decade of our
democracy was mostly used to scrutinise past laws and establish new
policies and laws suited to all the citizens of our country. We are living
in a global village and our membership of recognised international
organisations, such as the International Organisation of Securities
Commissions, will pay dividends for our fiscal discipline. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chair, the Securities Services Bill consolidates a number
of Bills and in addition provides for a number of new provisions with
regard to these sectors.

In today’s times when we talk about the JSE, many people prick up their
ears and there is concern about investments.  A huge instrument of income
and investment, the JSE is the only licensed stock exchange in South Africa
and it shows that South Africa is a competitor in the global market.

The MF supports the Bill aimed at attaining a stable financial market
environment. This will lead to the establishment of South Africa’s
securities services as an international competitor. This Bill is applicable
to the necessary parties and clearly defines securities services.

The MF notes that the Bill clearly is aimed at preventing the offences
related to the prohibitions in clause 4. We further support the
establishment of a self-regulatory organisation. It also deals with the
functions of a number of other bodies and the new provisions appear to be
well established.

The MF seeks a stronger South African market and to promote South Africa as
a strong global competitor. The MF supports the Securities Services Bill.
Thank you, Chair.

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, hon Minister, from the outset our challenge is
that of demystifying this very important piece of legislation to our
economy. In introducing this Bill, allow me to go back 49 years to when the
Freedom Charter declared:

      The people shall share in the country’s wealth; all other industry and
      trade shall be controlled to assist the wellbeing of the people.

The Freedom Charter is further enhanced by the Reconstruction and
Development Programme that states, among other things, that it seeks to
meet the basic needs of our people via sustainable economic growth.

The latest BEE Charter and the subsequent legislation are some of the
milestones that take us forward to a transformed society that is nonracial,
nonsexist and democratic through a deracialised economy. Guided by the
Nedlac Financial Services Summit agreements, the industry initiated a
Financial Services Charter, which further includes a need to unlock and
enhance domestic and international commerce through a transformed sector
that is transparent and reflective of the demographics of our society.

Lastly, the Financial Services Charter commits itself and the industry to
job creation and access to financial services for the poor. The objects of
the Bill above state that it seeks
to create securities services that are transparent and aligned to the
demands and challenges of the transformation of our society, especially in
the economic sphere that still remains the domain of white business. Our
experiences of BEE listings continue to be a worrying factor in this
regard. As we speak, these account for a mere 3% of the total listed stocks
on the JSE securities exchange.

The opportunities for job creation and poverty eradication from these
financial services, especially guided by the charter, are the following:
for those of our young people who graduate from colleges, it offers them
training and learnership programmes. The charter also purports to advance a
programme that looks at a 50% procurement service to be in the hands of BEE
entities by the year 2008. The charter also advances a programme of
mentorship and, lastly, it advances gender equity in our society,
especially in our economic sphere.

The ANC believes that via these opportunities a new graduate will find
experience opportunities and that the inexperienced will be monitored. Our
BEE will be equitably empowered and our society will be better represented
by a financial service that balances gender participation in its makeup.

We trust that, mystified as it was, this Bill is now demystified, and we
are now able to relate to it, especially in relation to job creation and
poverty eradication.

The ANC supports this Bill. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson. Let me
express appreciation to all the parties for supporting the Bill. I would
like to draw the attention of the hon Rajbally to the fact that the JSE is
not the only registered exchange; there is also the Bond Exchange and AltX,
each of which will define its own rules. It is important to recognise that
all of these will be dealt with and covered by the Bill before the House.

The Bill, as we know, has long been in gestation and during the period that
the Bill was being discussed, there have been a series of very important
admissions. One of these was by quite a senior stockbroker, about the fact
that 10 years ago virtually every trade was done on an insider basis. The
other one was that as much as there was trade between large institutions in
South Africa, because of the concentration of wealth, they had been off-
market trades. Nobody knew who actually owned the scrip and the result has
been very extensive abuse of the system.

Also, there is a case at the moment in Pietermaritzburg that reflects just
how abusive some players in the market can be. One hopes that a Bill like
this will be able to deal with those kinds of issues to protect small
investors who also include the holders of pension funds, namely workers who
invest pension funds in institutions. If there are no rules to cover market
conduct, then we will see the kinds of abuses that Gary Porritt is accused
of in Pietermaritzburg at the moment.

When the hon Joemat asks about the ANC members, we should firstly recognise
that 70% of the electorate voted for the ANC and that is a big spectrum of
South Africa. But, very importantly, nobody is going to remain poor
permanently, but also, between the very rich and the very poor are many
South Africans whose pensions depend on the regulation of market conduct,
which is what legislation like this is about. We cannot leave the markets
to regulate themselves. We need good legislation and we need to ensure that
the rules are complied with and we need to ensure that small investors and
consumers, ultimately, are protected.

In conclusion, however, I wish to express our sincere appreciation for the
support and I trust that the other House will deal with it quite speedily.
Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
  VISIT TO BRANDVLEI YOUTH CENTRE AND DRAKENSTEIN JUVENILE DETENTION CENTRE

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, indeed, it is an honour to participate in this
debate. Let me make it very clear from the outset that no child belongs in
jail. The Freedom Charter says:

  All shall be equal before the law. Imprisonment shall be only for serious
  crimes against the people, and shall aim at re-education, not vengeance.

Laat ek my toespraak begin deur te sê dat apartheid hierdie land
onherstelbare skade aangedoen het. As enigiemand dit wil sien, moet hy net
na ons tronke gaan waar ons kinders en jeugdiges aangehou word.

Kom ons kyk wie hierdie kinders en jeugdiges is. Dit is kinders van
Guguletu, Mitchells Plein, Bonteheuwel, Elsiesrivier en Langa. Dit is
meestal swart kinders wat oral in ons tronke is. Oral oor die land sal jy
hulle daar kry. Daar is nie wit kinders in een van hierdie tronke nie. Ek
vra myself die vraag: Is dit net swart kinders wat met die gereg bots? Is
dit net swart kinders wat stout is? Is dit net swart kinders wat vir
huisbraak, verkragting, moord en dwelmhandel gearresteer word? Waar is die
wit kinders? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die rede waarom daar so baie van ons kinders en jeugdiges daar beland, is
die omgewing waarin die kinders hul bevind en waar hulle grootword. Ons is
gegooi op plekke waar die resultaat niks anders kon wees as dit waarmee ons
vandag sit nie. Kinders so jonk as 10 jaar oud behoort aan tronkbendes, die
28s, die 26s en ander. [Tussenwerpsels.] Waar leer hulle dit? Ons moenie
hierdie probleme ligtelik opneem nie. Ons moet die oorsprong van hierdie
probleem ken. Apartheid was ’n euwel.

Daar is ook ’n ander rede waarom so baie kinders en jeugdiges in ons tronke
sit. Van ons landdroste is baie negatief. Hulle wil nie saamwerk nie. Daar
is kinders in die tronk wat nie daar hoort nie. Laat ek ’n voorbeeld gee
van een so ’n geval. Verlede maand het ek die Kroonstadse Jeugsentrum
besoek waar verhoorafwagtendes aangehou word. Daar het ek ’n sestienjarige
swart seun gekry wat al vir 11 dae daar gesit het. Die rede waarom hy daar
sit, is omdat hy vermoedelik vyf sjokolades gesteel het.

Ek het hom gevra of daar enige borg was. Sy antwoord was: “Nee, daar is
geen borg nie.” Hierdie seun is ’n eerste oortreder. Hy was nooit tevore in
die tronk nie en hy sit nog altyd daar. Is dit reg dat ons dit aan die
kinders doen? Van ons landdroste moet net verander en saamwerk.

Nege-en-negentig persent van hierdie kinders is daar vir ekonomiese
oortredings. Wat kan ons doen om dié probleem aan te spreek? Ons as ouers
moet meer betrokke raak in die lewe van ons kinders. Kom ons bestee meer
tyd met hulle en verbeter die lewensomstandighede waarin ons mense hulself
bevind. Kom ons kyk na die begroting van die departement. Is dit nie nodig
dat ons meer geld moet bewillig om verbeterings aan te bring nie? Die
betrokkenheid van ons gemeenskapsorganisasies en kerkgenootskappe is ook
baie belangrik.

Ons Minister en departement het oor die afgelope maande regtig aandag  gegee
aan sommige van dié probleme. Een van ons grootste probleme is  oorbevolking
in al ons sentrums landwyd. Ek is oortuig dat die Minister baie  ernstig  is
om oplossings te vind vir dié probleme. Daar is wel voorstelle wat ek  graag
wil maak sodat die  Minister  daarna  kan  kyk.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Let me begin my speech by saying that apartheid has inflicted irreparable
damage on this country. Anybody who wants to see this, can merely to go to
our prisons where our children and juveniles are being held.

Let us see who these children and juveniles  are.  They  are  children  from
Guguletu, Mitchells Plain,  Bonteheuwel,  Elsies  River  and  Langa.  It  is
mostly black children who are  in  our  prisons  everywhere.  All  over  the
country you will find them there. There are no  white  children  in  any  of
these prisons. I ask myself: Is it only black children who fall foul of  the
law? Is it only black children who are naughty? Is it  only  black  children
who are being arrested for burglary,  rape,  murder  and  drug  trafficking?
Where are the white children? [Interjections.]

The reason so many of our children  and  juveniles  end  up  there,  is  the
environment in which they find themselves and in  which  they  grow  up.  We
were dumped in places where the result could only  be  what  we  are  facing
today. Children as young as 10 years old belong to  prison  gangs  like  the
28s, the 26s, and others. [Interjections.] Where  do  they  learn  this?  We
should not take these problems lightly. We must acknowledge  the  origin  of
this problem. Apartheid was an evil.

There is also another reason so many children and juveniles are  languishing
in our prisons. Some of our magistrates are very negative. They  don’t  want
to co-operate. There are children in jail who do not belong  there.  Let  me
cite one example of  such  a  case.  Last  month  I  visited  the  Kroonstad
Juvenile Detention Centre where awaiting-trial prisoners are held.  There  I
found a 16-year-old  black boy who had been kept  there  for  11  days.  The
reason he is being held there, is that he is believed to  have  stolen  five
chocolates.

I asked him whether there was any bail. His reply was: “No, there isn’t  any
bail.” This boy is a first-time  offender.  He  had  never  been  to  prison
before, but he is still languishing there. Is it right  that  we  should  do
this to the children? Some of our magistrates just need to change and  begin
to co-operate.

Ninety-nine percent of these children are  detained  for  economic  reasons.
What can we do to address this problem?  We  as  parents  must  become  more
involved in our children’s lives. Let us  spend  more  time  with  them  and
improve the living conditions in which our people find  themselves.  Let  us
look at the  department’s  budget.  Is  it  not  necessary  that  we  should
allocate more money to bring about  improvements?  The  involvement  of  our
community organisations and churches is also very important.

Our Minister and the department have over the past  months  paid  a  lot  of
attention to some of  these  problems.  One  of  the  greatest  problems  is
overcrowding in all our centres all over the country. I  am  convinced  that
the Minister is very serious about  finding  solutions  to  these  problems.
However, there are some proposals I would like to  submit  to  the  Minister
for consideration.]

Minister, we must look at the responsibility to have additional youth
correctional centres to ensure that all children who are sentenced to
imprisonment are catered for in institutions that are developed to meet
their specific needs.

Traditional prisons cannot facilitate the rehabilitation of our children.
No child should be sentenced to imprisonment in a prison that does not have
adequate infrastructure, including sufficient educational, recreational and
development programmes. Solutions to the problem of overcrowding in prisons
should be prioritised, as it affects our children.

We as a committee would like to give the department 12 months to address
this problem that I have raised today. We will certainly follow up the
progress on this report.

Laat ek afsluit met ’n beroep op die wrede, genadelose dwelmbase,
bendeleiers en sindikaatleiers wat ons kinders gebruik om hul vuilwerk te
doen. Kom ek vra hulle baie beleefd of hul weet wat hul aan ons kinders
doen. Ons kinders is die toekoms van hierdie land. Sonder hulle het ons
land nie ’n toekoms nie.

Ek hoor van hierdie agb lede aan my linkerkant het nou en dan iets om te
sê. [Tussenwerpsels.] As hulle geweet het wat in ons gevangenisse
plaasvind, sou hulle nooit sulke opmerkings gemaak het nie. Gister was ek
by Lindelani, ’n plek van veiligheid. Tienjarige kinders word aangehou vir
diefstal. Dit is baie emosioneel om hierdie kinders daar te sien.

Vra jy hierdie kinders wat hulle gedoen het, dan sê hulle: “Oom, ek het
gesteel omdat ek honger was”; “Ek het gesteel omdat ek ’n rugbybal wou hê”;
“Oom, ek het gesteel omdat ek gesien het dat my buurman se kind iets het”.
As julle geweet het wat in die gevangenisse plaasvind, sou julle nooit só
gepraat het en ’n grap gemaak het van dit wat vir ons ernstig is nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Dit is baie emosioneel om ons kinders … [Tussenwerpsel.]… want júlle
kinders sit nie daar nie. Daarom kan jy so praat. Ons huil in ons harte
omdat ons kinders gebruik word. Ons kinders het nie ’n toekoms nie as
gevolg van julle. Apartheid het hierdie ding veroorsaak. [Tussenwerpsels.]
Daarom is julle nie bekommerd oor wat ons daar binne sien nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

Jy moet gaan kyk wat gaan daar aan, dan sal jy beter kan weet dat jy een
van die mense was wat gesorg het dat ’n plek soos Mitchells Plein ontstaan
het. [Tussenwerpsels.] Jy was een van die mense wat gesorg het dat Belhar
daar is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Jy was een van die mense wat gesorg het dat
Elsiesrivier daar is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Jy was een van die mense wat gesorg
het dat Guguletu daar is. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ons kinders sit in die tronk. Jy is nie bekommerd daaroor nie.  Dit  is  die
vuilwerk wat apartheid aan ons kinders  gedoen  het.  [Tussenwerpsels.]  Ons
kan nooit ophou om te praat oor hierdie ding …  [Tussenwerpsels.]  Ons  moet
hierdie ding stop. Ons huil in ons harte vir ons kinders. Baie dankie.  [Tyd
verstreke.] [Applous.]  (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Let me conclude with an appeal to the  cruel,  ruthless  drug  lords,  gang
leaders and syndicate bosses who use our children to do  their  dirty  work.
Let me ask them very politely if they  know  what  they  are  doing  to  our
children. Our children are the future of  this  country.  Without  them  our
country has no future.

I notice that some of these hon members to my left  have  something  to  say
now and then. [Interjections.] If  they  knew  what  was  going  on  in  our
prisons they would never pass such comments. Yesterday I was  at  Lindelani,
a place of safety. Ten-year-old children are held there for theft. It  is  a
very emotional experience to see these children there.

If you ask these children what they have  done,  they  say:  “Sir,  I  stole
because I was hungry”; ``I stole because I wanted a rugby  ball’’;  “Sir,  I
stole because I saw my neighbour’s child had something”. If  you  knew  what
was going on in the prisons, you would never speak like this or make a  joke
of something that is very serious to us. [Interjections.]

It is a very emotional experience to see our children … [Interjections.] …
because your children are not languishing there. That is why you can talk
like that. We cry in our hearts because our children are being used. Our
children do not have a future because of you. Apartheid has caused this
thing. [Interjections.] That is why you are not worried about what we see
in there. [Interjections.]

You must go and look at what is going on there, then you will have a  better
understanding that you were  one  of  the  people  who  contributed  to  the
emergence of a place like Mitchells Plein. [Interjections.] You were one  of
the people who contributed to the creation of Belhar.  [Interjections.]  You
were one of the people who contributed to the  emergence  of  Elsies  River.
[Interjections.] You were one of the people who contributed to the  creation
of Guguletu. [Interjections.]

Our children are languishing in jail. You are not worried about  that.  That
is the filthy effect apartheid had on our children. [Interjections.] We  can
never stop talking about this thing … [Interjections.]  We  must  stop  this
thing. We cry in our hearts for our children. Thank  you  very  much.  [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr C M MORKEL: Madam Chair, Minister, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I
do not want to react to someone else’s speech. I think that some of the
issues that the previous speaker has raised are correct, but there is a
whole range of other issues that he neglected to cover. We have been in
this new South Africa for 10 years. How many of the challenges that we face
in our prisons, do have their roots in the past 10 years and beyond?

We need to ask ourselves, are those challenges being dealt with? Is our
democracy able to eradicate what has been happening in the last 10 years?
One of them is that the Department of Correctional Services, as we said in
the debate on the Budget Vote, faces the challenge of not having enough
resources. Not enough resources are allocated to the department, and we can
see that by the facilities at both the Brandvlei Youth Centre and the
Drankenstein Juvenile Detention Centre.

I will highlight some of the issues, but I don’t want to read the reports
that many of you would have seen in the ATC on 15 September. We went there
with specific questions, and I would just like to read them to you. What is
the capacity of the centres, and how many juveniles are currently
incarcerated there? How many of the juvenile offenders are there, sentenced
and not sentenced? What educational facilities and training are provided
for these juveniles? What general services are currently provided which are
lacking? What measures are in place to ensure the successful reintegration
of offenders into society?

We sought answers to those questions. At Brandvlei we found that there are
juveniles who are incarcerated there for between two and eight years. Many
of them are between the ages of 14 and 20 years. The prison is overcrowded
by 150%, Minister. There are 503 offenders accommodated in a facility that
can only accommodate 288, as it was built for that purpose in 1996. We
therefore recommend that if the existing structure on-site there is
renovated, it can accommodate an additional 600 offenders.

These are the challenges that we can address. With regard to the original
staff complement for the 288 offenders that the facility was to accommodate
when built, there are only 73 staff members there. That was for the 288
inmates; now they have 503, and it is obviously insufficient. There is a
shortage of professional staff, and in areas of adult education, in
particular, there are shortages there. Offenders serving sentences of less
than one year do not have access to formal education, so we are going to
have the repeat offenders coming back.

Although there are facilities being provided there by outside institutions
like UCT and Kfm - providing a radio station – and also courses in welding,
woodwork, pottery and so on, they are insufficient to get these
qualifications formerly recognised outside. These youngsters are not going
to get jobs out there, and they will come back. Therefore we ask that you
address that.

We also saw that there was an absence of a kitchen facility. They have to
transport the food from Medium A section to that facility. These are things
that the prison was built for in 1996. The facilities are shared with adult
prisoners, contrary to your department’s policy. This applies to the
visitor facilities in particular. The department must therefore work with
Public Works to eradicate some of these issues.

At Drakenstein with 658 male prisoners, there are 331 in the maximum
security facility of the centre. Of the 33 under 18s, 23 are in the medium
section, whilst 10 are in the maximum. It is the only facility in the area
for juveniles who need to be held in a maximum prison. Adult prisoners
maturing at juvenile facilities are also a problem evident here; that is,
those who turn 21 whilst they are in the juvenile facility.

The department needs to indicate how it will deal with this category of
prisoners after they have turned 21, because when they graduate to the
adult facilities, they are likely to become more hardened prisoners. Here
the department must also deal with the speedier filling of posts and the
competitiveness of salaries, especially for professional staff, who leave
the department to find employment elsewhere, especially the nurses and
psychologists.

Communication surrounding the issue of weekend overtime and the
establishment of a seven-day workweek is also a problem, as it is
elsewhere. The provision and formal recognition of education is a problem
here too. There are problems with the dispensing of antiretrovirals here as
well and, obviously, it is something that needs to be communicated to the
Health Department, especially to their local facilities.

Challenges with regard to the rehabilitation and integration of offenders
must be dealt with urgently by the department, and in this regard we ask
that you, in particular, work with the other departments in the justice
cluster to deal with the overcrowding in these facilities, because it is in
overcrowding that there are shortages in the facilities. We do not always
disagree in the portfolio committee, as you know, Minister. There are many
things that we agree on.

There are common challenges. The DA wants to make its contribution, but we
understand the challenges that you face. We cannot simply blame the period
before the 10 years of democracy. There are challenges that we know you are
trying to deal with; they are resource challenges, and we will make our
contribution in lobbying for more funds for you.[Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair, hon members, unfortunately I was unable to
participate in the actual visit to Drakenstein and Brandvlei due to
commitments in the Whippery. I actually apologised to the committee for not
having been able to participate, and I thank Nkosi Biyela for having
attended where he could over the past month. The portfolio committee has
been extremely active over the past few weeks. I must say I am pleased to
see that at last this committee has really come to grips with the many
challenges of the department, the concerns of the public, and the wellbeing
of both the departmental officials and the incarcerated.

I commend the chairperson and all members of the portfolio committee on the
very comprehensive report. What really does concern me, is that despite our
transformation and modernisation over the past decade, and all the good
intentions of all parties concerned, we continue to see an ever-increasing
prison population, an increase in overcrowding of the institutions and, of
most concern to me, an  ever-increasing number of young offenders
incarcerated under these appalling conditions with totally inadequate
ablution facilities, few resources and very few staff.

To top all this is the problem that, due to general overcrowding, many
adults, as we’ve heard, are being incarcerated in the same institutions as
juveniles, because of the lack of other facilities, notwithstanding the
decision taken by this Parliament in the early 90s that no juvenile may be
incarcerated along with adults. Unfortunately that legislation may never
have been passed, because we have never implemented it. Due to a lack of
resources and facilities it does not look like it is about to be
implemented for some time.

Mr Bloem has actually made the comment that no child should be in prison. I
fully support that. It is a privilege to be on the portfolio committee and,
believe it not, a privilege to have to work in those prisons. It is only
when you work in those prisons with prisoners that you actually understand
the real implications of young people being in prison.

It is clear from the report that there are still many obstacles to overcome
in order to promote genuine rehabilitation, and to cut down on the
recidivism in South Africa. We clearly have to make it possible, if not
compulsory, for all juveniles, even those serving a period of under one
year, to have formal education, which is compulsory. This, of course, means
that we have to ensure that we have adequate facilities, qualified persons,
and really, when we talk about one teacher training or teaching 113
offenders in Drakenstein, that is an impossible situation.

If we want to combat crime we have to do everything possible to motivate
all offenders, especially juveniles, to change their ways. This cannot be
achieved if they are individually left idle in overcrowded facilities, with
nothing to do, other than to learn from their more corrupt peers how to
develop their criminal skills.

There is no doubt that young people who are kept actively involved in
institutions such as Drakenstein, dealing with things that they are dealing
with in the agricultural and productive field, become far more motivated
and are far more prone to be successful than those who are in other
institutions. I am pleased to see the Drakenstein prisons continuing to
develop and expand the agricultural production facilities. I sincerely hope
that other institutions are going to go the same way, and that we build new
institutions along those lines, because we really do need to make a change
for our young people.

We again urge the courts to look at alternative sentencing, and not to put
young people into prisons. We really cannot afford to have our young people
in such institutions, and we need to do something about it, each and every
one of us. The IFP accepts and supports the report. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S MAHOTE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen, let me echo what my chairperson has said. I am honoured to
participate in this debate which is both sensitive and, given our
experiences as parents, also disturbing in nature.

As we all know, the family unit is recognised as the bedrock of any healthy
and prosperous nation. South African history and circumstances are steeped
in tragic tales of children having to grow up in families without mothers
or even without both parents. If one factors in social phenomena such as
the legacy of apartheid, poverty, the migrant labour system and hardship in
general, one inevitably arrives at daunting long-term challenges. And the
issue of youths and juveniles in correctional and detention centres
represents one such daunting challenge.

At the same time one does not ignore the fact that those who engage in
criminal acts do not originate only from dysfunctional families. To this
end, the categories of offenders who come from affluent families attest to
this. However, a sober analysis of the composition of South Africa’s youth
offender population drives home the reality that the vast majority of
juvenile offenders come from communities and facilities plagued by poverty,
hunger, absent figures of authority and care, distorted value systems and
general hardship - some of the very factors directly associated with
dysfunctional families and dysfunctional communities.

Xa ikomiti ejongene necandelo leenkonzo zoluleko ibityelele amaziko ogcino-
luleko-lutsha eBrandvlei Youth Centre naseDrakenstein Medium B Detention
Centre, ngaphandle kokubuza imibuzo, eyona ngxaki ibigqamile yingxinano
ebuhlungu kula maziko. Inyaniso yeyokuba iziko ngalinye lithwaliswa
umthwalo wezaphuli-mthetho ezinokwanela amaziko amabini. Ngaphezulu,
ukunqongophala kweenkonzo nenkqubo yeenkonzo zoqeqesho kwenza ukuba le meko
ibe mandundu. Zonke ezi zinto zezinye zeenyaniso eziyintlonze nje
kumfanekiso wemeko yala maziko.

Kubaphuli-mthetho baseBrandvlei, sisiqingatha nje esithatha inxaxheba
kwiinqubo zemfundiso. EDrakenstein sisinye esithathwini. Kunzima kakhulu
kwezoqeqesho ngenxa yale ngxinano. (Translation of Xhosa of paragraphs
follows.)

[When the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services visited the youth
rehabilitation centres at the Brandvlei Youth Centre and the Drakenstein
Medium B Detention Centre, without asking we could identify the main
problem as being overcrowding. The truth of the matter is that each centre
accommodates the number that is supposed to be taken by two centres.
Moreover, the lack of services and a training programme makes these
circumstances more difficult. All of these facts reflect the truth of what
is happening.

For Brandvlei prisoners there is a small percentage that takes part in
educational programmes. At Drakenstein it is only one third that
participate. Training is very difficult because of overcrowding.]

Another cause for concern is the shortage of medical and social work
personnel. This situation seriously compromises the physical and mental
health of these young offenders. We are all conscious of the extent to
which communicable diseases such as TB and HIV/Aids thrive in unhygienic
social conditions and more so in overcrowded prisons. Also, the scourge of
gang culture and drugs demands sufficient person power to turn this tide.

Furthermore, we believe that the shortages and challenges outlined above
are certainly not conducive to the process of rehabilitation. As the ANC,
we, however, believe that everything is not doom and gloom. In relation to
detention of children, the South African Constitution of 1996 provides the
following rights for children: not to be detained, except as a last resort;
if detained, only to be detained for the shortest period of time; to be
kept separate from detained persons over the age of 18 years; and, to be
treated in a manner and kept in conditions that take account of their age.

What is most encouraging is that the Department of Correctional Services
has drafted a White Paper on correctional services that will replace the
1994 one, and it has already been approved by Cabinet. This draft White
Paper on Corrections arises out of a need for a long-term strategic policy
and operational framework that recognises corrections as a societal
responsibility. It also flows from the need for the Department of
Correctional Services to gear all its activities to serving a
rehabilitation mission that ensures true delivery of appropriate programmes
without compromising security; and that ensures that the people who leave
the correctional centres have appropriate attitudes and competencies that
enable them to successfully integrate back into society as law-abiding and
productive citizens.

In respect of youths in detention, the department’s position is
unambiguous, as contained in the White Paper. It states that different age
groups of children require different service delivery and should, as far as
possible, be accommodated separately. It further seeks to align its
policies with those of other integrated justice system departments to
ensure that appropriate policies are in place for different age categories
of children. Where this is not an option, they should be accommodated in
secure facilities that are designed for children.

Through the White Paper and as part of its division for youth offenders,
the department provides for diversion, alternative sentences and
alternative detention centres run by the Department of Social Development.
The Department of Education should also be utilised for the correction of
such children.

Moreover, and most encouraging, through the White Paper again, the
department is aligning itself to the United Nations rule for the protection
of juveniles deprived of their liberty. As the ANC, we have no doubt that
this development will go a long way towards ensuring that challenges we
have alluded to, such as overcrowding, are tackled in an integrated and
coherent manner. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP has studied the report
and supports its contents, and we just wish to highlight certain aspects.

Firstly, we share the view that education and school attendance should be
compulsory for all juvenile offenders. It is crucial that offenders receive
education and training to enable them to be reintegrated into society once
they have served their sentences.

The painful truth, however, is that many juvenile offenders are abused,
raped and forced to become involved in criminal and gangster activities and
continue with these activities when they leave prison. Imprisonment becomes
an initiation into a lifetime of criminal and gangster activities instead
of a means of rehabilitation. Instead of receiving a proper education and
training, many graduate from the university of crime.

Possibly the saddest part of all is the fact that, as the hon Bloem pointed
out, many of these juvenile offenders are serving sentences for property
crimes such as theft. These juveniles do not present a danger to society
and should not be incarcerated. The Cape Argus printed an editorial from
which I would just like to quote. They said:

  We are sentencing many young men to a slow and painful death, simply by
  arresting them for petty crimes and sending them to overcrowded prisons
  where they fall into the clutches of hardened criminals. There must be a
  better way.

And there is a better way, hon Minister. The restorative justice approach
is the way and this is what the ACDP has advocated for many years. The
Child Justice Bill contains innovative restorative justice principles to
prevent such youths from being locked away in universities of crime by
implementing principles such as diversion.

In the year 2000 I represented our country at a United Nations crime
conference where I proudly extolled the virtues of the restorative justice
approach. I was very proud of the Child Justice Bill at that stage, then
drafted by the SA Law Reform Commission. Sadly, today, some four years
later, the Child Justice Bill is yet to be passed by this House. This is
unacceptable and I would implore the hon Minister to discuss this issue
with the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, and to
urgently attend to the finalisation of the Child Justice Bill. I thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek het nou geluister na wat die agb
Bloem hier te sê gehad het en my advies aan die agb lid is dat hy vir hom ŉ
ander bril moet kry, vanweë die feit dat dié agb lid deur daardie bril net
wit en swart sien. Ek wil vir u sê die agb lid se optrede hier vanmiddag is
ŉ tipiese optrede van die ANC, in die sin dat die oomblik as hy nie ŉ
probleem of ŉ krisis kan hanteer nie, hy dit op apartheid blameer.

Ek wil graag by agb lede weet hoe lank nog hulle apartheid die skuld wil
gee vir alles. [Tussenwerpsels.] Ek wil vir die agb lid sê armoede kan
nooit ŉ rede of ŉ oorsaak wees vir die pleeg van ŉ misdaad nie. As die agb
lid dit dalk nie weet nie, die blankes het ook ŉ armblankevraagstuk beleef
in hul geskiedenis. Hulle was arm, hulle was bywoners, maar hulle het hulle
nie tot misdaad gewend om te kan oorleef nie.

Nee, Mevrou die Voorsitter, ek wil vir die agb lid sê hy slaan die bal
heeltemal mis. Hulle moet begin optree en kundiges aanstel om die probleem
te kan hanteer. Die standpunt van die VF Plus is baie duidelik. As ons gaan
kyk na jeugmisdaad vandag, dan moet ons ook ŉ bietjie verder gaan kyk –
verby daardie bril van die agb lid.

En as ons na die probleem gaan kyk, dan sê die VF Plus die probleem kom in
by dissipline. Dit het tyd geword dat ons dit weer ernstig moet oorweeg om
lyfstraf terug te bring in ons stelsel. Daarom sê ons dit moet by die skole
begin en die agb lid moet mooi luister: as ek praat van skole dan praat ek
van blanke en swart skole, dat lyfstraf moet terugkom soontoe, dat ons
kinders kan leer wat dissipline is, want dan sal ons jeugmisdaad begin
afneem.

Ander aspekte wat ander sprekers hier genoem het is uit die aard van die
saak belangrik, maar die VF Plus wil lyfstraf daarby voeg, want daar is
baie mense … Die agb lid praat hier van iemand wat ŉ bietjie sjokolade
gesteel en toe in die gevangenis beland het. As hy twee of drie “cuts”
gekry het, sal hy nie weer sjokolade vat nie. Hy sal nie in die tronk wees
nie en dit sal nie op die onkoste van die belastingbetaler wees nie. Ek
dank u. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, I have listened to what the hon Bloem
had say here and my advice to the hon member is that he should get another
pair of spectacles, as this hon member seems to see only black and white
through those spectacles. I want to tell you that the hon member’s
behaviour here this afternoon is typical behaviour from the ANC, in the
sense that the minute they cannot deal with a problem or a crisis they
blame it on apartheid.

I would like to know from hon members how much longer they are going to
blame apartheid for everything. [Interjections.] I want to tell the hon
member that poverty can never be a reason or a cause for committing a
crime. If the hon member was not aware of it, the whites also experienced a
poor white problem in their history. They were poor, they were
sharecroppers, but they did not resort to crime to survive.

No, Madam Chairperson, I want to tell the hon member that he is missing the
mark. They must begin to act and appoint experts to be able to deal with
the problem. The position of the FF Plus is very clear. If we look at
juvenile crime today, we also have to look a little further – beyond that
hon member’s spectacles.

And if we look at the problem, the FF Plus says that the problem arises
with discipline. It is time we once again seriously considered
reintroducing corporal punishment to our system. For that reason we say
that it must start with the schools and the hon member must listen
carefully: when I talk about schools I am talking about white and black
schools, that corporal punishment must be reintroduced there, so that our
children can learn what discipline is, because then our juvenile crime will
start to decrease.

Other aspects that other speakers mentioned here are of course important,
but the FF Plus wants to add corporal punishment to them, because there are
many people… The hon member spoke about someone who stole some chocolate
and went to prison. If he had received one or two “cuts”, he would not take
chocolate again. He would not be in prison and it would not be at the
expense of the taxpayer. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Chairperson, firstly, the PAC of Azania wishes to
compliment the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services for submitting
its report to the House on its visit to the said areas. Government
established these youth and juvenile centres with the good intention of
protecting the youth and juveniles from abuse at the various adult
Correctional Services facilities.

The PAC is disturbed by the conditions to which these juveniles and youths
are exposed at these centres as these conditions may psychologically affect
them in their upbringing. Overcrowding and an unhealthy environment lead to
mortality at a very young age. It is an open secret today that this
generation will not survive for more than 45 years. The conditions found at
these centres paint a broader national picture regarding our correctional
services. Nationally, there is overcrowding and a lack of facilities
befitting human beings in our correctional services. To date, the PAC has
received much correspondence from inmates who were incarcerated for
politically motivated activities, especially Azanian People’s Liberation
Army, Apla, operatives who are still languishing in our prisons. This then
makes a mockery of our democracy because people died for us, and others who
sacrificed their youth for us are still languishing in our prisons. We
demand their immediate release as another measure to curb overcrowding in
our prisons, Mr Minister.

The PAC further urges government to stop privatising correctional services
through awarding contracts to foreigners. I hereby refer to Group 4 prison
next to Grootvlei in the Free State province. That prison does not fully
conform to the required standard of the Correctional Services Act in our
country. Inmates are subjected to the worst incarceration conditions, and
those that apply to be moved nearer to their home base are refused
permission without valid reasons. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I also want to associate
myself with thanking the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services for
bringing about this debate. Crime is one of the most serious challenges in
South Africa, and juvenile delinquency is, sadly, a great contributor to
our problem of crime.

The seriousness of the issue may be observed through the reality of our
overcrowded prisons and the large number of juveniles residing in such
prisons. Regarding prisoners, our aim is not only to restore the balance of
society that is disrupted by crime, but also to inculcate the reformation
of these offenders into law-abiding citizens through punishment by
imprisonment.

In order to prevent them and others from committing crime and through
deterrence from engaging in criminal behaviour, government and the
community have been working hard to combat crime in South Africa. The MF
has also worked hard at promoting a safer South Africa and deterring
juveniles from criminal behaviour by incorporating them into the MF youth
programmes that facilitate and promote law-abiding behaviour. As is evident
from the report, not only is it sad to note the number of juvenile
delinquents, but it is also unpleasant to note the harsh conditions of
imprisonment that they are forced to live under.

Overcrowding, a lack of facilities, and a lack of professional assistance
in the sectors of education and health care, and so other more factors not
only contribute to poor living conditions but also minimise the chances for
success of efforts to deter such juveniles from criminal behaviour. The
reality is that conditions in both Brandvlei Youth Centre and Drakenstein
Medium B Juvenile Detention Centre are really bad.

Having looked at the report and the recommendations, the MF calls upon
government to treat this issue with great seriousness. We need to roll up
our sleeves in order to mediate in a process aimed at correcting these
inefficiencies with immediate effect. We would like to mention, though,
that renovating these facilities would alleviate the overcrowding
situation, but we need to work at stopping crime in our communities with
greater earnestness.

The promotion of skills and the education of juveniles are crucial to
reformation and bringing these juveniles back into society as great
contributors and law-abiding citizens. I couldn’t agree more with the
Minister when he says the parents of these juveniles must be totally
involved as well in rehabilitating these children. Let’s stamp out crime
and give our youth a bright future. Let’s open our hearts and our homes and
give these juveniles a chance to live in a better South Africa. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Madam Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members,
regardless of what your offence is, once you enter the high walls and heavy
doors of prison you have entered a world which is unique in every sense;
the world that speaks in terms of 26s, 27s and 28s; the world that uses
concepts such as “wyfies” and “upping the cool” - indeed, you will be in
prison.

Regarding the prison world, medical treatment of its population is
guaranteed by the Bill of Rights and details are spelt out in the
Correctional Services Act. Primary health care services that are in line
with the national Department of Health requirements have to be provided for
our prisoners. In most cases, doctors who provide medical care are
appointed by the provincial departments of health, and nurses are in the
employment of the Department of Correctional Services. These nurses should
have primary health care as a qualification.

According to the inspecting judge, in 2003 about 19 000 prisoners’
complaints were about the inadequate provisions of health care in prisons.
Key health problems include TB, a common problem in almost all our prisons.
Our prisons, which are so overcorwded, favour the easy spread of this
disease. The human immunodeficiency virus and Aids are also a serious
problem. A large number of our prisoners are sexually active males under
the age of 30 years who, even in  our communities outside prison,
constitute a very high-risk group for contracting HIV and Aids, and prisons
are no exception.

Due to the constrained nature of prisons and because they are aggravated by
overcrowding, sexual relations may lead to the spread of sexually
transmitted infections and HIV and Aids. Imagine two men having to share a
single bed every day for 8 to 15 years. That situation is most likely to
lead to sexual relationships or homosexuality. The committee have seen
victims of prison rape. Sodomy seems to be part of prison life as many men
resort to it as a means of survival and a deterrent to further sexual
abuse. Both rape and sodomy have a high potential for the spread of STIs
and HIV and Aids, and by their very nature they undermine human rights.

In the majority of our prisons there is an acute shortage of professional
health care staff. In August 2004 the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services visited Brandvlei and Drakenstein juvenile prisons. In Drakenstein
we saw overcrowding. There was one registered nurse who was a sister, and
there was one nursing auxiliary. There were three funded posts for
registered nurses, but only one had been filled and two had been vacant
since December 2003. The nurse-to-patient ratio was high and there was one
doctor who visited prisons every day. There were three confirmed HIV-
positive patients. There was one permanent psychologist, and we appreciate
that.

There were, of course, many positive things that we saw in this prison.
Amongst them was that all three social workers’ posts had been filled.
These social workers cater for the needs of juvenile offenders in this
prison. Furthermore, there were a number of external service providers who
assisted by providing services in a variety of areas including life skills,
and arts and craft. Offenders in this prison received gala awards from the
former President, Mr Nelson R Mandela and the Duke of Edinburgh in June
2004. The programmes aim to change the outlook on life and behaviour of
offenders.

Brandvlei prison was also overcrowded. The population of 503 was cared for
by two social workers, one permanent psychologist, whom we appreciate, and
one nurse. The doctor visited the facility once per week and could spend
only one hour at the juvenile centre. The most prevalent diseases included
TB, HIV and Aids. We saw nine active TB patients as well as three HIV-
positive patients. It was pleasing to find that various NGOs and other
organisations presented HIV and Aids courses to inmates, and 30 of them had
received certificates as peer educators on HIV and Aids.

The main question is: Where to from here? In solving these problems in our
prisons, and in order to deliver a better life for all our inmates, we have
to reduce our prison population drastically. The Department of Correctional
Services cannot do this alone. Only an integrated approach will solve the
problem of overcrowding in prisons.

In order to ensure acceptable health care in our prisons, the department
has to look seriously at the issue of improving salaries of professional
staff such as nurses, social workers and psychologists so as to attract and
retain them in our system. The budget issue has to be looked into
critically in order to address some of these urgent challenges. In fact,
Comrade Minister, it may mean finding more funds if possible.

In conclusion, issues that are raised in this debate are raised because we
are a caring society. We believe that our children are our future and that
they should be moulded and provided with opportunities that will ensure
that one day when they are out of prison they live a better life –
normally, they are not supposed to be in prison. The Portfolio Committee on
Correctional Services requests this Parliament to endorse this report.

Within the few minutes that I still have left, I just want to raise the
issue regarding some members who debated here today. It was surprising for
us to see them for the first time when they stood at this podium. They
don’t attend meetings, and they don’t know what is happening. They come
here to make a noise, and banikeza isithombe
okungeyiso. [they are giving a false picture.]

Comrade Chairperson, regarding the IFP members, the last time they attended
the meetings of Correctional Services was when the Minister
Owayekhona kwakuseyindoda abayithembayo. Uma sekungene omunye
uNgqongqoshe asizange siphinde sibabone. [Ubuwelewele.] [who was in the
office was the man that they could trust. When another Minister took over
we never saw them again. [Interjections.]]

Madam Chairperson, it is not correct for a member to come here and say
there were regulations that were never implemented. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, let me first of all
thank the portfolio committee, very well led by the hon Dennis
Bloem…[Laughter.]… for the oversight role that all the members are playing.
I really appreciate the fact that this report is tabled in this House. Not
many members of this House know what is happening in our correctional
centres.  Let me make it easy for them: They don’t know what is going on in
our prisons.

We call them correctional centres. You might call them prisons. Eventually,
you will get used to the language that we are using in the White Paper. The
members have contributed quite well today, but I only want to say one thing
to hon member Groenewald. One of the things that will be written about you
on your grave will be “Defender of Apartheid”. [Laughter.] I will make sure
that it is written there. [Laughter.] [Applause.] He is the hon member who
defended apartheid until the last drop of blood. [Interjections.]

The other members have contributed quite well. The rational way in which
the hon Morkel has looked at this thing clearly says that there is some
maturing that has happened in him. It is quite good. I really appreciate
that. Hon Seaton is an old hand. She knows Correctional Services.
[Applause.]

Let me talk very quickly about juveniles in correctional centres. I am
quite aware of the focus of the portfolio committee this year, that is, it
is on juveniles in our centres. I quite agree with the members who spoke.
Young children and juveniles do not belong in prisons. [Interjections.]

I will take a point of order, and I will eat you up! Try it. [Laughter.]
Because you asked a question, and then I was… [Interjections.] I can’t sit
on them. You know I have lost some weight now. [Laughter.] I look quite
nice and young. I am energetic, and I will eat him up. [Laughter.]

Negotiations are going on within the JCPS cluster. The JCPS cluster is
seized with this issue of young people in prisons. We are also seized with
the problem of overcrowding within our prisons, and we are trying our best
to deal with that. We are also looking at alternatives for young people -
diversions for them not to go to prisons, because as you rightly pointed
out, Mr Swart, they sometimes become universities of crime. But because of
the shortage of space, they are put into prisons, and I don’t like that. It
hurts when you see most of these young people in prisons.

We are dealing with that. The reports of the inspecting judge, Judge Fagan,
are also assisting us in dealing with that through the justice system.
There are delays in the system. We are trying to get rid of those delays so
that these young people can do community corrections, and the community can
participate in making sure that they are not in prison.

The staff inmates are very bad. But we have groups that consist completely
of new recruits. In Zonderwater, we have 461 new recruits. In Kroonstad we
have 543 new recruits. I am hoping that once these recruits are out of our
system, we will get another group of young recruits, because we need more
young people to come and work in Correctional Services. Our motto at
Correctional Services is: We serve with pride and humility. That is the
motto that we are trying to instil within Correctional Services.

The programmes of rehabilitation at the core of the White Paper are
corrections and rehabilitation. As I said when I talked about Gareth James
here, the first step in correction is the family. If families do not
participate in that code of correction, then we are in trouble, because
this is a conveyer-belt situation. We are at the end of the conveyer belt,
and they come back again, through the family, into the justice system.
Somewhere, somehow families have to play a very strong role. We should act
against parents who do not want to assist us in that. We should introduce
legislation that will make sure that those parents take responsibility for
their children.

We are working on the retention of our professional staff. I do hope that
in no time we will have social workers, psychologists, as well as teachers
and doctors. We need doctors to work for us within Correctional Services.

Correction is a societal responsibility. All of us have a role to play. It
is very true that if we allow crime to be committed, we will have these
problems. But if we were playing our role as communities to curb crime,
then we wouldn’t have the kinds of problems that we have. So let us all
stand up and fight crime. Whether you are a DA or ID member, crime affects
all of us.

The last thing I want to say very quickly is that I have taken note of what
the portfolio committee chairperson has said regarding 12 months to deal
with overcrowding. But another thing that I need to quickly talk about is
the issue of gangsters within our correctional centres. We cannot allow
gangsters and we cannot glorify them. We can’t allow them to suck young
people into that void. We are going to make sure that we crush the gangs in
the prisons. [Applause]

That is one thing that I vowed to do. We are going to crush them. There is
no doubt about it. [Applause.] I don’t care a damn. I nearly used French.
Whether they are 26s, 27s or 23s, the fact is that they don’t belong in
those prisons.

We are dealing with the issue of overtime with the unions and we are
getting there. We are supposed to have compulsory education in all our
centres and we are working very hard. Restorative justice is an issue that
we are trying to get through so that they can acknowledge the crime that
they have committed. But we also need to work towards making sure that the
victims’ families also accept them back into society.

We will also look at the Child Justice Bill. We will make sure that the
Justice Minister and I sit and look at that. Regarding political prisoners,
we will also have a programme to look at that. I can promise you we are
busy dealing with that.

I would like more of our members to go out there and see for themselves the
situation within the prisons that we have to deal with. When you see a 19-
year-old, and he tells you that he has been sentenced to 162 years, then
how do you sleep at night - even knowing that he has committed a crime? But
still, 162 years for someone who is 19 years old! Parents have to take
responsibility.

If you go to the Drakenstein Prison and you see a 14-year-old, you wonder
where the parents are. What were they up to? What responsibility are they
taking? [Interjections.] Meneer [Mister] Groenewald, I am talking about
parents’ rights across the board, not parents as you define them. These are
some of the things that worry me.

But I must also say that the work that has been done by correctional
officials all over the country, starting with the Commissioner of
Correctional Services and those officials that work in the Zonderwater and
Kroonstad Prisons, is work that I think will turn Correctional Services
around. I am beginning to be very passionate about Correctional Services.
On weekends, instead of going and watching sport, I go to correctional
centres, because I want to see what those young people and other people who
are there are doing.

Women in prison and the young children that they have in those centres are
other issues that worry me, particularly when women are there because of
domestic violence in their homes. No children should be born in prisons.
These are some of the things that we have to address. I am asking hon
members to make time for themselves. Go out there into those cells. I go
into those cells, overcrowded as they are, and I talk to those young
people. I try and understand what we can do to assist.

I am not soft on crime; not at all. I have zero tolerance for crime. But we
have to find ways and means of making sure that these young people do not
end up being habitual criminals that come in time and time again. The
chairperson has also mentioned the areas of bias when dealing with some of
these cases. It is an area that we have to look at.

We serve with pride and humility. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms E NGALEKA: Chairperson, I move, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party:

      That the report be adopted.

Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

             CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
              ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - COUNCIL FOR MEDICAL SCHEMES


           CONSIDERATION OF SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON


               PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - REGISTRAR FOR MEDICAL SCHEMES


           CONSIDERATION OF THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON

                PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - FILM AND PUBLICATION BOARD



           CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON


                        PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - BALA FARMS



           CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON


                         PUBLIC ACCOUNTS - BANK SETA


Mr F BEUKMAN: Chairperson, thank you for the opportunity to introduce the
first five Scopa resolutions of the new parliamentary term on behalf of the
committee. In terms of Rule 206 of the National Assembly, Scopa must
consider the financial statements of all executive organs of state and
institutions when those statements are submitted to Parliament, any audit
reports issued on those statements, and any reports issued by the Auditor-
General on the affairs of any executive organ of state, constitutional
institution or other public body. Any other financial statement or report
may be referred to this committee. We must then report on any of those
financial statements or reports to the Assembly, and that is what we are
actually doing this afternoon.

In a normal calendar year, Scopa will receive in the region of about 200
reports. To enable Scopa to deal with the reports effectively, we have
categorised them in terms of a set of criteria. A category A will entail a
hearing, for instance, as the one we had today on Public Works. Category B
will entail further interaction with the department, and C will mean that
we will adopt a resolution without taking further action.

The five reports to be adopted this afternoon in the House are in
categories B and C. Scopa envisages that in future we as a committee will
also utilise this opportunity in the House to discuss a report, especially
those dealing with category A departments. Category A departments are those
with claims of qualified audit reports. Hopefully, we could also involve
portfolio committees with regard to those discussions.

Coming to the reports, the first one is from the Council for Medical
Schemes. We have studied the report. Scopa commended the management of the
council for the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General,
and trust that future audit opinion shall be equally unqualified. We are of
the view that no further interaction with the Council for Medical Schemes
is necessary.

The second report deals with the Registrar for Medical Schemes. It is also
an unqualified report. Scopa is of the view that no further interaction
with the accounting authority of the Registrar for Medical Schemes is
necessary for the financial year under review.

The third report deals with the Film and Publication Board. It is also an
unqualified audit opinion expressed by the Auditor-General. We, as a
committee, trust that future audit opinion shall be equally unqualified. We
are of the view that no further interaction with the accounting authority
of the Film and Publication Board is necessary.

The fourth report deals with a so-called classified schedule 3  institution
and national government business enterprise, Bala Farms. Bala Farms is
really part of one of the former homeland administrations that has been in
the process of being wound up by the accounting authority of Bala Farms.

There are certain issues that we as a committee feel that should be
followed up and reported to Parliament. We have noted with concern that the
company, Bala Farms, is in the process of disposing of all its properties,
but no timeframe has been set for this process. The company would however
continue as a going concern until the properties have been disposed of.

Scopa recommends that within two weeks after tabling of this resolution and
adoption by the House it should be provided with the current status of the
entity with regard to the winding-up process. We should also be provided
with lease agreements and their timeframes; details regarding the plan of
action for those properties where leasing is not a viable option; the
investment policy being used to ensure optimum risk return; the list of
properties that were disposed of; the valuations of the properties and to
whom they were disposed of and a detailed report on what processes were
followed to establish the respective beneficiaries and the respective
selling prices.

A number of those farms have already been sold, but we are of the opinion
that more detail should be provided. Scopa will follow up on information
requested, as well as specific matters raised during the consideration of
the next annual report.

The last report I am going to deal with this afternoon is the fifth one
that deals with the Banking Sector Education and Training Authority. The
committee commended the management of the Bank Seta for the unqualified
report, and trusts that future audit opinion shall be equally unqualified.

The committee further commended the audit committee for the comprehensive
report provided. However, we believe that because this Seta was exempted by
the National Treasury from the requirement of Treasury regulation 31(3) to
invest surplus funds with the
co-operation of public deposits, surplus funds were invested in an
institution with an investments rating. This is in line with investment
policy as required by the Treasury regulations.

Therefore, Scopa recommends that the following information should be
provided to Parliament: A copy of the investment policy for unspent funds,
which includes consideration of both risk and return; full details of the
investment portfolio of unspent funds and a documented strategy on how it
intends to utilise its unspent money for the intended purposes, while also
ensuring value for money. This is in effect the content of these five
reports, and we believe that these reports should be adopted. Thanks a lot.
[Applause.]


Ms E NGALEKA: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move:

      That the reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:12.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Companies Amendment Bill [B 10D - 2004] - Act No 20 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 15 October 2004).

National Assembly

1.    Correction of tablings entry

     The Speaker, on 19 October 2004, tabled a report submitted by the
     Public Protector (see Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, p
     905). The entry relating to that tabling should have read:

         Report of the Public Protector on an Investigation into
         Allegations of Undue Delay, Unlawful and Improper Conduct and
         Prejudice in the Rendering of Services at Braamfontein Refugee
         Reception Office (now Rosettenville Premises).

2.    Referral to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Trade and Industry. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
         the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Competition
              Tribunal for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 103-
              2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              National Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
              Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 82-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Mining
              Qualifications Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 53-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 40-2004].


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Finance. The Reports of the
         Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
              Accounting Services Sector Education and Training Authority
              (FASSET) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 38-
              2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 39-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 50-2004].


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry.
         The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 47-
         2004].


     (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
         Affairs. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Sector Education
              and Training Authority for Secondary Agriculture for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 58-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Primary Agriculture
              Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 155-2004].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. The
         Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
              Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 41-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverage
              Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
              2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 46-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and
              Retail Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 62-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
              Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
              Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 54-
              2004].


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Communications. The Reports
         of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
              Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and
              Training Authority (MAPPP) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Information
              Systems, Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies
              Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 49-2004].


     (8)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Transport. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 61-
         2004].


     (9)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Education. The Report of the
         Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
         Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 44-2004].


     (10)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Public Works. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 42-2004].


     (11)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Health, and the Portfolio
         Committee on Social Development. The Report of the Auditor-General
         is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
         consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 48-2004].


     (12)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
         and the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government, Water and
         Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 51-2004].


     (13)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, the
         Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services and the Portfolio
         Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development. The Report of
         the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on
         Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
         Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 55-2004].


     (14)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
         Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 126-
         2004].


     (15)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Energy Sector Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 45-
         2004].


     (16)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Labour, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
         Tourism and the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation. The
         Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing
         Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 60-2004].


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 - Department of Foreign
     Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2003-2004 [RP 203-2004].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Annual Report of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of
         Weapons of Mass Destruction for 2002-2003.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
         Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements 2003-2004.

      d) Report and Financial Statements of Technology for Women in
         Business (TWIB) for 2003-2004


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the National Payment
     System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 20 October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the National
         Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) and proposed amendments of the National Council of
         Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 6
         October 2004, p 852), referred to the Committee, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 14C - 2004].

     Report to be considered.


