---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 21 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-09-21
---

TUESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 09:31.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Does any member wish to give notice of
a motion? I know that if Mr Mzizi is not here, we are going to skip him.


            CONGRATULATIONS TO ATHLETES AT PARALYMPICS IN ATHENS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Thank you, Chair. I move without notice:

   That the Council –

1) notes with much pleasure the successes achieved by our athletes at the
  Paralympics in Athens;


     2) especially congratulates our own Natalie du Toit on her excellent
        performances in winning gold medals and the others that have won
        gold, silver and bronze medals; and

     3) expresses its pride in our athletes participating in the
        Paralympics.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Are there any other motions without notice?
Bab’u Mzizi, we have passed yours deliberately, knowing that you were not
in the House. We said you must quickly do it before you come in.

                UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION AGAINST CORRUPTION

    (Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Local Government and
                               Administration)

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson of the Council, colleagues, we are presenting
here today a watershed convention, a convention of the world multilateral
body, the United Nations. The United Nations Convention Against Corruption
is aimed at contributing to the building of a just and caring world and a
humane society. It is aimed at dealing seriously with human greed and
selfishness.
The purpose of the convention is to promote and strengthen measures to
prevent and combat corruption. These measures include international co-
operation in respect of asset recovery; and the promotion of integrity,
accountability and the proper management of public affairs and public
property.

In South Africa the convention finds expression in the South African
regulatory framework in the preamble to the Prevention and Combating of
Corrupt Activities Act, Act 12 of 2004.

The UN Convention Against Corruption has its origin in the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime of 2000. A dedicated
convention against corruption was required, and 105 countries negotiated
the convention, concluding it within two years after only seven sessions.
One hundred and five countries have signed the convention, which requires
that we as a country be party to it.

The timeframe for ratification of the convention is until 9 December 2005.
The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
considered the request for ratification by Parliament of the UN Convention
Against Corruption referred to the committee, recommends that this Council,
in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, ratify the said convention.

The committee took note of the new approach that had been initiated by the
National Council of Provinces, of taking provinces on board in matters
dealing with protocols, conventions and treaties, especially those matters
mentioned in section 231 of the Constitution.

The committee appreciates that the recent approach will further enhance
active participation and inputs from our provinces, thereby fulfilling the
expectations emanating from the core mandate of the National Council of
Provinces. Therefore, we recommend that this House ratify the convention.
Thank you.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is
dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are all delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance to Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to do so? No.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour of, against or abstain. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: The Eastern Cape supports the ratification of the UN
convention. Thank you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: The Free State supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyaxhasa, Madam Chair. [We support, Madam Chair.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Ms P HOLLANDER: The Northern Cape supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke wa rona. [Supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N MACK: Ons steun, Voorsitter. [We support, Chairperson.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.


       CELEBRATING OUR LIVING HERITAGE IN THE TENTH YEAR OF DEMOCRACY


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I call upon the hon Minister. We have received
information, hon Minister, from your department that you were not well, but
thank you for coming to lead the debate. I know that you are very
passionate about issues of heritage; hence you have defied your sickness to
be here.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I am not too
well this morning, but maybe it’s because of being too passionate about
arts and culture that I am not so well.

Madam Chair, hon members, the Ministry of Arts and Culture, together with
the Members of the Executive Councils for Arts and Culture in the
provinces, invites the nation to participate in Heritage Month celebrations
that are taking place, during the course of this month, throughout the
country.

The theme that has been adopted for the next three years is “Celebrating
our living heritage”. For the purpose of this year, which coincides with
the tenth anniversary of our democracy, the theme is “Celebrating our
living heritage in the tenth year of our democracy”.

For the benefit of all, I want to take the opportunity to define the term
“living heritage”. It means the intangible aspects of inherited culture,
and includes cultural traditions, oral history, performance, ritual,
popular memory, skills and techniques, indigenous knowledge systems and a
holistic approach to nature, society and social relations.

Living heritage, like any other human activity, has been around since time
immemorial. It is the lived experience of various communities. It is the
totality of the experience, the manner in which they deal with death,
birth, coming of age, maturity, marriage, old age, etc; the manner in which
they celebrate these stages of human development; the manner in which they
deal with poverty and destitution; how they build their economies; how they
create stability; how they coexist with other communities, as well as with
the natural environment; how they narrate their stories; how they sing
their songs and how they dance.

The kind of living heritage that we have today is part of our inheritance
as a common human society. Our heritage ranges from oral traditions and
histories to rituals and indigenous knowledge systems that have been
preserved and undergone changes, and thus have removed or added some new
dimensions owing to constant interaction amongst various communities of the
world that originally were separated by space, time and distance.

This interaction has further been enhanced by the global cosmopolitanism
that has been brought about by the advent of telecommunications, and
improved travel and tourism, thus reducing the distances amongst various
communities.

South Africa presents a perfect model of a cosmopolitan society and is
comprised of a rich and diverse cultural heritage - hence the concept
“rainbow nation”. It is therefore incumbent upon us as government to create
an enabling environment for the expression and exhibition of the various
forms of living heritage of all our population groups.

This should happen in a manner that supports our ideal of a nonracial,
nonsexist, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious society. It
should also happen within the context of trying to promote the sharing of
cultural experiences amongst the various communities, because it is through
that sharing and mutual appreciation of our common and diverse cultural
heritage that we shall achieve national reconciliation, nation-building and
social cohesion.

This year a different approach to Heritage Month and Heritage Day
programmes has been adopted. It was agreed that we would discontinue the
national event, that is, the one big event on which everyone concentrates
and converges and that is usually characterised by one big event at the
Union Buildings. As a result, the Department of Arts and Culture and the
provincial departments envisage a decentralised Heritage Month and Heritage
Day that will see the various provinces, municipalities and traditional
leadership authorities playing a prominent role in the roll-out strategy,
so that Heritage Month and Heritage Day have an impact at the community
level and generate capacity to mobilise the South African public around the
concept of a living heritage.
Our department and the provinces hope to see the theme as a springboard to
achieve a bigger vision, collecting, preserving and promoting our living
heritage. Through this theme, the Department of Arts and Culture intends to
establish a dynamic national database of both living heritage and living
human treasures, since we are losing the latter almost every day. A case in
point is the tragic passing away, last week, of Dolly Rathebe, who, as many
people know, was an outstanding actress and singer. She was probably one of
the pioneers of cinema amongst Africans in this country.

We have planned for focus weeks that will prioritise different elements of
living heritage. Various stakeholders have begun to provide details of how
they plan to implement programmes designed to popularise living heritage.
The Department of Arts and Culture has forged a partnership with the SA
Broadcasting Corporation to ensure that there is a great deal of publicity
around the theme and programmes throughout the month.

The focus weeks are set out as follows. The first week, which is now past
us, concentrated on music and dance programmes designed not only to
showcase the music and dance performances, but also to link these to
particular stories, events, ceremonies and rituals that characterise that
week.

It was also planned that this would be an opportunity to demonstrate how
music and dance performances have evolved over time in a multicultural
society, and how various cultures have mutually influenced one another.
This is the issue of transculturation.

The rationale behind this exercise was to emphasise our common heritage
that could, in fact, serve as the building blocks for our nation-building
and for social cohesion. The department, co-operating with the Universities
of Venda, Zululand and Fort Hare, collected and preserved indigenous music,
dance and oral history, and during that week presented a number of
opportunities where this could be showcased.

The second week was to be dedicated to indigenous knowledge systems and
practices. There is a tendency sometimes, on the part of many people, to
associate this term, “indigenous knowledge”, exclusively with the African
section of our population. This is a rather uninformed perception, because
all the various population groups have grappled with the challenges that
traditional communities have dealt with.

If you think, for instance, about the production of food, medicines and
ointments which has taken place over centuries, these things are done
completely differently today, but it is a common phenomenon amongst all
population groups and there is a lot we can share in terms of how our
ancestors engaged in judicious farming methods; how they made fire; how
they dug for gold and diamonds; how they conserved the environment; how
they bred their livestock; how they played various roles, such as those of
midwives and home nurses; how they brought up their children; and also how
they used various types of cosmetics and make-up, and so on. We want the
South African population to begin sharing amongst themselves knowledge
about these indigenous knowledge systems and practices.

The third week we will be looking at icons of South African heritage and
their stories. During this week we hope to see the profiling and
interviewing of individuals who will have an opportunity to discuss the
achievements of those who have excelled in various aspects of living
heritage. We have used the concept “icons” in order to simplify the term
“living human treasures”, which is the one that is preferred by Unesco, but
the term “living human treasures” means almost the same thing as “icons”.

People who could be described as icons are those who have contributed,
through their actions, towards the revitalisation of cultural traditions
that are at risk of disappearing; those who have demonstrated and affirmed
the importance of the cultural expression of the peoples and communities of
South Africa as a source of inspiration and as a means of bringing peoples
and communities closer together; those who have provided proof of
excellence in the application of their skills and techniques; those who
have given wide evidence of their roots in cultural traditions or the
cultural history of the community; and those who have affirmed their value
as unique testimonies of living cultural traditions.

We hope that the fourth week will be a week of national dialogue on the
role of living heritage in moral regeneration, social cohesion, poverty
alleviation, nation-building, reconciliation, etc. It’s planned that this
national dialogue will focus on these national imperatives, the main
purpose being to simplify these imperatives for all South African citizens.

It is further hoped to discuss the manner in which South Africa is actually
realising these ideals. In recognition of the wisdom that resides in the
South African people, our department, through the broadcast media, will
engage the nation in discussion on how various aspects of living heritage
can be harnessed to grapple with these priorities.

The national dialogue will, to a greater degree, try to lay a foundation
for the development of a national strategy on the collection, protection,
preservation and promotion of our living heritage.

During the course of this month, we are also going to be undertaking acts
of restitution and receiving from others goods and services in restitution.

In the twentieth century, round about 1915, Namibia was a colony of South
Africa. As a result of that, a lot of material, which rightly belongs in
the national archives, libraries and other heritage institutions of
Namibia, is still with us here in South Africa. On 24 September 2004, we
will be undertaking an act of restitution in terms of which our department
will be returning and restoring those properties to the people of Namibia,
through their government.

On the same day, we will also be receiving from the embassy of the
Netherlands an archive that was built up by the AABN –
Anti-Apartheid Beweging Nederlands. This is an archive of materials
relating to the struggle in South Africa, mostly video footage, which
consists of something like 189 hours, which they will be restoring to South
Africa for our national archives and as part of our national record.

During this month we are also launching a project through our schools.
Actually, the launch took place yesterday at Ikemeleng Primary School in
Soweto. In terms of this project we are distributing national flags,
national symbols, our national orders, coat of arms, etc, to the various
schools, and using this as a means of educating our young people about the
significance of these national symbols.

At Ikemeleng yesterday we unveiled a number of murals, which had been
executed by the pupils at that school, with the assistance of local
artists. They are quite impressive murals, which are all around the outside
walls of the school. In this way, we hope to be be able to teach our young
people about the importance of these national symbols, what they mean, etc.

That was just the beginning. We are going to take this campaign to other
schools, and there will be further launches during the course of the coming
months. The schools in Naledi, Soweto, participated in this project
yesterday. There were something like 14 that participated. During the next
few days there will be unveilings at the other 13 schools that
participated.

We hope, therefore, during the course of this month, to undertake quite a
number of interesting initiatives, which we think are going to assist us to
recognise not only what we share as South Africans, but also to recognise,
accept and embrace the diversity of our community, because much as we want
to emphasise the issue of unity, as the motto on our coat of arms says, it
is this “diverse people in unity” that makes up South Africa.

We want to call upon members of Parliament, government departments,
nongovernmental organisations, community organisations and others to
participate in this effort together with us. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA: Chairperson, hon Minister of Arts and Culture, hon members,
comrades and invited guests, the people of great countries are bonded
together by their history, hence their cultural landscape is enriched by
the pattern of the buildings, monuments, sites and other places of meaning
which reflect the events and layers of experiences and processes throughout
the centuries. Our country is no exception.

In fact, our story, more so because of where we come from, is one whose
layers and experiences, debilitating and aspiring alike, has yet to be
told. For centuries, many myths and prejudices have concealed the true
heritage of South Africa. It is therefore imperative that, as this is
Heritage Month and we are approaching Heritage Day after our first decade
of liberation, we do so from this perspective and contribute to the
development of a national consciousness and identity.

Heritage Day, in our view as the ANC-led government, goes beyond the mere
assembly of representations of diverse legacies. It endeavours to bring
together these multiple identities and perspectives to form a holistic
picture of our national identity, and thereby provide a coherent, wider and
overarching perspective of the South African character as a whole.

In line with our ANC-led government’s programme for Heritage Month 2004, it
is appropriate that we, because of the extent to which eurocentrism still
decorates the South African cultural landscape, utilise this podium to
pronounce ourselves on the promotion of African values. We want to
emphasise this, because every vote for the ANC in the April election of
this year was also a vote in support of nurturing this component of the
people’s contract. Moreover, it is our duty to dispel any notion that might
exist in the minds of our people, namely that as their public
representatives, serving in this law-making institution, we are merely
paying lip service to this project.

We are all aware of the erosive effect colonialism and apartheid had on our
indigenous knowledge systems, which include tradition-based literacy,
artistic and scientific works, innovations, scientific discoveries and all
other intangible aspects of inherited culture. Right now the legacy of
South Africa’s heritage landscape is the denial of the existence of
tradition-based innovation and creation that resulted from African
intellectual activity. Our roles, therefore, should be recognised. We
should celebrate and promote African values and contributions in a
meaningful way.

Moreover, it is incumbent upon us to lead by example and to inform our
people as to how and why our communities have undergone the changes that
they have, hence our arrival at this point in our history. In this regard,
we are indeed inspired by the policies and legislative framework that have
been put in place to ensure the preservation and protection of all our
treasures: rituals, oral history, culture, traditions, skills and
techniques, indigenous knowledge systems and so forth.

It would be amiss if we celebrated and gave expression to our cultural
heritage, and did not pay tribute to our cultural icons. They are those
individuals who have, through various modes of expression, either
contributed through solid action towards revitalising a cultural tradition
or reaffirmed the cultural identities of peoples and communities. Moreover,
there are individuals who have excelled in the application of skills and
techniques and have given testimonies of living cultural traditions.
Through their work, they have recorded social structure, initiation
ceremonies, rites of passage, religious ceremonies, live dance, arts and
vibrant costumes, but above all they have offered us an insight into the
rich and varied cultural history of apartheid.

We think of Afrikaner cultural icons who have also, through their
contributions, inspired a new direction in Afrikaans culture and raised a
new consciousness as to what it means to express yourself on anti-apartheid
platforms. Here we think of people such as Ingrid Jonker and Johannes
Kerkorrel. Other icons that left an indelible impression on our heritage
landscape include Miriam Makeba, Jonas Ngwange, Johnny Mekwa and many more,
who ensured artistic expression and opposition to a system that could never
be artistically praised. We celebrate living icons such as Sibongile
Khumalo.

It is important to encourage the coming generation to acquire knowledge on
historical archives, the trees and mountains we have in South Africa, and
also to understand cultural food such as “imifino” [vegetables], “emadumbe”
[yams], “izicade” [carrots], “mogodu” [tripe], and so forth. Historical
stories need to be told to our children. It is important to learn all 11
languages enshrined in the Constitution. I must commend the province I come
from, Gauteng, of course, the smart province, because people there talk and
understand 11 languages.

In conclusion, we as the ANC will ensure that the importance of heritage
and its enriching impact on the lives of ordinary South Africans is
sustained. This effort includes the creation of new social structures and
support for existing forms of cultural expression. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, members who are here today and other invited
guests, South Africa is a multicultural society, rich in heritage. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister for indicating in his
speech that some schools are moving towards an understanding of our
heritage as of today. We really appreciate the effort that the Ministry is
making.

In the rural areas of South Africa you will find that not many students
understand what our flag stands for. Therefore, I believe that if that
effort is made at schools, it will assist a great deal in our society
today. Our heritage was not built overnight, but through the ages amongst
various cultural groups.

The 11 official languages recognised by our Constitution contributed
immensely to our living heritage. I would like this House to recognise that
these 11 languages are here to stay, because our Constitution recognises
that whatever these languages have done in the past, are doing today and
will be doing in the future should be recognised, because they contribute
to and make life what it is today in South Africa.

Our living heritage needs urgent attention in terms of funding to maintain
and promote what is available today, and what is to be done in the future.
If we do not maintain and promote what we have, then our society is going
to be lost for not knowing what our cultural aspects are, and what our
heritage in South Africa is.

Cultural activities such as “tshikona” [reed and drum music] which is
normally practised amongst the Vendas, “dinaka” [horn music performance]
which is normally practised amongst the Sotho-speaking nations, and so on,
need to be promoted at the highest level.

These cultural activities have their traditional regalia and equipment that
is used. Their promotion and recognition is critical for the promotion of
our cultural heritage in South Africa today. We need to look into those
particular aspects, so that our country becomes what it is and what the
world admires.

There is a rich history within black communities that is not documented. I
really appreciate the fact that the department is taking steps to ensure
that the history, cultural activities and heritage amongst nations in South
Africa which have not been documented are being documented. Otherwise, if
it is not documented, 20 years from now our own children will not know what
the Zulus, the Sothos and others did in the past.

Therefore, I really believe that the department should take great steps in
making sure that the documentation of our history is speeded up. Arts and
Culture needs to take the lead in encouraging this documentation. I believe
it is their competency to do so. If we do not do that I believe that, as a
nation, we are going to be lost.

Our education system should actively encourage the teaching and learning of
aspects of our heritage in full so that we are able to recognise the
contribution of the various communities. I want to emphasise that it is at
school level that we learn best. After school we have no time to learn
things. Therefore, if cultural activities are included at school level, I
believe they are going to be cemented, and they are going to be there for
good. Our children, whether they are at Model C schools or other types of
schools, should be introduced to these kinds of activities so that we as
South Africans can get to know each other better.

The significance of the world heritage sites within our borders should
become part of our curriculum in schools. The reason one has to emphasise
these elements at school level is because of the fact that there is a
certain amount of ignorance at schools as far as heritage and cultural
aspects are concerned. It is my belief that if these elements are brought
into the picture at school level, then as a nation we are not going to be
lost.

South Africans still need to find each other through our own history as a
rainbow nation. But at the same time, you find xenophobic tendencies
prevailing in South Africa. You are classified as South African or non-
South African depending on the language you speak or even depending on your
accent. I think this has to stop, because South Africans, Africans and
people coming from other continents are part and parcel of the people who
contribute to the development of this country. It should not be your accent
that determines your acceptance in South Africa. It should not be your
accent that determines what you can do and what you cannot do within our
borders today.

Oral history is no longer practised the way it used to be by some of us.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, I am afraid your time has expired.
I have been listening to you. You started in low gear, and towards the end
you started to pick up. I think that is what ate up your time. My sincere
apologies, but your time has expired. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson and hon Minister, I woke up in a South
Africa this morning as a proud South African. I woke up in a South Africa
where the future is certainly more attractive than the past. I woke up in a
South Africa where it is not the size of your fist, but rather the logic of
your argument that counts. I woke up in a South Africa where there is
common agreement that in our diversity lies our strength. I woke up in a
country where we take cognisance of the past, treasure today, but dream of
a better tomorrow.

Hon Chairperson, indeed spring is in the air for South Africa. As South
Africans we can be proud, especially when we celebrate our living heritage
in the tenth year of our democracy. After ten years we are still building
our country, but, more importantly, we are building our nation. It is
therefore appropriate that today we also debate our cultural heritage.

As we sit here, hon Chairperson, we sit as Sinclair, Tau, Themba, Hollander
and Le Roux, and all of us come with something from the past. We South
Africans wear “velskoene” [raw-hide shoes], we sit on “riempiesbanke”
[riempie-seat settees], we eat biltong and “morogo” [leafy green
vegetables], and we cheer for Amabokoboko and Bafana Bafana. Hon
Chairperson, indeed we are South Africans. So when we debate today, we are
doing it for our future, so we can say that as South Africans we want to
become the powerhouse of not just Africa, but also the world.

Indeed, hon Chairperson, the hon Minister was right: unity is our strength.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Chair, hon Minister, during the apartheid era the entire
life and destiny of every person in South Africa was determined by an
artificial, arbitrary and totally unscientific system of race
classification.

This unlamented era in the evolution of our democracy was characterised by
racial denigration and the demoralisation of those who were not “blessed”
with white pigmentation. The dignity, identity and esteem of the vast
majority of the South African populace, that is us blacks, were
nonexistent.

Today, as we stand on the threshold of our second decade of democracy, we
celebrate our South Africanness, all of us, the kaleidoscopic mix of
diverse cultures that make up the veritable rainbow nation.

We celebrate the beauty of our people and the beauty of our land. Did we
not celebrate the return of our beloved Saartjie Baartman to her beloved
homeland only last year? Did we not, even after some two centuries, rescue
her, retrieve her from the ignominy of being an object of obscene curiosity
in some foreign European capital; as some human freak? Did we not embrace
her in spirit and lower her remains into the African soil under the African
sun? In one fell swoop, did we not restore and celebrate the status of
women in South African society?

Only last week South Africa hosted the visiting president of India, Dr
Kalam. Not surprisingly, one of the highlights of His Eminence’s visit was
a visit to Pietermaritzburg and the Phoenix settlement in order to pay
homage to that great apostle of peace and nonviolence, Mahatma Gandhi,
whose policy of satyagraha, the strategy of nonviolence against racial
intransigence, germinated right here in South Africa when he confronted the
racial arrogance and excesses of the British colonial powers in their
unbridled, unChristian treatment of Indian and black subjects in South
Africa.

For some 20 years Mahatma Gandhi was a beacon of light in the fight against
racism and obstinate oppression. The Phoenix settlement at Inanda is a
reminder of the struggle of the human spirit to triumph over evil.
Incidentally, hon Chair, the Phoenix settlement is only a stone’s throw, so
to speak, from the revered Dube Memorial at Ohlange at Inanda.

John Langalibalele Dube was the first president-general of the ANC, which
was founded some 92 years ago. John Dube was a scholar, a gentleman, a
leader, a farmer, a teacher, a politician, a patriot and a philanthropist.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I’m afraid your time has expired, Mr
Raju. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, guests, the
Heritage Day debate before this august House is indeed one to celebrate. I
say celebrate, because not only are we celebrating 10 years of freedom and
of heritage and culture, but we are also fortunate in the sense that some
of the stark reminders of our colonial apartheid past, in the form of the
trappings and décor of this House, have been replaced timeously with
symbols that reflect the spirit and values of our democracy. We believe
that the new symbols will certainly become a cherished part of our
parliamentary heritage.

For the purpose of this debate, it is important to point out that as South
Africans we are blessed with what is called an “intangible” cultural
heritage. The intangible heritage is heritage which communities, groups and
individuals acknowledge as part of their culture and which is passed on
from one generation to another. It gives them a sense of identity and
dignity. It includes practices, expressions, knowledge, skills, as well as
instruments, objects, artefacts and cultural spaces associated therewith.

Voorsitter, die provinsie waarvandaan ek kom, die Noord-Kaap, is ’n
sprekende voorbeeld van diversiteit van kulture. Dit spog ook met simbole
van wat die Departement van Kuns en Kultuur, as deel van sy Erfenismaand-
program, Lewende Erfenis noem. Hieroor kan ’n mens nie uitgepraat raak nie.
Van die agb lede hier teenwoordig sal met my saamstem dat die Noord-Kaap
met seker die rykste versameling van San-rotstekeninge onder die Afrika-son
kan spog. Die hele gebied, veral langs die Oranje- en Vaalriviere, is
lewende bewys daarvan.

Meer nog is die McGregor-museum in Kimberley. Geen kultuur-opvoedkundige
toer na die Noord-Kaap kan voltooi wees as besoekers of toeriste nie
hierdie museum besoek nie.

Die Noord-Kaap spog ook met verskeie nasionale parke en
natuurbeskermingsareas, byvoorbeeld die Kalahari Nasionale Gemsbokpark
tesame met die Gemsbok Nasionale Park in Botswana.

Maar wat ’n mens seker die kroonjuweel van die nasionale parke kan noem, is
die totstandkoming van die Kgalagadi Transfrontierpark. Tans is dit die
grootste natuurbeskermingsarea in suidelike Afrika en een van die grootste
beskermde natuurlike ekosisteme in die wêreld. Hierdie park maak
voorsiening vir onomheinde toegang vir inloop tussen Suid-Afrika en
Botswana, en bestaan uit ’n oppervlakte van meer as twee miljoen hektaar.

Dan is daar ook die Ai-Ais-Richtersveldtransfrontierpark. Hierdie park, agb
Voorsitter en lede, beslaan van die mees skouspelagtige tonele, bestaande
uit ’n kaal woestynomgewing in Suidelike Afrika, en dit ís skouspelagtig.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the province where I come from, the Northern Cape, is a good
example of the diversity of cultures. It also boasts symbols of what the
Department of Arts and Culture, as part of its Heritage Month programme,
calls Living Heritage. This is a subject of which one never tires. Some hon
members present here will agree with me that the Northern Cape boasts
possibly the finest collection of San rock art under the African sun. The
whole area, especially along the Orange and Vaal Rivers, is living proof of
this.

There is moreover the McGregor Museum in Kimberley. No cultural-educational
tour to the Northern Cape is complete without visitors or tourists visiting
this museum.

The Northern Cape also boasts various national parks and nature
conservation areas, for example the Kalahari National Gemsbok Park together
with the Gemsbok National Park in Botswana.

But what one can certainly call the crown jewel of national parks is the
establishment of the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park. It is presently the
largest nature conservation area in Southern Africa and one of the largest
protected natural ecosystems in the world. This park provides unfenced
access to facilitate free movement between South Africa and Botswana, and
comprises an area of more than two million hectares.

Then there is also the Ai-Ais-Richtersveld Transfrontier Park. This park,
hon Chairperson and members, has some of the most spectacular sights, and
it is barren desert area in Southern Africa, which is indeed spectacular.]

Yes, Chairperson, the kind of living heritage that we have today is part of
the inheritance from our common ancestry from time immemorial. Our living
heritage ranges from oral traditions and histories to rituals and
indigenous knowledge systems that have been preserved and have undergone
changes, thus removing or adding new dimensions, owing to consistent
interaction among the various communities of the world that were originally
separated by space, time and distance.

This interaction has further been enhanced by the global cosmopolitanism
brought about by the advent of telecommunications and increased travel and
tourism, thus reducing the distances amongst various communities.

Our ANC-led government has transformed and is still transforming our
policies and legislation to create an enabling environment for the
expression of various forms of living heritage for all population groups.
This is happening in a manner that supports our ideals of nonracialism,
nonsexism, and a multicultural and multilingual society. It is also
happening in the context of promoting and sharing cultural experiences
amongst cultural groups, because it is through this sharing and mutual
appreciation of our common and diverse heritage that we shall achieve
national reconciliation and nation-building.

For us in the ANC our progress with regard to language in particular, and
how it relates to the expression of culture, is indeed significant, more so
in respect of the increased usage of indigenous languages in this House and
from this podium, so that we are indeed able to speak to our constituencies
in a meaningful way.

Moreover, this signals to all our cultural groups that culture and language
differences are indeed appreciated, even at governmental level. However, it
is important that we increase our efforts.

In conclusion, it is important for all cultural groups to share their
knowledge about the changes our cultural heritage has undergone. This could
take the form of looking at both the diverse and common elements. Moreover,
it will be important to learn how these cultures have cross-pollinated to
create hybrid cultures that have a unique South African character.

It is important to note that we will have to work harder to ensure that the
legacy of apartheid does not define each one of us according to race,
ethnic group or tribe, and we will have to share a common destiny in order
to build a better South Africa for all of us. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, Mr Sulliman. Before I
call upon the Minister I want to recognise on this day, as we are
deliberating on our living heritage, that we have in our midst
schoolchildren from Willie Junior Secondary School. We want to welcome them
in the National Council of Provinces. We appreciate your presence
here.[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Madam Chairperson, let me thank all the
hon members for their participation in this debate. We can all agree that
the points that have been made are very sound, and I also think it points
to the fact that despite the political differences amongst the various
parties here, there is a body of shared values and ideals that all South
Africans have embraced.

I want to remark on some of the contributions. I won’t be responding to
every comment that has been made, but perhaps just underscore one or two
points made by hon members. One of the challenges that South Africa faces
is precisely how to preserve those aspects of our country’s history that
have not necessarily been documented in forms that are familiar today.

Last week in the Limpopo province there was a commemoration of King
Sekhukhune of the Bapedi people. During this commemoration a number of old
people, who had been beneficiaries of the oral tradition of handing down
history which existed amongst the Africans in the past, were able to share
with younger people those stories about the past of their people, their
heroes of the past, etc.

That is a form of documentation that is probably universal throughout the
world in terms of which information is handed from one generation to
another by word of mouth. But of course we all know that as you move away
from rural areas into urban areas many of those sorts of traditions are
lost. Our urban living is much too fast and complex to permit that sort of
opportunity and space. Many of those things then get lost in the process as
we become modernised and our societies become more urbanised.

It therefore becomes important for us to find ways of preserving those
memories. We are perhaps fortunate that we are living in the 21st century,
when the techniques of documenting, recording and preserving knowledge are
so far advanced. One of the things that we are undertaking, as a
department, is precisely finding ways and means of preserving those sorts
of memories.

I want to agree with the hon member who said that this is one of the
challenges that we have to undertake. But in addition to that, there are
many traditions and many other forms of knowledge which have in fact been
recorded in writing by various communities in this country. But owing to
the character of our publishing business we stand to lose many of these,
because they are not being republished, reprinted and redistributed.

If you go to a country such as Britain, for example, you will find that you
can walk into any bookshop, and I mean from the smallest, cheapest bookshop
to the most fancy, and you name one of the great English authors, anyone
working there would be able to point you
to the relevant shelf, and you would be able to find your Dickenses,
Thackerays, etc.

A friend of mine called me some four weeks ago and said they were
desperately looking for a very wellknown isiXhosa novel, and they hadn’t
been able to find it in Exclusive Books in Johannesburg. I then said they
should try the University bookshop near Witwatersrand. They went there and
it didn’t have it either. They couldn’t even point that friend of mine to
any particular bookshop that would carry that novel.

That is just one particular novel, but there are many others like that in
Setswana, Sesotho, Sepedi, Tshivenda, Xitsonga, in the indigenous
languages, written by African authors in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries and beyond, and they are no longer being published.

Now many of these portray very valuable aspects of the cultural history of
South Africa, and we might lose them forever. Let’s face it, a Charles
Dickens would not be known to the likes of me here in Cape Town, was it not
for the fact that after he was published, some time in the mid-nineteenth
century in Britain, he has been reprinted and republished many times over,
so that even those children in the gallery, when they get to the point
where they want to read works of Dickens, will able to obtain them quite
easily.

As South Africans we have to do something about that. Let’s face it, no one
else is going to do it, no one in France, no one in Germany and no one in
the United States will do it. South Africans have to do it. It is part of
our cultural history. I want to emphasise that point.

That also then emphasises the need for having the necessary resources for
our heritage activities. I want to appeal to hon members to think seriously
about this, because, after all, all these activities are funded from the
public purse. My department depends on the public purse for everything we
do. When we come around here during budget debates, people must remember
what they said today, and not forget it and think that we are just looking
for more money. We are looking for more money sometimes to do exactly the
things that you are saying we should be doing.

The past is important, as all of us have emphasised. But the past can
either be a great teacher or it can be a burden and a trap. Regrettably, in
the not-too-recent past, here in our country, instead of being our teacher,
our past was a burden and very much a trap, and we carried over, very late
into the 20th century, institutions and practices that should have gone out
of fashion in 1900, because we allowed our past to become such a trap and a
burden to us.

But if we want to turn our past into a teacher and not a burden and a trap,
it means we must converse with that past and be able to draw the
appropriate lessons from it. I was very excited on Sunday night when M-Net
had an item on their Carte Blanche programme called “Where do we come
from?” They did something quite interesting. I think it ties up with one of
the issues raised by hon members here – the World Heritage Sites here in
South Africa.

As we know, scientific investigation now indicates that the species known
as Homo sapiens, to which we all belong, has a common ancestor who probably
resided somewhere near the Sterkfontein Caves in Magaliesberg in Gauteng.

They did a very interesting experiment: they asked a number of notable
South Africans to donate samples of their blood, from which DNA samples
were taken. They used that genetic material to trace people’s ancestry and
quite surprising results were obtained. It’s a great pity that something
like this had not been done in 1948, 1945, or even earlier. It might have
saved this country a great deal of pain. Because one of the outcomes of
that investigation is that a prominent Afrikaner lady finds that she might
be related to former President Nelson Mandela. Tim Modise discovered that
he had European ancestors. Someone else who never knew this discovered that
she had Asian ancestors.

There was a very interesting piece in Beeld yesterday, which followed up
many of these investigations. It is quite surprising what happens when you
actually submit yourself to these sorts of scientific investigations. It is
of course ironic that it was Beeld that published this, but I think it is
also in a sense a salutary lesson for us all, because 10 or 20 years ago
Beeld would not have dared to have dabbled in things like that. They would
not have dared to suggest that a prominent Afrikaner might be related to a
Bantu such as Nelson Mandela - God save us! But anyway, it is indicative of
how far we have come as a nation that Beeld is actually taking up that
issue.

The World Heritage Sites are therefore also important, not only for what
they teach the world, but for what they teach South Africa, because this is
the ultimate repudiation of all those pseudoscientific explanations about
race, ethnicity and so on. At the end of the day we have a common ancestor.
If there was an Adam and Eve, that Adam and Eve were Africans and they
lived near the Magaliesberg. Now isn’t that wonderful? [Laughter.]

Phoenix settlement and the Ohlange Institute in Durban are very important
sites indeed, and I agree with hon Raju, they are important not only
because of the names associated with them, but also for what they
symbolise.  Both these institutions tell us a lot about how ordinary human
beings make and can change history.

When I spoke at Phoenix settlement last week Friday, when we received the
President of India there, one of the things I pointed out was that Mohandas
Gandhi would have been nobody had it not been for the fact that he was able
to mobilise thousands of people to embrace his vision and to follow him. It
was the people who became his followers and embraced his vision who made
him somebody and who transformed him from just a nice British-trained
barrister into a freedom fighter.

Equally, John Langalibalele Dube will also just have been a very clever,
educated scholar had it not been for the millions of people who embraced
his vision and followed him. I think that is the salutary lesson we can
draw from both these institutions. Because we recognised the importance of
both, one of the things that is under consideration by the department is
how we should preserve the memory of these great actors in the history of
this country and the institutions they built. We are working with the
government of KwaZulu-Natal to figure out a way of memorialising these
great sites.

One of the hon members spoke about Gauteng and the fact that all 11 of our
official languages are spoken there. The hon member might have added many
other languages from other parts of Africa and from other parts of the
world, which are also now spoken in that province. This is as it should be,
because as the world moves forward, and the distance, space and time that
separate different segments of humanity become reduced, the reality of us
being one human family becomes much more palpable in the way we live. What
is happening in Gauteng is indicative of that tension that has always
existed and that must necessarily exit between the past and the present.

There are many who say that modernity, urbanisation and things that go with
them are destructive, and that they add nothing of value. If you go to
Gauteng, you will see a living repudiation of that sort of assertion,
because what we have seen there is in fact the emergence, through modernity
and urbanisation, of what one might call a modern African city in which, if
you walk down the street, you can hear people speaking Sepedi, Setswana,
Xitsonga, Tshivenda, isiXhosa, isiZulu, you name it.

In addition, these days you hear people speaking Shona, Nyanza, Swahili and
a whole number of other languages from beyond South Africa’s borders. If
you listen very carefully, you will pick up a little bit of Bulgarian here,
a little bit of Russian there, a little bit of German there, etc. Gauteng
is becoming a sort of melting pot, not only of Africa, but also of the
world. That also is an important aspect of our heritage.

We should not use the past as a means of almost perhaps blackmailing the
future, but as a way of linking to the future, because our future is what
one sees happening in Gauteng. It is the future not only of this country,
but I think the future of the world in which you have this melting of
cultures in which people accept that they are diverse in their origins and
speak a whole number of languages, have different traditions, different
ways of cooking and even different ways of dressing, but nonetheless, in
pursuance of common objectives, are willing to work together for those
common objectives.

I want to thank the hon members and the NCOP for the opportunity to address
you. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, hon Minister. After the
departure of Willie Junior Secondary School, hon Minister, we have received
another school, Hyacinth Primary School. We also welcome them on this
important day on which we debate our living heritage. Welcome to our young
generation that will be the presidents, premiers, ministers and members of
Parliament of tomorrow. I am sure it starts at this age, that you have to
learn and understand the role of being a parliamentarian in this 21st
century. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 10:39 and resumed at 14:00.


Afternoon Sitting


QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – See that book.

    VOICE OF AFRICAN WOMEN: WHAT SHOULD BE THE ROLE AND PLACE OF THE PAN-
                        AFRICAN WOMEN’S ORGANISATION

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Once again, I welcome the Deputy President in
leading this debate and call upon you, Sir, to take the floor.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, Madam Chair. I accept this
very willingly. I know that I haven’t been around the NCOP, so I have to
pay for that. [Laughter.] Chairperson of the NCOP and hon members, let me
congratulate you, Madam Chairperson and this House, on the decision to hold
this important debate on the role of African women in building a new Africa
and, in particular, on the role of the Pan- African Women's Organisation in
this regard.

Given the enormous contribution of African women in the struggle for the
liberation of the continent, we need to be mindful of the imperative of
women to become involved in the running of the affairs of the continent and
the rebuilding of the continent.

We are all aware of the enormous challenges that face the African
continent, challenges of poverty and underdevelopment arising from decades
of colonialist marginalisation and exploitation. The question of working
for the sustainable development of the continent is therefore critical, and
is uppermost on the agenda of the African Union.

In order to achieve sustainable development and an improvement in the life
of all, we need to prepare the political environment. That is why, through
the African Union, we all work to promote democracy, good economic and
political governance, the eradication of conflict, and strive generally to
achieve economic growth and development.

The Constitutive Act of the African Union provides the framework for the
promotion of women's rights and for women to participate in this broader
programme of building the continent. In terms of the principles guiding the
AU, there are at least three clauses in Article 4 that have relevance to
human rights and women's rights. They are the promotion of gender equality;
respect for democratic principles and human rights; the rule of law and
good governance; and the promotion of social justice to ensure balanced
economic development.

All the institutional and implementational organs of the African Union,
including Nepad and the Pan-African Parliament, have committed themselves
to gender parity and representation in all the work they undertake in
rebuilding the continent. For example, of every five representatives of all
member states of the Pan-African Parliament, the Constitutive Act decrees
that one must be a woman. The Pan-African Women's Organisation therefore
has structures with which it can work to advance gender equality in the
programmes of the African Union.

With regard to the socioeconomic development of the continent, the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, Nepad, clearly spells out the role of
women and the programmes through which the empowerment of women can be
achieved.

These include the promotion of women in social and economic development by
reinforcing their capacity in the domains of education and training; the
development of revenue-generating activities through facilitating access to
credit; and assuring their participation in the political and economic life
of African countries. The Pan-African Women's Organisation should play a
leading role in monitoring and evaluation to ascertain whether the AU and
its organs meet such obligations and undertakings.

Another important area is that of conflict resolution. The African Peace
and Security Council has been established to assist in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. It is well known that women
experience the brutality of war more than men. In the recent attack at the
United Nations’ camp in Gatumba, Burundi, many of the victims were women
and children. I doubt we would be wrong in saying that the majority of
inhabitants of refugee camps in Africa are women.

This necessitates more active participation by women in the programmes of
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping
and peacemaking. Women should not be seen only as victims of war and
recipients of assistance. Avenues should be open for them to become active
in peace and security structures in order to inform and manage the manner
in which the continent deals with conflicts.

With regard to socioeconomic rights, we all know the challenges facing
women in individual African nation-states. There is a need for urgent
interventions in the areas of promoting access to social services, in
instituting campaigns against gender-based violence, and in protecting the
legal rights of women regarding land, property, inheritance, education and
all other socioeconomic rights.

There could be lessons to be learnt from a few individual states on how
they have responded to some of the challenges facing women. We believe our
country could make a good case study. South Africa has a vibrant history of
women's involvement in the struggle for liberation and political life in
general. This has informed the actions and programmes of the democratic
government since 1994.

Women continue to play a visible and active role in Cabinet, in Parliament,
as premiers in provinces and in many other senior positions in the public
and private sectors. The presence of women in such senior positions and the
efficient and effective manner in which they run the institutions they head
are indications of the outstanding capabilities of South African women.

Having said that, we must hasten to add that government sees its
responsibilities as opening opportunities to all women for a better life
and participation in the public life of our country, and not only for a few
middle-class women.

This explains the massive programmes that government has initiated over the
past 10 years to improve access to basic social services, education,
business and other opportunities in order to enable all women, regardless
of their station in life, to enjoy the fruits of democracy and freedom.

A number of laws have gone through this House aimed at improving the
quality of life of women. These include employment and economic opportunity
legislation; safety and security legislation such as the Domestic Violence
Act; and social legislation such as the Maintenance Act, forcing all
parents to take responsibility for the raising of their children.

Our country is also a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and we strive to
fulfil these obligations at all times.

I mention our country as an example in terms of what can be done if women
and men work actively together to mainstream gender in the public life of
the country. We still have a long way to go, but I believe South Africa has
made a good start. The Pan-African Women's Organisation could play a role
in promoting information-sharing and in learning from each other as African
countries.

The struggle for the emancipation of African women continues, and it is a
struggle in which all of us need to participate. We cannot leave it to Pawo
members alone. We all have a duty to be part of the programme of building a
gender-sensitive Africa. We will know we have achieved the end of this
struggle when Africa is free of discrimination, oppression and violence
against women. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mrs M N OLIPHANT: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Deputy President, hon
Chairperson of the Council, hon members and comrades, I am honoured and
privileged to have the opportunity to address the House on the voice of
women, and the place and role of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation,
which was officially founded in Dar es Salaam in 1962, and whose biggest
affiliate was the ANC Women’s League.

Allow me to begin by reminding this House that five days ago, on Thursday,
16 September 2004, our country was bestowed the honour of hosting the
second session of the long-desired and historical
Pan-African Parliament. For me, the establishment of this continental body
signifies the final nail in the colonial coffin and is the vehicle that
will give new meaning to the African Renaissance.

However, before I can go any further, it is appropriate to use this time to
forward my congratulations to South Africa’s representatives to the Pan-
African Parliament. They are the National Assembly Speaker, Comrade Baleka
Mbete, the Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Comrade
Mahlangu, Adv Zweletu Madasa, Sue Vos and Fatima Hajaig.

We are confident that in this new deployment they will discharge their
responsibilities with honour and humility, knowing that the aspirations of
the African poor are expressed through them. As Africans we have decided on
our destiny. We now have the Pan-African Parliament. The Pan-African
Parliament is currently made up of five MPs from each of the countries that
have signed its protocols. Three of the five South African representatives
to the Pan-African Parliament are women.

Moreover, I want to share with this House that not only are women
participating in Africa’s parliament, but, more profoundly, a woman is
leading the African parliament. That woman is the honourable Gertrude
Mongella, who was unanimously elected as the first president of the newly
established Pan-African Parliament in Addis Ababa. In her address she said
that one of the roles of this continental body would be to challenge the
stereotypes of women and of Africa, and she promised that the parliament
would not become just another talkshop.

The second session of the PAP coincided with the passing of two of our
country’s anti-apartheid struggle heroes, Oom Bey and Ray Alexander. While
as a country we mourn our great freedom fighters, the occasion of the PAP
served as a reminder that what they fought for was not in vain. The African
people are forging a new dawn for themselves. The suffering and economic
emancipation of women from Cape to Cairo will top the transformation agenda
of this institution.

The representatives of the PAP will echo the words of the greatest freedom
fighters such as Marcus Gavi and Kwame Nkrumah. This institution is a step
forward towards Africa realising her potential and we will work towards
ensuring that Africa’s voice is heard more strongly within the context of
nations. We have made giant strides on this continent and I, like millions
of others, feel proud to be African.

This is not just about addressing past imbalances, but it is also about
delivering to the women in a meaningful way. The strategic place of the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation is not only about getting numbers right, but
about enabling women to make a meaningful contribution to the social,
political and economic aspects of African society. This represents a
profound confidence in women by our government, and we see this as the
critical mass needed to make a difference in the struggle to promote
women’s rights.

This will also be very important in promoting a range of policies and
legislation that will benefit women and free them from all forms of
oppression. To date the South African government has introduced legislation
intended to undo the injustices inflicted upon women, with specific
reference to the Maintenance Act and the Domestic Violence Act, but more
still needs to be done.

We still have situations where there are some men and state agents who do
not comply with these Acts. Throughout the entire African continent, we
should strive for an end to violence against women and children. The legacy
of economic inequality is prevalent on the continent. Whilst talking about
the general economic inequalities of the past, experienced by the
previously disadvantaged people, we must be mindful that women are the most
affected people.

Economic empowerment therefore becomes critical. In this regard, we have
seen the initiative directed towards empowering women, but more still needs
to be done. Our country should also propagate the issue of economic
empowerment for women on the entire African continent. The recognition of
the Pan-African Women’s Organisation is a clear indication of the important
voice of women in our society, and that women need to organise themselves
to ensure that their concerns are represented at Nepad, the African Union
and the Pan-African Parliament.

While the voice of African women continues to be heard, violence against
women continues to contribute to the spread of HIV and Aids. This is an
indication that a lot still needs to be done to ensure the total
emancipation of women, and we need to ensure that Pawo is transformed to
truly become the voice of African women.

As we talk of Africa’s turn in this century, we should equally see this
century as an era of opportunity to bring about political and socioeconomic
changes on the continent. Women should play a leading role in bringing
about these changes. As African women we need to decide on our destiny, and
our destiny is in our own hands. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, colleagues and
guests, a lot has been said about the role of women in society. Now is the
time to reflect on women in Africa and the role they should play, and the
direction the Pan-African Women’s Organisation should take.

To me the direction is very clear, especially if seen in the light of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
Women in South Africa and on this continent suffer because of
discrimination in all forms. They also suffer because of HIV and Aids,
poverty and hunger. There are high incidences of illiteracy. Two thirds of
the world’s 876 million illiterate people are women. Unemployment figures
are higher for women than for men.

These issues should be high on the agenda for the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation, and it should be made clear that African women have a voice.
That voice should not be used to exclude men from the solutions that we
need to seek; it should include men. And here I need to quote from the
Interparliamentary Union’s plan of action to correct present imbalances in
the participation of men and women in political life, and I want to extend
this to all spheres of society:

  The combination of efforts on the part of all society’s components is
  indispensable to tackle and resolve the problems facing society. Emphasis
  should thus be placed on two complementary concepts: the concept of
  parity, which reflects the fact that persons of one or the other sex are
  different but nonetheless equal; and the concept of partnership, which
  shows that a creative synergy can be created between men and women, so as
  to tackle and resolve the community’s problems effectively. It is
  therefore important to include as many people as possible, not only
  females, in addressing the problems our continent face, and to come up
  with creative solutions for these problems.

Women form an integral part of our society. I believe that they are the
backbone of society and that they are the ones holding everything together,
because of their important role as mothers and care-givers. Women should be
treated with dignity and respect. They should have equal opportunities to
be educated, to be empowered, and to make a difference in areas where
before they did not dare to venture, such as politics and the economy.

Therefore, within the context of our Constitution and our Bill of Rights,
and with reference to Sunday night’s programme on Carte Blanche on M-Net,
and yesterday’s front-page article of Beeld, I, as an Afrikaans-speaking
South African who also regard myself as an African because I am a daughter
of the African soil, as a daughter of this continent, I call on the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation to make sure all African women are heard, to
assist in addressing their issues. They should be heard echoing the words
of the father of our new rainbow nation, Nelson Mandela, when on 10 May
1994 he said: “Never, never, and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another.” And
I believe it should be extended to the women of this continent.

In conclusion, I say again what I have said before: “Wathin’ta bafazi, wa
ithint’imbolodo.” If you touch a woman, you touch a rock. [Applause.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Adjunkvoorsitter, Adjunkpresident, lede van die Huis, laat my
toe om te sê dat dit net ’n vrou is wat ’n vrou kan leer en op die regte
spoor kan bring. Ek dink ná die les wat die agb Terblanche van die
Voorsitter van die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies gekry het, wil ek amper sê
dat sy besig is om reg te kom. [Gelag.]

Volgens ’n onlangse Wêreldbank-beleidsverslag, getiteld Engendering
Development, is daar geen land in die wêreld waar vroue op gelyke voet met
mans staan op die gebied van wetlike, maatskaplike en ekonomiese regte nie.
Die verslag beweer dat geslagsgelykheid nie net ’n
ontwikkelingsdoelstelling in eie reg is nie, maar dat dit ook ontwikkeling
steun deur die verbetering van lande se vermoë om te groei, armoede te
beveg en doeltreffend te regeer.

In ’n positiewer lig is daar wel groei in idees en benaderings om
oplossings te soek en die geslagsgelykheidprobleem te oorkom. Ek is daarom
van mening dat Pawo, die Pan-Afrika-vroueorganisasie, ’n belangrike en
doeltreffende rol moet speel in die bemagtiging en opbou van vroue oor die
vasteland. Hoewel die geslagsgaping tussen mans en vroue in die ekonomie
verklein, bly die aard van die deelname van die twee geslagte totaal
uiteenlopend.

In die meeste lande verdien vroue minder as hul manlike eweknieë. Vroue in
baie Afrika-lande is steeds onderverteenwoordig in alle strukture van die
uitvoerende en wetgewende regering, die regsbank, as onafhanklike
waarnemers, die privaatsektor, die burgerlike gemeenskap en die media.
Hoekom vroue steeds agter mans plek inneem, het te doen met verouderde
houdings en stereotipes. Dit word benadruk deur gewoontes, kulture en
tradisies. Hierdie instellings wil steeds die vrou in die huis hê, terwyl
die man die wye wêreld tot sy beskikking het - waar hy ook die magshebbende
is.

Vroue het reeds ’n tree gegee in die rigting van wetlike emansipasie en
bemagtiging in ’n gemeenskap wat steeds gekenmerk word deur ontstellende
vlakke van geweld teen hulle. In Suid-Afrika het daar in die afgelope tyd
’n ontploffing van vroue in posisies van mag en gesag plaasgevind. Kyk maar
na ons Parlement en Kabinet. Kyk maar na ons eie voorsitter – ’n sterk en
gebalanseerde vrou, moeder en leier. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy President, members of the House,
allow me to say that only a woman can teach a woman and put her on the
right track. I think, after the lecture that the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces gave the hon Terblanche, I almost wish to say
that she is in the process of coming round. [Laughter.]

According to a recent World Bank policy report entitled Engendering
Development, there is no country in the world in which women are on an
equal footing with men in the areas of legal, social and economic rights.
The report alleges that gender equality is not only a development objective
in its own right, but that it also supports development through the
improvement of the ability of countries to grow, fight poverty and govern
effectively.

In a more positive light there is in fact growth in ideas and approaches to
seek solutions and to overcome the problem of gender equality. For that
reason I think that Pawo, the Pan-African Women’s Organisation, must play
an important and effective role in the empowerment and development of women
across the continent. Although the gender gap between men and women is
decreasing in the economy, the nature of participation by the two genders
remains entirely divergent.

In most countries women earn less than their male counterparts. In many
African countries women are still underrepresented in all structures of
executive and legislative government, the judiciary, as independent
observers, in the private sector, civil community and the media. Why women
still stand behind men involves obsolete attitudes and stereotypes. This is
emphasised by customs, cultures and traditions. These institutions still
want to have the woman in the house, while the man has the whole world at
his disposal – where he is also the one in authority.

Women have already taken a step in the direction of legal emancipation and
empowerment in a community that is still characterised by alarming levels
of violence against them. In South Africa there has recently been an
explosion of women in positions of power and authority. Just look at
Parliament and the Cabinet. Look at our own Chairperson – a strong,
balanced woman, mother and leader.]

Chairperson, the women in South Africa have shown us that the participatory
approach is the best way to shed light on the human dimensions of poverty
and of seeking ways to end it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson and Deputy President, the women of the
African continent are now, more than ever, in need of their total
emancipation from the shackles of oppression, degradation and exploitation.
For many years the women of Africa have been victims of war and of
extremely violent crimes where their dignity and spirit to live have been
extremely compromised. But, a total wave of justice has swept across the
African continent like a raging fire and is currently manifesting itself in
all spheres on our continent. The women of Africa are also part of this
awakening process, which has granted them their long overdue recognition in
relation to the pressure that they have endured under the struggle of
oppression and silence.

The role of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation should be that of
adequately representing all the women of our continent in a way that is
both transparent and visible. The flow of information regarding the social
problems the women of our continent are grappling with, should be easily
available to this organisation in order that it could appropriately embody
the notion of representivity in every way possible.

The Pan-African Women’s Organisation should also be used as a vehicle for
voicing women’s grievances in relation to their economic security. But,
most importantly, it should be used as a means of facilitating the process
of women’s political participation and decision-making powers.

Women need a world that will embrace them openly and freely and where
gender bias in favour of their male counterparts will stop. Women do not
need sympathy; they need opportunity and recognition. Women have, for many
centuries, been weaving together the golden thread of society upon which
our existence was able to flourish. Women need a world of true equality
that will run like a thread across the entire face of the African
continent, and the Pan-African Women’s Organisation needs to work
vigorously towards making this a reality.

An organisation such as the Pan-African Women’s Organisation should be used
as a means of uniting all the voices of African women. It should be used as
a channel for open communication between women across the length and
breadth of our continent so that they can share their common problems and
ensure that appropriate solutions are found to assist them in resolving
these problems. The existence of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation is
definitely an achievement for all the women of Africa.

The establishment of the Pan-African Parliament is also an enormous
achievement for the African continent. It will create a channel so that the
voice of the AU can be heard in order that it can continue its
groundbreaking work of unifying and uplifting the entire African continent.
What the African continent is vitally in need of . . . [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Deputy President, hon Chairperson, hon members, as a
woman and as an African myself I believe that the Pan–African Women’s
Organisation can and must pull our continent out of this situation of
poverty and underdevelopment, the situation in which it is currently
immersed.

The debate today comes at the right time, as we have just celebrated
Women’s Month. It also makes sense that as we are closing as the NCOP, we
end on this high note, as the Pan-African Women’s Organisation gives women
the status they deserve as builders of the nation. I cannot think of any
way I would rather close this term than with a call for women in Africa to
stand together and speak with one voice.

The ANC Women’s League has supported the Pan-African Women’s Organisation
as an organisation that played a very important role in the liberation and
upliftment of Africa, and it still has an important role to play today.
Pawo, as we call it, has given women in Africa the opportunity to organise
themselves. It has given women a platform to address their common problems
and think about their future while not undermining the changing realities
of today’s order.

No one in this House could dispute the fact that African women share a
common history of triple oppression and struggle for liberation. Through
Pawo women in Africa have been able to share experiences and to intensify
the struggle for women’s emancipation, gender equality and a better life
for women in Africa. This year is the 42nd anniversary of Pawo, which was
established in 1962. Pawo played a significant role in building African
unity and solidarity during a crucial period of struggle to free Africa
from colonial bondage. The fact that the foundation of Pawo preceded the
OAU, which became the driving force for the liberation of Africa from
colonial oppression, shows that African women have played a strong
leadership role in Africa.

Let me mention a few of the initial objectives of Pawo to show its
relevance today, when women still suffer as a vulnerable group in our
society. The objectives included creating awareness about the role of women
in the African liberation struggles; co-ordinating women’s activities at
regional levels; promoting women’s initiatives by establishing gender-
sensitive programmes; establishing close contact and co-operation with
other women’s organisations for collecting, processing and disseminating
information about women of African descent; and organising workshops,
debates, talks, conferences and meetings on various issues that concern
African women and that advance the spirit of Africanism and the efforts of
women to meet these challenges. All these objectives are still relevant
today.

Pawo becomes more relevant in this century of Africa. As we embark on the
African century and make the African Renaissance a reality, the role of
women in development and in the struggle needs to be recognised. Women in
Africa have made outstanding contributions in the struggles for liberation
from slavery, colonialisation and apartheid and in development at all
levels.

Today in Africa we talk about the economic development of the continent
through Nepad. At the same time the African Union and the Pan-African
Parliament have been established, as has already been mentioned. It is very
important that the concerns of women and gender issues that affect them are
integrated into these institutions or processes.

Pawo could be the vehicle used to mainstream gender in these institutions.
In order to do that, it means that the role of Pawo within these
organisations should be clearly spelt out as a full participant.

I believe that the struggle by women for gender equality is now bearing
fruit, as women have been appointed to higher positions in organisations on
the continent. We have women as the president, one of the vice-presidents
and Speaker of the Pan-African Parliament and as the chair of the AU Peace
and Security Council. Having women in two of the top five positions of the
Pan-African Parliament is a clear victory for women on the continent. This
represents an opportunity for the inclusion of continental gender issues.

In the AU, as per agreement, equal numbers of women and men were elected as
commissioners and this parity has been extended to the recruitment process
of the AU bodies. The AU has also adopted the Protocol on the Rights of
Women in Africa in the African Charter on Human Rights. So far Africa is
the only continent in the world to have made obligations to gender
mainstreaming with its continental bodies.

The election of women to high positions is a reflection of the global trend
for gender mainstreaming and women’s participation in decision-making. This
trend has been influenced by the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution
1325.

Resolution 1325 calls for broad participation of women in peace-building
and postconflict reconstruction. It is true that women today are succeeding
in taking their places as leaders in their own right. However, the
challenge remains for women to ensure that they maximise the efforts of
continental legislatures to promote gender equality. We should always
remember that those women need our support to succeed for all of us. As
African women bear the brunt of conflict in Africa, it makes sense that
women should be engaged in strategies to bring about peace and security in
Africa.

Women have played a constructive and essential part in the peace process. A
role of Pawo today is to campaign for women to take their rightful place in
governance, peacemaking and the revival of Africa. It must spearhead the
movement for peace on the continent and find ways of as far as possible
preventing conflicts and wars. It should also campaign against the rise of
sexual abuse and rape of women and children and other issues affecting
women.

I would like to see Pawo play a leading role in fighting the HIV and Aids
epidemic, which is killing and infecting more women than men, according to
statistics.

In conclusion, let me assure women that if we work together we will be able
to turn the challenges we are facing into opportunities to realise women’s
emancipation and a better life for African women.

The Pan-African Women’s Organisation provides a platform for all women’s
organisations in Africa to participate and campaign for women’s
emancipation. Women should continue to organise and build this important
organisation for women in Africa, which will help to reduce poverty, bring
about peace on the continent, stop the spread of HIV/Aids and facilitate
unity amongst African women.

Umhlonishwa u-Terblanche engezwa kahle uma engase asivakashela singomama be-
Women’s League ukuthi uma sithi, “Wathinta umfazi, wathinta imbokodo”,
sisuke sisho kusuka ngaphakathi. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [The hon Terblanche
will be able to understand us better if she visited us as Women’s League
and heard us saying: “If you strike a woman, you strike a rock.” We say it
from deep within our hearts. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, His Excellency the Deputy
President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma, hon members of
the Council, comrades, colleagues and friends, this debate takes place at a
time when men and women in our country continue to celebrate the
achievement of freedom and democracy.

In celebrating this achievement, we need to delve deeper and unpack the
extent to which the past 10 years of democracy have improved the position
of women in our country. Like women in the rest of Africa, women in our
country have suffered extreme forms of oppression and exploitation under
the apartheid regime, in terms of class, colour as well as gender. The
brutal nature of the apartheid system did not, however, condemn women to
silence and submission. On the contrary, generations and generations of
women took to the streets, challenging the system that unfairly and in a
most systematic way discriminated against them.

The turning point of women’s activism against the previous regime was the
courageous and gallant struggles before and during 1956 against the pass
laws, which was the most dehumanising form of control. These struggles
culminated in the historic march to the Union Buildings in protest against
carrying the dompas. Through these gallant efforts women defied the law and
shook the apartheid regime to its very core. As we therefore celebrate the
achievement of our democracy, we take stock and pay tribute to these
courageous struggles.

The democratic government has over the past ten years created an enabling
environment for women’s development and empowerment. This has greatly
improved the position in our country. Through these enabling laws and the
appointment of women to key strategic positions, the first decade of
democracy became the embodiment and symbol of women’s emancipation.

South Africa has one of the highest percentages of women representatives in
public sector and law-making institutions. We are proud of the women who
have, in this short space of time, demonstrated success and achievement in
Parliament, provincial legislatures and municipalities. Our women continue
to climb the corporate ladder, making inroads in what was previously
perceived as the enclave of white males. More women have also taken the
lead in technology, arts, science and culture. We are indeed proud of their
achievements in these specialised fields.

The establishment of the Office of the Rights of Children, the Office on
the Status of Women in the Presidency, and the Gender Commission forms part
of the innovative and progressive efforts to ensure that women are equal
partners and role-players in the political, social and economic mainstream.
Campaigns of these institutions have empowered women and have given rise to
increasing numbers of women and children speaking openly about their
experiences.

However, a lot must still be done to continue to improve the position of
women in our country. In this regard a historic meeting in Pretoria is
under way. This meeting will provide women and government with a platform
for a shared understanding of transformation challenges faced by women.
This follows President Thabo Mbeki’s launch of the presidential Women’s
Working Group that will provide space for government and women to engage
and interact meaningfully on important transformation challenges facing
women. This is further testimony to the commitment of our government, and
our President and Deputy President in particular, to issues of women’s
development and empowerment.

It is important to note that all these developments are taking place
against the background of national Women’s Month, celebrated throughout the
country during the month of August. These developments are also taking
place during this month of September, Heritage Month. This is a time when
we need to sit back and reflect on the enormous and rich heritage of our
country. As we educate our people and seek to preserve our heritage, women
become key agents, messengers and teachers of the valuable resources of our
country.

The debate on the role and place of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation is
very important. It is an important debate, given the challenges faced by
women in Africa. African women have, over a period of time, been subjected
to and had to endure continuous ethnic and civil wars that have resulted
not only in the death of innocent women and children, but also in the
displacement and disintegration of families across the continent.

Women and children continue to be the victims of genocide and political
conflict that bring untold suffering to the poor as a result of economic
decay and social disintegration. Issues of patriarchy and cultural
alienation continue to define the place and position of African women,
condemning them to the periphery in our society. Issues of poverty, hunger,
famine, diseases and underdevelopment, including the abuse of women and
children, continue to be the key challenges that should define the agenda
of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation.

Indeed, poverty remains the greatest challenge among women, as it is a
deeply entrenched feature of the political landscape across the continent.
The eradication of poverty should therefore remain our chief priority if we
are to improve the position of women on the continent.

Historically, Pan-African women have championed and led the popular
struggles for women’s emancipation across the continent. Pawo was the voice
that, in the early days of the Organisation of African Unity, raised key
and pertinent issues that affected women. As stated earlier, the conditions
for women have not improved significantly in various parts of the
continent. As the voice of African women, Pawo must be strengthened and
capacitated to lead women’s struggles in this new era of the Pan-African
African Parliament and Nepad.

We have a responsibility to build a strong, vibrant Pan-African Women’s
Organisation that will actively and tirelessly engage with these
challenges, making sure that the issue of gender, equality and women’s
emancipation assumes priority on the African agenda for economic renewal.
Pawo must be transformed into a mass-based popular movement that is able to
bring together and draw from the support of the progressive women’s
movement across the continent. In taking women’s issues forward, Pawo must
ensure that it takes centre stage and provides leadership in campaigns
aimed at deepening the culture of human rights. It must also build a strong
partnership with other nongovernmental organisations dealing with issues of
human rights. Pawo must ensure that women are integrated in the economic
mainstream and that they are trained in various skills, including
entrepreneurial skills. Pawo must indeed ensure that African women take the
lead in the continental efforts to build a better Africa and a new world
order.

Regarding the role of the Pan-African Parliament and Nepad in advancing
Pawo’s objectives, the Pan-African Parliament provides a new platform for
developing African countries to forge a collective identity to act and
position themselves more favourably in the global village. The Pan-African
Parliament is an expression of the spirit of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the African Union. It embraces people-to-people interaction as part of a
new democratic outlook in Africa, and provides us with a rare opportunity
to make choices in terms of how we want to see Africa moving forward.

The adoption of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development programme for
Africa’s economic renewal is one of the most important developments,
placing Africa at the apex of the global agenda. Nepad is an instrument for
advancing people-centred and sustainable developments in Africa, based on
democratic values, being premised on the recognition that Africa has an
abundance of natural resources and people who have the capacity to be
agents for change, thereby holding the key to its own development. Nepad
provides a common African platform for engaging the rest of the
international community in a dynamic partnership that holds real prospects
for creating a better life for all.

While partnerships with the rest of the world are vital for the success of
Nepad, we are of the view that such partnerships must be based on mutual
respect, dignity, shared responsibility and accountability. Given the
progressive character of the Pan-African Parliament, Pawo has a
responsibility to use this forum to advance and place on its agenda issues
that continue to undermine development on the continent. In this context,
the Pan-African Parliament and Nepad should be important vehicles in
advancing the interests of those marginalised through various forms of
oppression and colonisation.

With South Africa having been given the opportunity to be the seat of the
Pan-African Parliament, we are poised to play a more active and leading
role in shaping the path towards Africa’s sustainable development. The Pan-
African Parliament will provide an opportunity for South African women to
interact with their counterparts on the continent, sharing perspectives and
transformation challenges that African women are faced with. This
interaction should, in a most concrete way, influence the Pan-African
Parliament and the rest of the African countries on how we could
progressively take women’s issues forward. African women around the
continent should be able to learn from our experience over the past ten
years of democracy. Indeed, South African women have an important role to
play in shaping the agenda for the full emancipation of African women.
These are the challenges we must continue to grapple with as we advance to
the second decade of our democratic government. We are all confident that
South African women will rise to the challenges and take the lead in
continental efforts to free women from the shackles of the colonial past.

In conclusion, I want to congratulate the hon Terblanche. It takes only
five minutes to change and be in focus, with the rest of the world, the
rest of Africa and South Africa in particular, to realise that as women we
need one another across the political spectrum. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon members, on your behalf and on
behalf of the presiding officers, I should like to thank the Deputy
President for his sustained courage to be part of this important and august
House, to share thoughts that are not only important for us, but important
for our country and our continent. We are inspired by the sustained
leadership that he provides.

As most members will be departing to their different constituencies, it is
my pleasure, on behalf of the presiding officers, to wish you a good and
safe journey home. In doing that, I acknowledge the role that you have
played, individually and collectively, in the last four months of our third
democratic Parliament, to make the work of this House a success. We are
quite confident that you will come back more vigorous and greatly
rejuvenated to meet the challenges ahead.

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 15:28.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                        WEDNESDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 55 - 2003] - Act No
         17 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 11 September
         2004).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of the Medical Research Council (MRC)
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 91-2002].

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Agricultural
         Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         7-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort Biological
         Products Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 161-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
         Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces
1.    Report of the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration
     on the United Nations Convention against Corruption:

     The Select Committee on Local Government and Administration, having
     considered the request for approval by Parliament of the United Nations
     Convention against Corruption, referred to it, recommends that the
     Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the
     said Convention.


     Report to be considered.



                         THURSDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 16 September 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77)


         (ii)    Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


         (iii)   National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)


         (iv)    Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)


         (v)     Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

         The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
         the National Council of Provinces.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 133-2004].

  (b) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Accountants' and
      Auditors' for 2003, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
      on the the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2003.


                          FRIDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bill passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 16 September 2004:


         (i)     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10D - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Infrastructure
     Investment Unit 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 178-2004].


                          MONDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translation of Bill submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Keuse oor die Beëindiging van
              Swangerskap [W 72 - 2003] (Nasionale Vergadering - art 76)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Choice on
         Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72 - 2003] (National
         Assembly - sec 76).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) for 2003-
     2004.

     CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert ATC0920e

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms (Proprietary) Limited
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral
         Technology (MINTEK) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 31-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 68-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
         Regulator for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 122-2004].

5.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 - Department of Safety and
     Security for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2003-2004 [RP 184-2004].

6.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Electoral Commission
     regarding the Management and Administration of the Represented
     Political Parties' Fund for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 116-
     2004].


                         TUESDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Public Works

     Guidelines for the Implementation of Labour-Intensive Infrastructure
     Projects under the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP).

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Playhouse Company for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Zoological
         Gardens of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Engelenburg House Art
         Collection for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library for
         the Blind for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National
         Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 150-2004].

3.    The Minister for Safety and Security

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 - Independent Complaints
     Directorate (ICD) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements of Vote 23 for 2003-2004 [RP 121-
     2004].


