---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 June 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-06-23
---

WEDNESDAY, 23 JUNE 2004
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

Vote No 1 - The Presidency:

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker and Deputy Speaker, hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, this
year we have already spoken twice from this podium to present two state of
the nation addresses. These covered the short and medium-term objectives
of the Government, as well as the programmes intended to achieve them.
It is not necessary that we use the occasion of the consideration of the
Budget Vote on the Presidency to repeat what we said in our February and
May addresses and we will not do so. Rather, we will try to focus on the
critically important matter of the capacity of the state machinery to
implement the programmes we have announced.

As on other occasions, the Deputy President, the hon Jacob Zuma, and the
Minister in the Presidency, the hon Essop Pahad, will also address the NA
to reflect on the areas of work of the Presidency for which they are
responsible. As we indicated in our addresses earlier this year, we are
determined to focus on the challenge of the implementation of the
programmes we which have already announced so as to ensure that we
accelerate the achievement of the objectives we have set ourselves.

As part of this, we are in the process of improving the operation of the
mechanisms within Government that must ensure the proper monitoring and
evaluation of work being done to implement the Government's programme.
This would help us to improve the quality of the outcomes of Government
activities; an objective which we have sought to pursue for a number of
years. Naturally, our first area of attention will be the Programme of
Action we announced during the May state of the nation address.

In this regard, the Presidency has provided all our national Ministries
and departments with a copy of the tasks they have to carry out, with a
clear indication of the timeframes within which they are expected to
complete these tasks. These tasks include both those we mentioned during
the May state of the nation address and others that predate this address.
We will, therefore, ensure that the Presidency has the necessary capacity
to monitor and evaluate the implementation of these comprehensive
programmes. Among other things we have to ensure that the Government
identifies any impediments to the successful implementation of these
programmes early, so that we address these quickly before they cause the
failure of the agreed programmes.

At the same time, we recognise the keen interest of our people as a whole
in the progress and problems we achieve and experience as we pursue these
programmes. We are also mindful of the comments made by the hon members
last month, that they are also keen to monitor the implementation of the
Government programme. Accordingly, consistent with the objective of
continuously improving the two-way communication between the Government
and the people, the Presidency has decided to place before the people a
report on progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action,
which will be constantly updated.

Our people, including honourable members, will therefore have the
opportunity of assessing the Government's progress in implementing the
announced Programme of Action, side by side with the Government's own
assessment of this progress. As hon members are aware, the Government
Communication and Information System, GCIS, has already put on the
Internet the Batho Pele Gateway Portal which we mentioned during the May
state of the nation address. The Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, the hon Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, provided further
information relating to this portal during her Budget Vote on Monday.

The GCIS has requested comments from the public on the portal to ensure
that by the time it is formally launched within the time period we
indicated in May, it is properly designed to address the needs of the
people. I trust that hon members will take the trouble to answer the
questionnaire that has been provided on the Government website to assist
the public in making its comments.
We will open a page on the gateway portal containing information on the
Government's Programme of Action. By checking on this page, the public
will be able to follow progress with regard to the implementation of this
Programme of Action. It will also be possible for the public to
communicate its views about the programme directly to the Government,
through the Internet and other more traditional ways and means. Further to
improve the capacity of the Presidency to discharge its functions of
oversight, co-ordination and evaluation, more work will be done to
increase the effectiveness especially of the Policy Co-ordination and
Advisory Service unit, the PCAS, working together with the Cabinet
secretariat.

To facilitate the work of the PCAS, Ministries and departments are working
on business plans for each of the tasks they have to carry out. These
business plans will include an indication of the resources allocated for
the fulfilment of each of the tasks, as well as the necessary
implementation timeframes.


  The Government has also agreed that we should use the system of Cabinet
  committees to monitor and co-ordinate the implementation of the
  Programme of Action. This will be done once every two months, bringing
  together Ministers, Deputy Ministers and directors-general who belong to
  the various clusters to consider progress with regard to the tasks
  relating to each cluster. This will improve co-ordination to ensure that
  the programmes of the various Ministries and departments are consistent
  with one another.

The enhanced focus on the challenge of implementation will also give us
the possibility practically to assess the capacity of Government to carry
out its developmental functions. Among other things, this relates to
matters raised by the Minister for the Public Service and Administration
during her Budget Vote, with regard to competence within the Public
Service. As the hon Minister has said, we have to ensure that our public
management is firmly rooted in the principles of efficiency and
effectiveness, transparency and accountability.

She went on to say that administration is about the day-to-day systems and
procedures that make governance work so that institutions and resources
are effectively utilised. The next phase of public service and
administration in South Africa will require that skills sets and
approaches be valued and applied in all components of the Public Service.
One of the mechanisms that will spearhead this is the compulsory induction
programme that we agreed to during the most recent Cabinet lekgotla.
Accordingly, every serving public servant will be exposed to this as a
matter of urgency, and every new recruit who joins the Public Service will
go to an appropriate level of induction soon after being employed.

And we clearly have to do what the Minister pronounced when she said that.
Over the coming year, we will be specifically investigating the extent to
which Public Service standards are really being set, measured and met.
Service users must be advised of these standards by the relevant
Government offices that they are dealing with, and at the same time should
be informed about recourse mechanisms available to them if standards are
not met. We will rely on the assistance of our citizens to give us honest
feedback on their exposure to Government departments.

To this I must add that this obviously entails an undertaking on our part
as Government that we will do everything possible to respond to this
honest feedback from the people. Our Ministers and Deputy Ministers will
have to ensure that the Government honours this commitment. Needless to
say, the further improvement in the efficacy of the Government must
include a sustained and heightened offensive against corruption. In this
regard again we would like to refer to the comments made by the Minister
for the Public Service and Administration, which reflect the approach of
Government to this important matter. In her Budget Vote address she said
that South Africa may be a relatively new democracy with a young Public
Service, but in terms of what we have achieved to raise our level of
integrity, we rank with the best in the world. The Public Integrity Index
released by the Centre for Public Integrity confirms that this Government
is serious about fighting corruption. In 10 short years we have managed to
be ranked in the index amongst far more established democracies.

 The Public Service Anticorruption Strategy remains the blueprint for
anticorruption work in the public sector, and its implementation is part
of the core mandate of DPSA's Public Service Anticorruption Unit. The
second national anticorruption summit will take place in November. The
event will seek to strengthen intersectoral co-operation and assess our
progress in addressing corruption, measured against global standards and
our national requirements. The summit will also define the national
anticorruption programme for the next decade.
Accordingly, as we work to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
Government, we will also continue vigorously to implement the Public
Service Anticorruption Strategy in all its elements. We also hope that
Parliament will proceed to ratify the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, whose provisions we will have to respect practically.
Necessarily, our success with regard to the implementation of Government
programmes will require that we further strengthen our intergovernmental
system, consistent with the principle of cooperative governance contained
in our Constitution.

As we indicated earlier this year, we have been reviewing our
intergovernmental system to improve its functioning. To this end, the
three spheres of government will meet in Pretoria in two days' time, on
Friday 25 June, to consider the National Framework and Bill on
Intergovernmental Relations. The meeting will bring together national
Government, the Premiers and some of their MECs, Salga, as well as the
national and provincial directors-general. The Minister for Provincial and
Local Government will report on the outcome of this review process when it
becomes available.

In the mean time, we will continue to pay close attention to the
effectiveness of the system of co-operation between national and
provincial government, effected through the regular and institutionalised
meetings between Ministers and MECs, the Minmecs. At the same time, we
will work to improve the functioning of the Presidential Co-ordination
Council, which brings together the Presidency and the Premiers. As part of
this process, a greater effort will be made to integrate the planning,
implementation and monitoring processes relating to the Government's
Programme of Action to which we have already referred.

In the past the Minister for the Public Service and Administration
reported on the intervention made by the national Government to assist the
government of the Eastern Cape to overcome a number of problems it faced.
This work is continuing. Nevertheless, we have learnt many lessons through
this intervention. We are convinced that many of these lessons would add
value to the effort to improve governance in other provinces as well.

I mention this because the process of improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of our system of government, with regard to the task of
implementation, must extend beyond the national sphere to include
provincial government as well. We will, therefore, work with the
provincial governments to achieve this objective. In this regard, we will
also draw on outstanding examples of good practice evolved by a number of
our provincial governments.

With regard to the experience we have accumulated as a result of the
Eastern Cape intervention, we would also like to draw the attention of the
hon members to the observation made by the hon Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi,
that our experience in the Eastern Cape has helped to define an operating
model for integrated institutional support that is being refined for use
elsewhere. As part of this, the Department of Public Service and
Administration is preparing to implement an early warning system and a
structured system for providing institutional support.

To achieve the objective of effective implementation of our policies and
programmes, we will have to pay even greater attention to the
strengthening of our system of local government. In this regard, I would
like to express our sincere appreciation to Salga for convening the 5th
session of the Local Government Consultative Assembly so soon after we
spoke of the challenges of local government in the May state of the nation
address.

In his address during his Budget Vote earlier this week, Minister Sydney
Mufamadi said that critical to sustaining the delivery of services to the
masses of the population is the new system of local government that was
established in December 2000. With the ensemble of 284 municipalities,
over 3 700 ward committees and about 9 000 councillors, the local
government sphere should indeed become the provider-of-choice with regard
to the delivery of basic services. However, the limited capacity and
resources of some municipalities are clearly an obstacle to action,
whether in the areas of planning, budgeting, or implementation. Some of
our municipalities rest on a deficient human capital base, thus they fail
to implement new strategies of delivery and cost recovery.

He reported that the Department of Provincial and Local Government has
undertaken a thoroughgoing capacity survey in order to determine the
constraints faced by local government in policy design and implementation.
He also said that we have identified a number of municipalities that are
experiencing a short-term need for intense, hands-on support. His
department is assembling a high-calibre team to be deployed in order to
work with municipalities and tackle the identified tasks, but since this
support is meant to fade out over time, provinces will immediately
replicate this process in order to position themselves so that they can
continue to support municipalities in their own areas of jurisdiction.

Indeed, as he said, we seek to make local government more dependable as an
enabler for provincial and national departments to realise their
development and delivery targets. Undoubtedly, the June 25 Workshop on
Inter-Governmental Relations to which we have referred will, once more,
draw attention to the enhanced importance of the sphere of local
government. Hopefully it will go further to spell out how we should
respond to this reality, indicating the improvements that must necessarily
be made to the functioning of our system of co-operative governance.

In this context, Minister Mufamadi said on Monday, that, given the steady
maturation of local government, the geography of development and
underdevelopment, and the variable municipal capacity to address
development challenges, we are undertaking a revision of the intrasphere
equitable share formula. This revision will be finalised in the current
financial year so as to ensure that we start the 2005-06 financial year
with an allocative pattern which speaks to conditions as they actually
obtain on the ground.
While this work is going on, we will have to concentrate on the task
mentioned by Minister Mufamadi, of providing intense, hands-on support for
those of our municipalities that require such support. Fortunately, both
the Department of Provincial and Local Government and Salga already have
enough information to point us to the municipalities that require this
assistance.

The strengthening of the capacity of our system of local government will
require the closest possible co-operation between especially the
Departments of Provincial and Local Government and of Public Service and
Administration, as well as the Provincial MECs for Local Government and
Salga. In the context of what we are discussing, the effective
implementation of Government programmes to accelerate the process of
creating jobs and fighting poverty, we must also reiterate our commitment
to speed up the deployment of community development workers as well as the
empowerment of the structures of traditional government to contribute to
the common development effort.

From the very first day of our democracy, we have insisted on both a
people-centred and a people-driven process of change. Our focus on
improving the effectiveness of the system of governance must accordingly
and necessarily go together with an intensification of our campaign to
draw the masses of our people into the accelerated process of change that
will be represented by the effective implementation of our Government's
Programme of Action. This makes it imperative that we strengthen all
processes intended to intensify the interaction between the Government and
the people, to activate the people to play a meaningful role in the
struggle for a better life for all and to increase the transparency and
accountability of Government.

 Of particular importance in this regard will be the need for us to ensure
that the local government ward committees meet regularly and function as
they were intended. We have to ensure that they are involved in the
implementation at local level of the various initiatives that constitute
the Government's Programme of Action. The national and provincial
Government imbizo programmes will also have to be reviewed to improve
their ability to ensure meaningful interaction between these spheres of
government and the people. The Presidency has started this review process,
and I'm convinced that it will result in future izimbizo enhancing our
contact with the people and therefore enhancing the quality of
Government's service to the people.
And because of the importance of these outcomes, the imbizo programmes
will also be assessed under our system of monitoring and evaluation to
improve the impact of the views expressed by the people on the overall
functioning of Government. This will provide an effective addition to the
process of translating the concept that ``the people shall govern'' into
practice.

In the February state of the nation address, we said: ``The advances we
must record demand that we ensure that the public sector discharges its
responsibilities to our people as a critical player in the process of the
growth, reconstruction and development of our country. In particular, this
will require that we further strengthen our system of local government and
ensure that the system of traditional government plays the role ascribed
to it in our Constitution and legislation.''

We further said: ``We must achieve greater progress with regard to the
integration of our system of governance, achieving seamless co-operation
both within and among the spheres of government. At the same time, we must
further consolidate the practice of creating public-private partnerships
and building Government-civil society co-operation, to ensure that we
utilise our collective capacities to give further impetus to the overall
development and transformation of our country.''

In the May state of the nation address, we indicated some of the tasks
Government would carry out to achieve these objectives. Today's address
has sought to build on this, focusing on the necessary additional
interventions we have to make to build a system of governance capable of
serving the people, within the context of the letter and spirit of our
Constitution.

In his 2002 book, The World We're In, the columnist and former editor-in-
chief of the British newspaper The Observer, Will Hutton, has drawn
attention to the global struggle to defend the public sector against an
ideological onslaught that seeks, as he puts it: ``... to celebrate
individualism and denigrate the state''.

Given that we are a young democracy, I believe that we should debate the
issues raised by Will Hutton to help us define what kind of South Africa
we seek to build. I will therefore take the liberty to quote somewhat
extensively some of the critical points that Hutton raises. I also do this
because there are some in our country who propagate the views that Will
Hutton contests, seeking to persuade our people to adopt a particular
stance towards the issue of the state, which, if accepted and implemented,
would shatter the dreams of the millions of our people for a better life.

Writing of his own country, the UK, he says: ``There are no great
political movements or inspirational causes. Voter apathy is widespread.
Our political leaders are well-intentioned, but they are at a loss as to
how to revive a belief in politics and public purpose. The public realm is
in eclipse. It is almost as though citizenship has gone into abeyance. And
yet there remain great issues. The terms of society's social contract
remain as vexed and contentious as ever. The rich grow richer, while
disadvantage remains acute. Equality of opportunity, let alone income and
wealth, remain elusive. Public services are inadequate.''

Arguing his case further, he writes:

``The idea of the public realm is in eclipse, and with it the concept of
civilisation. Increasingly, we British are rarely citizens who make common
cause and share common destinies. The scope for public initiative and
endeavour, through which our common values are expressed, is contracting
with giddy speed. Inequality of income and opportunity is increasing,
despite well-intentioned efforts to reverse it.

 Wealth and stratospheric incomes are portrayed as the just reward of
individual enterprise, badges of individual worth. The poor and
disadvantaged, unless they declare their readiness to work, are
increasingly felt to deserve their status. Government and its associated
tools of regulation, legislation and taxation are a currency whose very
legitimacy has to be fought for. As the new conservatism has honed its
rhetoric and political programmes in the US to celebrate individualism and
denigrate the state, so that same philosophy has become seamlessly part of
the new international `common sense'. We are all becoming American
conservatives now.

So it is that the syllogism that the rights of the propertied and the
freedom of business come before any assertion of the public interest or
social concerns has become the consensus orthodoxy. These are deemed to be
the only circumstances in which wealth generation and employment can be
assured, and thus the citizen would stand to lose more by putting these at
risk than he or she might gain from public action asserting common
interests. The law of private property rules supreme.

In this climate taxation is depicted as the confiscation of what is
properly our own - an intolerable burden that should be reduced. The
social, the collective and the public realm are portrayed as the enemies
of prosperity and individual autonomy, and, worse, are opposed to the
moral basis of society, grounded as it should be in the absolute
responsibility of individuals to shoulder their burdens and exercise their
rights alone.''

He goes on to say: ``Civility is under siege as a market society makes
strangers of us all. While our public horizons shrink, we search for
satisfaction and contentment in our inner, private lives - but we turn in
on ourselves thus not out of choice; rather, we recognise that engagement
with the world on any other terms than those that enthrone the primacy of
market values and diminish those of public citizenship is increasingly
without purpose.

The conservative creed we have been asked to accept barely needs
rehearsing. The Americans live with increasingly unequal distribution of
income and wealth. Indeed, many argue it is the necessary stick and carrot
upon which a successful capitalism depends - so others should follow. The
message is merciless. Welfare is portrayed as disabling the poor from
taking proper responsibility for themselves. The poor and disadvantaged
should expect no more than minimal, time-limited and means-tested
assistance.

The conservative American presumption is that the federal government
should exercise its authority as minimally as possible. Individual states
in the union should be given the responsibility for doing as little as
they can, and the federal government should confine itself to the
provision of national security. Governance in the rest of the world should
follow suit. If there are malevolent social consequences, then react with
a tough welfare system and repress crime. Do not wring your hands over the
causes of crime; stamp it out with a repressive criminal justice system,
extending even to endorsing the death penalty.''

Will Hutton argues that: ``Western democracies have been characterised by
one broad family of ideas that might be called left - a belief in the
social reduction in inequality, the provision of public services, the
principle that workers should be treated as assets rather than
commodities, regulation of enterprise, rehabilitation of criminals,
tolerance and respect for minorities - and another broad family of ideas
that might be called right. An honouring of our inherited institutional
fabric, a respect for order, a belief that private property rights and
profit are essential to the operation of the market economy, a suspicion
of worker rights, faith in the remedial value of punitive justice and
distrust of the new.''

There can be no doubt about where we stand with regard to this great
divide. It is to pursue the goals contained in what Hutton calls the
``broad family of ideas that might be called left'', that we seek to build
the system of governance we indicated today and in previous addresses. The
obligations of the democratic state to the masses of our people do not
allow that we should join those who celebrate individualism and denigrate
the state.

 We would never succeed to eradicate the legacy of colonialism and
apartheid if we joined the campaign to portray ``the social, the
collective and the public realm as the enemies of prosperity and
individual autonomy, opposed to the moral basis of society, grounded as it
should be, in terms of right-wing ideology, in the absolute responsibility
of individuals to shoulder their burdens and exercise their rights alone.

This is precisely what we meant when we said in the May state of the
nation address that the advances we must record demand that we ensure that
the public sector discharges its responsibilities to the people as a
critical player in the process of the growth, reconstruction and
development of our country.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Deputy President, the
Minister in the Presidency, Directors-General Frank Chikane and Joel
Netshitenzhe, my advisers, and other workers in the Presidency who are
working hard to ensure that the Presidency contributes what it must to the
building of a public sector that truly discharges its responsibilities to
the people within the context of available resources.

I would also like to acknowledge with appreciation the co-operation
extended to the Presidency by all the spheres of government, as well the
private sector, the trade unions, civil society and the masses of our
people as a whole, which has helped us to avoid the gloomy outcome
described by Will Hutton, whereby ``the British are rarely citizens who
make common cause and share common destinies''.

Sadly, Director-General Frank Chikane could not be with us today as he and
the rest of the Chikane family prepare for the burial on Saturday of his
mother, Sophania Erenia Chikane. Once more, we extend our sincere
condolences to him and the rest of the Chikane family.

I'm honoured to commend the Budget of the Presidency to hon members, and
thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr E M DIPICO: Madam Speaker, hon President, Deputy President, hon
members, comrades and friends, the Presidency as the apex of Government is
challenged at many and varied fronts that relate to our country and
people. All of these challenges relate to the objectives of ensuring a
better life for all our people and creating a prosperous South Africa in
the context of a growing and developing subregion and continent. These
challenges resonated throughout the state of the nation address delivered
to this House by the hon President Comrade Thabo Mbeki.

Key among these is to ensure that the Presidency is better suited as the
apex of Government to undertake the many challenges that relate to
ensuring that the highest point of Government machinery is geared towards
meeting the deadlines articulated in the programme outlined by the
President. In this regard the Presidency must not only have the requisite
capacities and resources, it must also mobilise the broadest possible
forces to ensure we meet the challenges we set ourselves. It is expected
that the President and the Presidency must be able to table regular
reports on the varied commitments made on behalf of Government in this
House and elsewhere. Therefore the overall co-ordination of this
Government, the monitoring and evaluation dimensions of the Presidency
will continue to play a critical role in this and ensure that these are
used to assess the policy impact generally.

South Africa continues to play a key role in continental affairs across
the globe. These commitments and others also have an impact on the
expected role the Presidency must play in order to assist its principals
to discharge their functions with effectiveness and efficiency. The
Presidency is fully committed to garner the broadest possible forces
behind the national objectives of our country. To this extent, there is
greater emphasis also on ensuring that the opinions of the key
stakeholders are solicited. These platforms also provided Government with
the basis of sharing experiences and information regarding the best
possible path of attaining our common objectives.

These partnerships are key and meant to afford the Presidency with avenues
to also share its vision with society in general. Stakeholders such as
churches and the religious fraternity are key in the programmes of the
state to ensure that we deal with the degeneration of the moral fibre of
our society. The youth, women, the disabled, the elderly and the children
will continue to form a key component of the stakeholders with whom from
time to time Government will converse and strategise to ensure we move
closer to the objective of creating a caring society. The ongoing
consultations and deliberations between the various Presidential joint
working groups and other working groups of business, labour, traditional
leaders, civil society, etc will also enhance the policy and delivery of
services of Government.

The ANC is fully committed to ensuring a better life for all the people of
our country and the Freedom Charter forms part of the historic mandate of
the ANC. During this month of June we will also celebrate the 49th
anniversary of the Freedom Charter, which was adopted at the Congress of
the People in Kliptown in 1955. The vision espoused by the Freedom Charter
continues to inspire millions of South Africans in their struggle for a
better future. The Charter captures the historic demands of the people of
South Africa for a united nonracial, nonsexist democratic society. In its
preamble, the Freedom Charter states that: ``Only a democratic state based
on the will of the people can secure to all their birthright without
distinction of race, colour, sex and creed.''

The Freedom Charter speaks about the aspirations of all the people of
South Africa and was a historic moment in the struggle for freedom and
democracy. Key among its clauses is the clause that states that the people
shall govern. This important vision is indeed the key part of the
governance and Government's vision as espoused by the Presidency. When he
spoke some weeks ago in this House on the occasion of the state of the
nation address, the hon President Thabo Mbeki articulated the commitments
of the ANC-led Government to ensure we realise the key elements of the
Freedom Charter. He spoke to the key elements of the clause, the people
shall govern, when he said:
      We will strive to unite all our people to implement the Programme of
      Action we announced on Friday - that day - in favour of a democratic
      South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it. We will do
      this because we are convinced that our unity gives us the
      possibility to accelerate and advance to a South Africa that is free
      of poverty and the racial gender and geographic disparities
      bequeathed to us by our history.

That Programme of Action, as outlined by the President of the Republic,
forms the key work that the Presidency must carry out without fail in the
days and months ahead. Indeed the entire spheres and levels of Government
in our country are about that Programme of Action. This will give meaning
to the vote of those who participate and took upon themselves to shape the
democracy that South Africa is developing and nurturing in the interests
of all our people and prosperity for all.

For its part the Presidency will continue to engage the different
communities and ordinary people to ensure that they too are able to hold
Government accountable and develop confidence in our systems and
procedures. The Presidential Imbizo programme will be further enhanced and
developed. This programme is key in that it allows Government much greater
contact and interaction with ordinary people and can facilitate different
interphases between the Presidency and ordinary people. This speaks to the
very clause of the celebrated Freedom Charter: the people shall govern.
This programme will also be replicated at different levels of Government,
such as the local and provincial government, where our mayors and Premiers
and their teams will also be meeting ordinary people and seeking to
address their immediate issues, as well as issues which face them daily.
This will ensure that ordinary people with whom we interact with during
the course of our election campaign continue to dialogue with Government
and that they derive joy from those who are honoured and privileged to
lead on their behalf.

This is key to the ongoing development of our democracy and democratic
processes, for these different stakeholders must also be seen and heard in
an ongoing transformation process which impacts on their lives. We will
only be able to realise the objectives of the Freedom Charter and create a
society which is nonsexist, nonracial and prosperous when all of us get
behind the national goals of our country, including all our people in the
rural and urban areas, both rich and poor.

Over the years Government has been able to also communicate much better
through such interactions and some pertinent issues of our people have
been resolved through these initiatives. We have been able to close the
gaps reported by the departments which come into the Presidency regarding
the issues affecting our people. We can find a way to deal with the gaps
which pertain to those things. As the systems and procedures of Government
develop there also will be bottlenecks and other such blockages in the
system and these can be identified and attended to promptly.

The programmatic character of Government's Programme of Action, as
outlined by the President's state of the nation address, with specific
practical commitments and timeframes, creates a strong platform for imbizo
interaction around public involvement in the implementation and monitoring
of programmes, in particular those most directly concerned with promoting
growth and development and with fighting poverty. The imbizo has proved a
popular form of communication, answering to the strong preference amongst
the public for face-to-face interaction with Government and direct
communication with our people. At the same time there is also an
insistence on the part of our communities and public that such interaction
should be followed by better monitoring and feedback of implementation of
issues raised in such serious gatherings.

The immediate challenges we face as we implement this very good programme
of imbizo is to ensure that we mobilise all our political principals in
all spheres of Government for maximum participation in the period leading
to the national focus week, without detracting from other activities which
need to be carried out by Ministries and Government. As a nation and as a
leadership we want to ensure that we focus on the implementation of the
Programme of Action and that we go back to the people to ensure that we
can get progress in terms of that Programme of Action. We have to ensure
that we pay special attention to promoting local government participation
and to ensuring that such participation is sensitive to the need to
enhance the responsiveness of local government to the concerns of our
communities. The imbizo focus week should contribute to the objective of
strengthening the functioning of ward committees, which is the lifeblood
of the community and the people on the ground.

We have to ensure that there is a co-ordination of communication in a
framework that integrates all of the focus week activities with the
President's and Deputy President's izimbizos popularising Government's
Programme of Action. And as we go out to our people building partnerships
for the implementation of that Programme of Action, it will be coherently
informed by the core message of our people's contract to speed up
implementation of our people's contract to expand skill and economic
opportunities and ensure co-operative governance for faster
implementation.

It is therefore important to have sufficient resources to meet all these
and other challenges of the Presidency in order to strengthen our
democracy, empower our people and build partnerships as part of the
people's contract to build a better South Africa and a better world.
Finally, the ANC will support the Budget Vote No 1 in order to
successfully carry out our mandate given by the electorate. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, Mr President, colleagues, the
task of this Parliament in today's debate is to deal with the balance
sheet of our nation's progress. We must acknowledge that which is
succeeding and debate vigorously and openly how to change the things that
are failing.

I was very struck by the President's ideological depiction of The World We
Are In, to quote Mr Hutton, this afternoon. I have had sight of that book
but I have read very closely the predecessor book, The State We Are In. I
think that if one looks at what Will Hutton says about Britain, it's very
interesting how the Prime Minister of Britain, who sits with the ANC in
Socialist International, has actually taken private sector policies and
initiatives and applied them to the reform of the public services. That
seems exactly the way to go; in other words, to take the best of the
private sector and put it into the Public Sector. That seems sensible.

The second thing - here the game was rather given away, I thought, by the
hon Minister of Labour, my old friend, who yesterday complained bitterly
about underperforming Setas, quite rightly. He said in his budget debate
speech that the problem with certain Setas is that they don't fulfil the
mandate that they have been given, and we will give them attention.

But, surely, the problem is within the construction of the Seta system
itself, as one example, because complaint after complaint from business
person after business person is that they pay millions of rands - some of
them - for proper bona fide training that they give in their enterprises.
Yet, the state sets up a completely parallel training enterprise system
without giving recompense for those who are already providing training.
That seems, with respect Mr President, where our own reform should begin.

If we take Britain as an example of a private-public partnership, why is
it that Britain is currently negotiating in the EU for a withdrawal from
the labour law provisions of the EU? In other words, they want an opt-out
provision from the onerous labour laws of the rest of the European Union.
Even within the most left states of the European Union - as you would
describe them - such as Germany, you have Agenda 2010 being driven by a
socialist government, the SPD government of Chancellor Schroeder because
the employment-stifling laws in Germany are crushing job creation in that
country. Therefore, if we are going to adopt The World We Are In or The
State We Are In, as a departure point, we should also look at some of the
lessons of reform that are contained in those volumes.

I think it is wrong to try and depict opponents of the ANC as being in
favour of some kind of libertarian night-watchman state. In fact, we are
not. We believe in a liberal democratic solution and that means, in
essence, as much market as possible, and as much state as is necessary.
The question which has to be answered, and no doubt you will do it in your
reply, Sir, is whether the model of the woolly mammoth state is
appropriate in the age of the Internet, indeed the modern and the mouse.
[Interjections.] You see, I write my own speeches, Mr Manuel, maybe you
should take a tip.

I actually want to draw attention to something the President spoke about
when he identified Government as being broadly of the left. I would submit
that this Government is somewhat to the left and somewhat to the right.
There is a central contradiction that goes through the heart of Government
policy which we should perhaps talk about in this debate. There are three
specific areas where the contradiction regarding the constitutional ideals
to which this whole Chamber - with one or two exceptions who weren't in
favour of the Constitution - is committed to an ANC ideology on one hand,
and that tends to undermine our goals.

I think we should start with the economy. On the one hand, President Mbeki
has often spoken, and quite correctly, about the need for economic growth
and job creation. On the other hand, the ANC is giving off more and more
signals of more state intervention, a more top-down approach to black
economic empowerment, all of which will have a cumulative effect of
discouraging investment.

Then we have the second issue which is at the centre of our public debate
at the moment, and that is the issue of race. On the one hand, the
Government quite correctly pays homage to the ideal of a nonracial,
nonsexist South Africa. On the other hand, the ANC in parts is driving
relentlessly a programme of racial transformation, the net effect of
which, whatever its original intentions are, is to reracialise our
society. [Interjections.]

The third element where these come together is in our foreign policy. On
the one hand, the President has formulated a bold new vision of Africa in
the world through Nepad, which we hardly subscribe to, and on the other
hand the ANC Government is maintaining a failed policy towards failed
states such as Zimbabwe, and is supporting countries and individuals
around the world who actually stand in stark contradiction to the very
human rights culture that the ANC has done so much to popularise in South
Africa and the world. [Interjections.]

Let's start with the economy. And, let me do something anyway though it
seems the hon Minister in the Presidency doesn't listen with his good ear
to it. That is to acknowledge what has gone right in South Africa's
macroeconomic policy. Growth has doubled from where it was in the decade
leading up to 1994. Inflation is a third of what it was 10 years ago and
our foreign reserves are approximately R60 billion as opposed to the R10
billion that the Government inherited from the empty larder bequeathed by
the Government's new friend, Mr F W De Klerk.

But, for all that is good, much has gone wrong. Our growth rate of 1,9%
per annum remains very low, not by international standards only, but even
by the standards of the most successful developing economies in the world:
China - 9,8%; India - 10,4%; and Botswana - 6,7%. Our expanded definition
rate for unemployment in the economy is now over 40%; twice what it was in
the much-maligned United States during the Great Depression. Foreign
direct investment remains pitifully low at only 1,5% of our GDP.

Some of these and their answers aren't in your book, Mr Turok, and I am
delighted the President reads Mr Hutton and not Prof Turok, because we
might get onto the better path. We are convinced that some of these
problems are the direct result of the contradictions that lie at the heart
of Government policy. For example, four years ago, this Government, when
the President took over, promised rapid privatisation. Today it is
apparent that there is a u-turn. It was announced last week by the
responsible Minister: no privatisation of Transnet; no privatisation of
Eskom; no privatisation of Denel. [Applause.] They clap, and all the more
they clap the more investment stays away because you don't want investors
to come in. [Interjections.] Don't clap against investment in South
Africa. [Interjections.]

Then we get to Government's empowerment policy. Now, the essence of this
policy is, once again, not what it promises but what it delivers.
Government policy says it is to help the many not the few. Let's look at
the scoreboard, to use an empowerment indicator. There were R42,2
billion's worth of black economic empowerment deals last year. Sixty
percent of these, R25,2 billion, went to companies owned by two men,
effectively.

As Mr Moeletsi has pointed out, this is an approach that makes no economic
sense. He has suggested that the Government should focus on small business
development instead. There is so much that Government could do: establish
trusts in the rural areas and poor urban areas to enable those trusts to
become the beneficiaries of empowerment deals; encourage companies to
enact employee share-ownership schemes. That is what broad-based
empowerment ought to mean. Instead of that, we have the Minerals and
Energy Minister taking a hard line against foreign investors and coming
down essentially in support of capital divestiture of foreign
multinationals. She said in Maputo, two weeks ago, and I quote:


  I know by insisting on black shareholding we are taking a risk of
  alienating some shareholders. It is a risk worth taking.

But it is the ordinary people who suffer when investors don't come here.
Much more recently, only last week, we had the question of property
ownership without a White Paper or a consultation process. The Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs, hon Thoko Didiza, has announced that foreign
property ownership is likely to be restricted. She said and I quote:


  We need a policy framework that will stipulate that no foreigner can own
  land. [Interjections,]
No foreigner can own land. So, on the one hand we say come in, and on the
other hand we say stay out. [Interjections.] Now, I say this because just
across the road from where Parliament is meeting there is a huge
redevelopment taking place in the central business district of Cape Town,
which I thought was a jolly good thing. But this comes from billions of
rands invested by investors who are Irish and that is leading to the
refurbishment of this city.

I understand that there is a concern in Government about sky-high property
prices. We recently received information from our councillors in Cape Town
that the family of the dictator or President of Equatorial Guinea,
President Obiang Nguema, is buying property or has bought property in
Clifton Beach worth R23,5 million. Now I don't know whether that property
is to be used as a safe house for the day his power runs out or if it's
just another case of a foreign property speculator on the Atlantic coast.
But either way, restrictions on foreign ownership are a red flag for
foreign investors. If some president from another country wants to buy
expensive property, we should put the welcome mat out to everyone. That,
to me, is a contradiction. What signal are we sending out and whose
interests are we serving?

We did'nt get to the issue of race-based demographics. Fundamentally, Mr
President, it must be correct that if you have a nonracial society and a
nonracial constitutional order, there is a real problem when
transformation negates individual merit and treats people's destiny as
though their destinations were written on their skins. That,
fundamentally, must be the wrong idea. Surely, individuals should be free
to define their own destiny and the people are more than the sum of their
demographic parts. In this regard, the debate was not started in this
Parliament in this session by the DA, but it was, in fact, started by the
Minister of Defence who said in his parliamentary briefing early this
month, and I quote:


  When will we cease to be Africans, coloureds, Indians and whites and
  become merely South Africans?

I notice the ANC doesn't applaud that statement. But to me that simple
question goes straight to the heart of the contradiction in Government
policy.

The Minister's very reasonable remarks were dismissed by the usual crowd
of ideologues. Christine Qunta, for example, wrote that the real culprits
in transformation were young white people who she said, and I quote:

... had a persistent pessimism and an aversion to taking steps to correct
the imbalances of the past.

We have not heard from the President on this subject. Which side is the
Presidency regarding this issue? Will the racial extremism of the likes of
Christine Qunta prevail or will the nonracialism of Minister Lekota be
supported? [Interjections.]

In foreign policy, there is also, to use Mr Moeletsi Mbeki's words,
``something of a double vision''. The President can boast some very
significant successes. It is a credit to the President and his Office that
the country has been taken from the Southern tip of Africa to enjoy a
presence in the corridors of world power and a seat at the table of the
G8. But Government's formal commitments to Nepad, SADC and African Union
often stand in stark contrast to the actions and rhetoric of the
Government, in practice.

So we have the situation of Monsieur Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti who
is now being given hospitality here. [Interjections.] It's not a question
of some kind of temporary shelter. There is all the difference in the
world between extending a humanitarian gesture and rolling out the red
carpet, because that sends another signal about what we are serious about
in democracy and international relations.

To me, these contradictions need to be addressed and the President should
take the country into his confidence and thereby address them and take
this country forward. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President, hon Deputy
President, hon members of this House, the President's Office in a certain
sense transcends the rough and tumble of the day-to-day political process,
because the Office of the Presidency contains the offices of both the head
of state and the head of the national executive.

It is in the interests of all our citizens that the Office of the
Presidency functions smoothly and efficiently, and that the interaction
between the Presidency and the institution of Parliament is both
streamlined and seamless. In this regard, it is gratifying that the budget
makes adequate provision for the President and the Deputy President to
fulfil their constitutional obligations.

While talking about the interaction between the institution and
Parliament, it is said: ``The turtle only makes progress when he sticks
his neck out.'' I am going to stick my neck out at this point, Mr
President, because it has become expected of me to use every opportunity I
can to push for members' benefits, members' resources and, on this
particular occasion, the salaries of members of Parliament. Several years
back, the then Goldstone Commission recommended that regular salary
increases should be automatic as at 1 April of every year. It was
suggested at the time that such increases should be 1% below CPI.

There was an undertaking at the time that the annual Goldstone Reports
would be tabled before the end of November each year and that the
Presidency would ensure that the implementation of such increases would be
effective as at 1 April of each year. Despite this undertaking, we are now
almost at the end of June and we still have no idea what is happening with
salary increases for this year. I appeal to the President, on behalf of
the members, to please look at this matter urgently and to see to it that
something is done, because this affects all members of this House.

Having duly stuck my neck out as expected, let me return to the matter
under discussion. In the year that we are celebrating our first decade of
democracy, the Budget Vote for the President's Office affords us an
excellent opportunity to appraise the institution of the Presidency
itself. One must be generously spirited in acknowledging that the ruling
party's success in garnering just short of 70% of the vote in the April
elections was also very much a personal achievement for the President
himself. This achievement also imbues our President with the grave
responsibility of ensuring that the Presidency is alert and sensitive to
the essential checks and balances of a democratic and free society.
Paradoxically, I believe the touchstone of the success of the Presidency
over the next five years will be the extent to which the President will be
willing to relinquish power and devolve decision-making.

There is clear water between the President's and the IFP's vision of
society. We believe that decision-making should be taken to the point
closest to the community and individual as is practically possible. In our
competing vision, we place the individual and the community at the heart
of society, not Government. The President and the ruling party's instinct,
on the other hand, is to grasp all power at the centre and impose
decisions in a top-down manner, effectively tying each mayor to the
President.

It is my fervent conviction that if the Presidency is to succeed in
fulfilling the noble ambition of turning back the frontiers of poverty and
closing the gap between the first and second economies, the President will
need to draw upon the contributions of all political parties in this House
and on that broad and rich constellation of groups known as civil society.

One of the primary roles of the Presidency is policy co-ordination, which
affects the lives of all ordinary South Africans. I hope the President
will be able to rise above party politics and have the courage to heed
advice from other political parties, politics for they represent
constituencies that did not vote for the ruling party but who are as
patriotically South African as those people who did. And, after all, the
two largest opposition parties do not participate in the executive. Such
constructive engagement can only serve to deepen democracy, promote
nonracialism and enrich the process of creating cogent and workable
solutions to our nation's challenges and maladies. The Presidency should
welcome principled and constructive opposition and not caricature it as a
camouflage for racism and the protection of elite interests.

As a moral and constructive opposition party, we would appeal to the
President to seek to accommodate the views of all opposition parties in
finding common solutions to the problems we as a nation face at home and
abroad: the Aids pandemic; the widening inequality gap; endemic poverty
which is most acute in the rural areas; the rooting out of corruption; the
unabating wave of crime; and the continuing unfolding economic and social
crisis in Zimbabwe.

I appeal to the President to use the prestige and authority of the
Presidency to work unceasingly to break down notions of them and us
between HIV-positive and noninfected people, to raise awareness about the
disease and to end the equivocation and malaise which has characterised
the Presidency's approach to dealing with HIV/Aids. The Presidency must
lead the Government's efforts boldly from the front so as to bridge the
gap between policy and the implementation of a comprehensive plan to treat
HIV/Aids.
In the fight against poverty, the Presidency has a huge role to play in
promoting an economic vision that empowers the poor and marginalised by
drawing them into the mainstream of economic opportunity.

The Child's Rights Organisation tells us that many children live in
conditions in which their rights are threatened. This is a serious blemish
on a civilised society. The promotion and protection of children's rights
fall within the ambit of policy co-ordination in the Presidency. Many
children have been orphaned by Aids and many are even the sole
breadwinners for their families. The Presidency must take the lead in
defending the rights of children affected by Aids, particularly the girl-
child.

In the formulation and implementation of our public policy, the Presidency
must be especially vigilant to ensure that in South Africa we avoid a
process of elite transition in which we merely exchange yesterday's bitter
politics of racial superiority with the equally cruel politics of the
haves and have-nots. Left unchecked, unfulfilled expectations could have
the explosive cauldron effect of ripping apart the seams of national unity
and reconciliation that we have all strived to strengthen over the past
decade.
Turning to the arena of foreign policy, in view of the Presidency's
significant involvement in Nepad, there is much we can contribute with our
experience in conflict resolution, I believe, to resolving conflicts in
Africa and further away, such as the Middle East.

One of the lessons of the 20th century must be that no country can keep
the world out. Our foreign policy must be consistent and ethical. We must
always stand up to bullies, irrespective of any past or present bonds of
friendship. This Presidency is better placed than other chancery in the
world to hold the government of Zimbabwe to account for human rights
abuses and for the deterioration and the undermining of the legal and
democratic institutions there.

Former US President Harry Truman once famously described the presidency as
a ``bully pulpit''. The IFP hopes that the President will take the
opportunity of using the Office of the Presidency to be a force for unity,
to take the moral lead, and to provide uncluttered, visionary leadership
in our beloved nation and on our continent.

The IFP supports the Presidency Budget Vote.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, hon President of the Republic, hon
Minister and Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, we are
pleased to have this opportunity of sharing with you our activities in
line with the Programme of Action outlined by the President in the state
of the nation address. Ministers have over the last few weeks indeed
outlined in their respective Budget Votes the activities of the various
departments aimed at advancing the fight against poverty and expanding
access to a better life. These have clearly indicated the commitment of
this Government to meeting the needs of the people.

Let me take advantage of this being youth month and begin by saluting our
youth and acknowledging their contribution to the struggle for freedom in
our country. The youth are our future and youth development continues to
be one of our priorities. The Minister in the Presidency, who bears
responsibility for youth development, will expand on our activities in
this regard.

We see nation-building as continuing to be a key priority in this second
decade of freedom. Our people, united in diversity, need to work together
in a people's contract to create work and fight poverty.
While working for national unity, we by no means seek to suppress the
unique diversity that makes South Africa a world in one country. Members
are aware of the establishment of the Commission for the Promotion and
Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
Communities, which is set to begin its work in earnest this year. Let us
as religious, cultural and linguistic groups, use this commission to
contribute our uniqueness as we build a better life for all.

Another key aspect of nation-building and the encouragement of diversity
is the promotion of multilingualism, especially ensuring the greater use
of indigenous languages to promote their growth and development.

Somlomo, namalungu ahloniphekile esishayamthhetho sikazwelonke,
kuyancomeka ukuthi izilimi eziningi seziyakhulunya ngisho nalapha endlini
yesishayamthetho sikazwelonke.

Kuyinjabulo kakhulu ngoba ngesikhathi sobandlulo lezi zilimi zazishaywe
indiva, zibukelwa phansi. Kuyakhombisa-ke manje ukuthi umbuso wentando
yeningi nenkululeko, sekulethe izinguquko eziningi.

Abuntu sebeyakwazi manje ukusho okusemicabangweni yabo ngokungazenyezi.
Lokhu kuyinto ebaluleke kakhulu ekwakhiweni kwesizwe, nasekubuyiseni isimo
sokuzethemba ebantwini bakithi.

Okunye okubalulekile Somlomo, ezinguqukweni ezilethwe yinkululeko,
ukubyiswa kwesithunzi samakhosi endabuko sibuyiswa yilo Hulumeni wentando
yeningi.

Siyakhumbula sonke ukuthi amakhosi ayephucwe namandla okwenza izinto
ezithile ngesikhathi sobandlululo, ephetwe yizimantshi. Lo mthetho omusha
oshaywe yilesi sishayamthetho usukubeke kwacaca ukuthi yikliphi iqhaza
elizobanjwa amakhosi kulombuso wentando yeningi.

Indlela amakhosi azosebenzisana ngayo noHulumeni isicaciswe kabanzi kulo
mthetho. Kuningi esikubona kufanele amakhosi abambe kukho iqhaza,
ikakhulukazi emkhankasweni wokubuyisa ubuntu nezimilo emphakathini.
Amakhosi angasisiza isizwe ekukhumbuzeni abantu amasiko agcizelela ubunt,
ukuze kunciphe ubunswelaboya.

Kanti nasemikhakheni yezolimo, nokuthuthukiswa kwezindawo zasemakhaya,
kanye nokufakwa kwezingqalasizinda nokunye, kufanele kuqiniswe ubudlelwane
nokokusebenzisana phakathi kwamakhosi noHulumenio basemkhaya, njengoba
sekwenzeka nje kwezinye izindawo. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Madam Speaker, hon members of the National Assembly, it is appreciated
that most of the languages are now being used, even in this House, the
National Assembly.

It is really a great pleasure, especially because these languages were
rejected and looked down upon during the apartheid era. It is now evident
that democracy and freedom have brought about quite a number of changes.

People are now able to say what is on their minds with confidence. This is
very important for nation-building and moral regeneration among our
people. Another important issue, Madam Speaker, arising from the changes
that have been brought about by democracy, was the recognition of the
authority of traditional leader which was brought back by this democratic
government.

We all know that during the apartheid era traditional leaders were
deprived of authority to perform certain administrative acts and were
under magisterial authority. This new legislation passed by this National
Assembly makes clear provision as to what role the traditional leaders can
play in this democratic government. The manner in which the traditional
leaders shall work together with the government has been clearly outlined
in detail in this legislation.

There are so many ways in which we feel the traditional leaders should
play a role in our communities, particularly in the moral regeneration
campaign. Traditional leaders can help the nation by reminding the people
about cultural codes that place emphasis on ubuntu, so that crime is
reduced, as well as in agricultural activities, the development of rural
areas, the establishment of infrastructure, and so on. Relations and the
spirit of working together should be strengthened between traditional
leaders and local governments, as is happening in other places.]

Madam Speaker, we are pleased that the moral regeneration programme has
continued to take root in communities. Hon members would be aware of the
success of the many campaigns undertaken by Government and communities,
encouraging awareness and action against scourges such as domestic
violence, child abuse as well as alcohol and drug abuse.

The success of campaigns such as the 16 Days of Activism on No Violence
against Women and Children, and others such as Child Protection Week,
result from the strong partnership between Government and communities in
preventing and fighting criminality.

We thank all members of this House who are active in their constituencies
during such campaigns. Let us do more, especially during this year, which
is international year of the family. But let me emphasise that the moral
regeneration programme is not only about campaigns against negative
behaviour. It is also about promoting positive values such as ubuntu and
compassion, and respect for human dignity and human life and all other
values enshrined in our Constitution. Therefore, all of us have a role to
play in our communities to mobilise and promote these values in various
activities.

In this regard, allow me to use this opportunity to pay tribute to one of
our foremost nation-builders, the former editor-in-chief of the Sowetan,
Aggrey Klaaste, who died at the weekend. [Applause] His contribution to
social development and to building a compassionate society will never be
forgotten. He was not just a spectator and reporter of events; he was a
catalyst for change.

Hon members, as we all know, the then Deputy President Mbeki launched the
Partnership against AIDS in 1998, emphasising partnerships in care and
support for the infected and affected. In addition to many Government
programmes, many resources have been pooled from diverse communities and
social groupings to ensure a strong, united and comprehensive response to
this epidemic. This partnership is expressed and co-ordinated through the
South African National Aids Council.

We will continue to encourage all sectors and spheres of society to be
involved as equal partners in developing programmes, and in sharing
information and research that will curb the spread of this disease. We
must also develop more support networks for those already infected and
affected by the disease.

Hon members, the building of a better Africa and a better world has always
been a strong mission of our Government. We will continue our interactions
on a bilateral and multilateral level with various countries and
international institutions to promote our national objectives.
Next week we will host the second meeting of the South Africa-People's
China Binational Commission. We will seek to further expand bilateral
relations with China in the political, economic, technological, cultural,
educational and scientific fields. South Africa is China's largest trading
partner in Africa. As China is one of the world's fastest growing
economies, we anticipate that the binational commission will assist in
further improving trade between our two countries. The bilateral trade
volume has already increased from R9,3 billion in 1990 to R23,3 billion in
2003.

We also have binational commissions with Nigeria, Sweden and Germany, and
all these provide a focused mechanism for deepening ties and meeting
objectives such as expanding trade relations in order to meet the national
priority and the creation of jobs. We have binational commissions with
other countries as well.

We are also continuing with conflict resolution in the Great Lakes region,
including Burundi, where elections need to take place before 1 November
2004, in terms of the Arusha agreement. The Great Lakes region has
approved a timetable and we are working closely with the Barundi to ensure
adherence to the deadlines. The priorities in the next few weeks include
the establishment of an independent electoral commission and the passing
of the necessary electoral legislation.

Also in terms of the Arusha agreement, we are assisting the Burundi
parties to finalise a post-election power-sharing arrangement, which we
call a soft landing option, which would take into account both the
aspirations of the majority as well as the fears of the minority.

We spent two days in Burundi last week, and met with 30 political parties
and representatives of civil society to discuss post-election power-
sharing and the peace process in general. On Monday this week, in
Pretoria, we also received a delegation from the All Africa Council of
Churches, the World Council of Churches and the Fellowship of Christian
Councils in East Africa and the Horn of Africa, to discuss the Burundi
peace process.

With regard to preparing for security conditions, hon members will also be
aware of the deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping mission from 1
June to replace the African mission in Burundi. As members will recall,
when the UN Security Council indicated in 2002 that conditions were not
conducive for the deployment of the UN's force, as the cease-fire
agreements did not meet all the UN requirements, the AU decided to deploy
the African mission to which South Africa, Mozambique and Ethiopia
contributed troops. As we welcome the UN deployment, we also commend the
African mission in Burundi, the first ever peacekeeping mission deployed
by the AU. It was a key innovation on the continent and it is now a good
model for future AU peacekeeping missions.

Allow me to thank all hon members who continue to support the key role
that our country is playing in peacekeeping and peacemaking on the
continent. South Africa is presently listed as the 10th largest troop-
contributing country to the United Nations. This is a remarkable
achievement, bearing in mind that the country only became directly
involved in the UN peacekeeping operations from 2001. This indicates the
total commitment of South Africa to peace and stability on the continent
and in the world.

Our country continues to provide hope on the continent, especially in the
search for peace. We recall that during the two presentations to the
United Nations Security Council for the deployment of a peacekeeping
mission in Burundi, in 2002 and 2003, council members unanimously
emphasised the importance that South Africa is playing in the continent.
This view has been expressed in many other forums.

Malunga ahloniphekile esiShayamthetho sikaZwelonke, angigcizelele ukuthi
njengoba sithumele amabutho kula mazwe anjengoBurundi noDRC, senziwa
ukwazi ukuthi angeke sithuthuke futhi sijabule sodwa ungunaphakade kube
kudlange izimpi nokwentula emazweni angomakhelwane bethu. [Ihlombe.]
Kuyayisiza iNingizimu Afrika ukusebenzela ukuthula ukuze sandise amazwe
esingahwebelana nawo futhi sithuthukise unmotho wezwe lethu kanye
nowezwekazi lase-Afrika. Sizimisele ukusebenzela ukuthula e-Afrika kuze
kungabi bikho ama-Afrika ayophila ngosizi, ngokweswela nangokwesaba.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Hon members of the National Assembly, let me emphasise the fact that we
have sent troops to countries like Burundi and the DRC because we know
that we will never develop and be happy forever all by ourselves while
wars and poverty are prevalent in our neighbouring states. [Applause.] It
helps South Africa to work for peace so that we increase the number of
countries we can trade with while developing the economy of our country
and of Africa as a whole. We are prepared to work for peace in Africa so
that no Africans live in poverty and fear.]

Taking Government to the people through izimbizo and other public
participation programmes is set to continue. Accessibility and the
capacity to listen and respond to the people will continue to be a key
priority of this Government. Last year a number of izimbizo were
undertaken. Follow-ups conducted after those visits indicate the success
of this programme.

For example, in 2001 we visited the Free State, and in November last year
we returned to assess progress. As regards agriculture, a request for the
speeding up of land claims had been made in 2001. By the time of the
follow-up visit, 18 farms had been allocated to the previously
disadvantaged families through grants obtained from Government. On the
question of access to services, the people of Trompsburg and Zastron had,
in 2001, complained about having to travel to Bloemfontein to obtain
identity and other civic documents. As we speak, multipurpose community
centres are under construction in two areas to resolve the problem.
[Applause.] The people of Trompsburg had also requested sport and
recreation facilities, and these were built by Government at a cost of R4
million.

In Limpopo, following complaints from the people during izimbizo last
year, the provincial government set aside over R30 million to demolish and
rebuild all school premises built with asbestos in Mafefe village.
[Applause.] These are just a few illustrations of how Government responds
to issues raised during izimbizo. They indicate the value of izimbizo as a
communication, monitoring and evaluation tool.

In this new term of government and new Parliament, as Leader of Government
Business, let me acknowledge and welcome the existing co-operation between
the executive and Parliament. We'll play our part to contribute to the
efficient functioning of Parliament through, among other things, ensuring
a smooth flow of legislation. In the previous Parliament, we succeeded in
ensuring that a large number of Bills did not have to be fast-tracked and
that Parliament had sufficient time to properly consider the Bills before
it. Once again, thank you for this opportunity of sharing information on
our activities. We hope for a continued positive working relationship
between the executive and Parliament for the common good of our country.
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to thank our President for
inculcating in the Presidency and Government the culture of hard work, and
indeed for providing effective leadership. [Applause.] I'd also like to
thank the Minister in the Presidency who has been a pillar of support to
all of us; our Director-General, Rev Frank Chikane and all Presidency
staff for their hard work and much-valued support to all of us. Allow me
to join the President in extending our heartfelt condolences to Rev
Chikane and his family on the passing away of his mother. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President, hon Deputy
President and hon members, we find ourselves in agreement with the hon
Deputy Minister, because we too strive for a strong and prosperous Africa,
and South Africa is the economic engine room of Africa. The first step in
creating a strong Africa is to make South Africa strong and prosperous.

Since the start of this third Parliament, we have witnessed Government's
grand plan taking shape. The hon President has led from the front in order
to put in place an overall policy thrust with a great deal of potential.
On various fronts strategy, legislation and budgets are taking shape to
address economic and social issues, issues that the UDM has also been
campaigning for.

It appears to us that Government, under the direct leadership of the hon
President, is moving in the right direction. Naturally, we do not agree
with every single initiative in its detail, and we have raised our
reservations and counterproposals during the various Budget Vote debates.
We sincerely trust that the outcomes of the policies that have been put in
place will be as positive as the intentions expressed.

Today I would like to raise three issues, which we believe require
attention in order to allow Government's overall strategy to succeed in
delivering social and economic prosperity for all. The three make-or-break
issues are, firstly, the volatility of our currency, secondly, the
inflationary environment, in third place, the impact of HIV/Aids. Many
factors contribute to the state of each of these issues. However, we would
like to suggest that above and beyond the various Government strategies
already in place, a single additional policy intervention in each case
could vastly enhance the success of Government's overall strategy.
Firstly, the volatility of the rand remains a central factor in dampening
economic growth and, hence, job creation. The rand's volatility creates
uncertainty amongst domestic and foreign investors and encourages short-
term rather than long-term investment. Whenever the currency weakens it
stimulates exports, but inflationary pressure is applied to various
sectors of the economy which, in one fell swoop, increases the price of
commodities and imported goods. When the rand strengthens, it inhibits
exports, decreases earnings and threatens jobs. This volatility is costing
the country dearly, because it keeps the country in a lose-lose situation.
Whatever the currency does, we lose.

Perhaps the single biggest factor leading to this currency volatility is
the interest rate differential. The fact that the differential in terms of
the interest rates of our major trading partners is in the region of 5% to
7% means that our currency will continue to attract so-called ``hot
money''. We make ourselves a target for speculative cash flows.

To benefit from the high interest rate differentials, speculators
temporarily ``park'' money in South Africa awaiting favourable investment
opportunities elsewhere. When those opportunities arise, these speculators
disinvest and cause huge currency outflows. The single policy intervention
that we would urge Government to consider is to reduce this differential
by pursuing interest rates down to at least neutral levels.

Secondly, the inflationary environment is a factor that hampers economic
growth and threatens to disrupt various job creation initiatives. Again,
it is worth noting that Government has committed itself to a number of
strategies to combat inflation. The UDM will definitely monitor the
success of Government to keep administered prices below inflation levels,
to mention only one commendable effort.

One factor that contributes significantly to the inflationary environment
is the cost of fuel. Transport expenditure is an important segment of most
household budgets. Given the economy's dependence on road freight, the
price of fuel inevitably determines the price of all goods that need to be
transported between suppliers, wholesalers, manufacturers and the
consumer. I have already referred to administered prices and to currency
volatility. These all have an impact on the fuel price.

However, we would like to propose that the Government seriously and
urgently investigate the viability of entering into one or more crude-oil
swap arrangements with friendly supplier countries. Oil swaps are well-
known arrangements throughout the world and they serve to fix the price of
oil for both the suppliers and the purchasers for an agreed period.

Since the Opec target price for oil is between $23 and $28 per barrel, we
should be able to negotiate a swap within that price range. If a
substantial portion of our annual oil requirements were fixed in this way,
the volatility of our price of fuel would be severely dampened and
stabilised. Low-price volatility should be our target at this juncture.
This arrangement will buffer the economy against the inflationary impact
of fuel price volatility. I believe that there are a number of crude-oil-
producing countries that we have friendly diplomatic relationships with.
So negotiating a favourable swap arrangement should, in essence, be
possible.

Thirdly, HIV/Aids is a disease burden that is doing untold economic and
social damage to our country. For instance, it is estimated that currently
18% of a working South African's life is spent sick. That figure will only
increase in the next few years as the pandemic spreads. The cost of health
care is spiralling, productivity will fall, and the youth and those in the
economically active age group are hardest hit. Social assistance
expenditure by Government will increasingly be absorbed by the disease.
Poverty will increase as a direct result of HIV/Aids.

Once again we acknowledge that various Government responses are under way
to deal with the problem. We would have hoped that some of these could
have happened earlier, but the fact is that things are finally beginning
to happen. The single additional policy intervention we would like to
propose is that Government make HIV/Aids a notifiable disease.

The success of any strategy to deal with the pandemic is directly linked
to the surveillance capacity of the Government. Without proper and
accurate surveillance, it is impossible to determine whether responses to
the disease are appropriate and whether they are succeeding, or when and
where strategies need to be amended. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, I promise I will not call you Madam Speaker.
Mr President, Mr Deputy President, the ID is the only independent voice in
this country. [Laughter.] This was confirmed in April of 2004, and we will
execute our mandate without fear or favour. We also remain the only
political party with a nonracial message of opposition politics, which is
protransformation and building a new South Africa.

There are several coalitions in this House. On the one hand there is the
coalition here for disappearance after 90 years, and, on the other hand,
we have a coalition for change, or is it a coalition for fear? I don't
know. [Laughter.] We are interested in finding out what this coalition
stands for, because it seems this coalition only comes together when they
fear that they have been excluded from positions of power. [Laughter.]

I will only focus only on a few key issues today that I think are integral
to the operations of the Presidency. One of them is poverty. While each
Government department has its own poverty alleviation budget, these
programmes must be aligned more tightly to ensure effectiveness. We
welcome the closer monitoring that the President has now announced today,
and we also look forward to fulfilling our function of watching it very
closely.
We support the latest Human Rights Commission report, which recommends
that child support grants be extended from 14 to 18 years. Government is
under obligation in terms of section 28 of the Constitution to provide
second-generation human rights and socioeconomic rights to children, and
we think that this obligation must be fulfilled.

It has also been proven all over the world that when a government finds
ways to stimulate the SMME sector, there is a significant reduction in
unemployment. Therefore job creation in the informal sector must be a
priority.

With regard to our youth, the majority of the unemployed today are the
youth of our country, and therefore policy interventions directed at them
must be strengthened and linked to broader employment initiatives. The
performance to date of the National Youth Commission and the Umsobomvu
Youth Fund is disappointing. These programmes stand to benefit the most
from efficient and independent monitoring to gauge their effectiveness and
justify the increase in their budgets.

Our education system must be designed to deliver the skills required for
our economy. There is currently a mismatch that needs to be corrected.
There should be a demand-driven approach to skills development between the
Sector Education and Training Authorities and the industries for which
they have been created.

Regarding HIV/Aids, the current roll-out rate of antiretrovirals will not
achieve your 1,4 million ARVs by 2008. There isn't any more time for
philosophical and intellectual debates around HIV/Aids or grandstanding.
What is needed is a strong political will to make high-impact and cost-
effective interventions. It is the role and responsibility of everyone in
this country to stand up and do something about HIV and Aids. For
Government to achieve its target by 2008, it is important that it partner
with NGOs, the private sector and also civil society as a whole. The fact
is that Government can never do it alone.

All pandemics such as polio and smallpox have been contained by vaccine
intervention. We must therefore make more resources available for the
HIV/Aids vaccine initiative. For this, we should commend the SA Vaccine
Initiative. But it is also quite embarrassing, Mr President, that when I
attend international Aids conferences we are always confronted by
different presentations by South African organisations. We hope this year,
when we go to Bangkok, that we will be able for the first time in the
history of the Aids conference to present a unified country position.

We also accept that the growth rate in the President's budget of 10,4%
over the medium-term is sufficient to cope with your increasing leadership
role on the continent and the implementation of domestic policy and
service delivery.

The restructuring of the Presidency is critical to ensure proper co-
ordination and implementation of policy. We therefore welcome the
appointment of the Chief Operations Officer in the Presidency in order to
fast-track delivery.

We also heard from inside your camp, Mr President, that you are cracking
the whip on your Ministers and not letting them get away with
nonperformance. You are correct in this approach, because they must work
in order to come back in 2009. The question is, Mr President, how can I
help you in this task, because I am sure I can shout louder than you?
[Laughter.]

In terms of the restructuring of local government, we agree with the steps
that are being implemented, because it is at this level where the face of
poverty is most obvious. The equitable share allocation is imperative if
the President wants to stand out in the minds of South Africans in years
to come for its achievements with regard to poverty elimination.

Instead of just being a bunch of reactionaries - they are not in the House
- who continually criticise policy without having credible alternatives,
the ID is building a majority that is determined and dedicated to getting
South Africa working. [Applause.] I am convinced, Mr President, that when
you look back many years from now, you would like to be remembered for the
goals that you intend achieving over the next five years. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, hon members of Parliament, comrades, ladies and
gentlemen, in this tenth year of freedom, we have collectively made
tremendous progress to transform our country from apartheid to democracy.
The ANC supports this Budget Vote, and the far-reaching Programme of
Action outlined by the Presidency. It is appropriate that this Budget Vote
debate takes place during this month of June, which is almost 50 years
since the adoption of the Freedom Charter in 1955. It is also the twenty-
eighth anniversary of our gallant youth struggles of 1976. This causes us
to reflect on the type of society the Freedom Charter envisaged and for
which our youth laid down their lives.

We also wish to recognise the contributions and sacrifices made by South
African workers under the banner of Cosatu and its former allies in the
UDF during the mid-1980s. The working people and the poor need to be seen
to be the major beneficiaries of the fruits of liberty for which they
fought and died. This needs to be the main yardstick by which we measure
progress. According to the 2003-2004 South African Year Book, significant
economic achievements have been recorded since 1994, including
macroeconomic stabilisation, a profound restructuring of the real economy
and substantive export success. Since 1994, for the first time over two
decades, South Africa experienced positive growth. However, what remains
is the critical challenge of strengthening the link between economic
growth and export success with employment creation, poverty alleviation
and a marked reduction in inequality. These are challenges that the ANC
took very seriously when it entered into a people's contract with South
Africa to create work and fight poverty.

Comrade President, we are further encouraged by your leadership together
with other African leaders and heads of states, in the G8 Summit process.
During the past weekend you continued to engage the international
community about the problems of South Africa, this region and our
continent. Business Day of Monday, 21 June 2004 reported as follows:


  The International Investment Council, composed of business leaders who
  manage multinational companies in various industries, has given its vote
  of confidence on the stability of economic conditions in South Africa.
  The Council believes that this will help the country to realize real
  growth for the first time in 10 years. This was also evident in the
  decision of the International Monitory Council to host this
  international conference in South Africa, the first it meets in Africa,
  in 2007.

These are important achievements for our economy, coupled with our
celebrated victory to host the Soccer World Cup in 2010.

The next decade of democratic rule in South Africa poses many critical
challenges to grow the economy, increase investment in our local economy
and to halve unemployment and poverty by 2014. In the discussion document
entitled ``Towards a Ten-Year Review'', the following captures the
enormity of the challenges ahead:


  The advances made in the first decade by far supersede the weaknesses.
  Yet if all indicators were to continue along the same trajectory,
  especially in respect of the dynamics of economic inclusion and
  exclusion, we could soon reach a point where the negative starts to
  overwhelm the positive.

The ANC Government does not have the luxury to state the problems only,
but has the responsibility to work tirelessly together with patriotic
stakeholders in the economy to find workable solutions.

A critical part of this challenge must be to address the plight of our
African youth and rural people. They are the hardest hit by unemployment
and poverty. Young people under 30 years faced an unemployment rate of 47%
in 2001 and constituted 70% of all unemployed people, as reported by Stats
SA in 2002. These problems are obviously easy to state but difficult to
resolve. Ours is an integrated and comprehensive strategy to fight poverty
and create work. The President, in this Parliament and elsewhere, has
clearly stated the long-standing challenge of dualism in our economy,
which was entrenched by many decades of colonialism and apartheid. There
are no automatic benefits from the first economy to the second economy.

Therefore, Government has mobilised social partners to the creation of
jobs and sustainable livelihoods, on a new growth path. We further wish to
acknowledge the important role played by Nedlac in facilitating social
dialogue on critical issues facing South Africa. Nedlac enriches our
participatory democracy on key socioeconomic issues, and has been
recognised by the International Labour Organisation as a pioneering
institution.

The five sectors that are critical in mobilising resources to contribute
to our economic turnaround are: state through fiscal policy; parastatals
through their investment and restructuring potential; retirement funds and
life insurers with the agreement to invest 5% of income into productive
projects; the social and co-operative sector; and the private sector. The
private sector alone commands the bulk of investable capital and is
expected to show more confidence in our domestic economy by investing even
more into our people, plant equipment and infrastructure. However, we note
with concern the massive disinvestments and delistings from the local
economy and off-shore listings and foreign beneficiation of our raw
materials by South African companies such as De Beers, Anglo American,
Sasol, Old Mutual, SAB Miller and Billiton.

International experience clearly shows that real foreign direct investment
follows large-scale domestic investment. Domestic corporations need to
demonstrate their commitment to our economy in a meaningful way. We
welcome interventions such as the Expanded Public Works Programme,
learnerships and other projects that were announced by respective
Ministers in their various Budget speeches. Our determination to fight
poverty, create jobs and grow the economy is unstoppable. The Presidential
Jobs Summit convened by our former President, Comrade Nelson Mandela in
1998 laid a solid foundation to deal with problems of unemployment and
poverty. That summit and the Growth and Development Summit are mutually
reinforcing agreements.

Our Proudly South African campaign is doing very well and needs to be
supported and encouraged at all levels. For instance, South Africa cannot
continue to import toilet paper, tinned tomatoes and condoms, which could
surely be produced locally and competitively. We also need to ensure that
we use South African goods and services as far as humanly possible, in our
preparations for 2010 and beyond. We need to host a Proudly South African
World Cup.

The Democratic Alliance, in their empty benches, until today have raised
one issue and one issue only, namely labour market flexibility to deal
with economic growth, poverty and unemployment. What they have essentially
been advocating for ten years now, is to scrap the labour laws and give
employers the right to hire and fire at will. That will not happen, Mr
Lowe. It will not happen as you said today, Mr Leon. [Interjections.] If
it is so, then they should tell us what the other rubbish is. All
important stakeholders, except you yourself, agree that ours is a complex
problem that needs sustainable solutions. They continuously fail to
understand the structural nature of unemployment and the collapsing demand
for unskilled workers in our economy. One day you'll learn.
[Interjections.] Yes, I still belong here.

Let me end for the benefit of my friends in the DA by reading a quotation
from the speech of the President at the Millennium Labour Council in July
2000. He quoted one of the greatest leaders of the 20th century who stated
that:
  I see a great nation upon a great continent, blessed with a great wealth
  of natural resources. Its people are at peace among themselves, they are
  making their country a good neighbour amongst nations. I see a country,
  which can demonstrate that under democratic methods of government
  national wealth can be translated into spreading volumes of human
  comforts hitherto unknown, and the lowest standard of living can be
  raised far above the levels of mere subsistence.


  But here is the challenge to our democracy. In this nation I see tens of
  millions of citizens, a substantial part of its whole population, who at
  this very moment are denied the greater part of what the very lowest
  standards of today can call necessities of life. I see millions of
  families trying to live on incomes so meagre that the pall of family
  disaster hangs over them day by day. I see millions whose daily lives in
  city and on farm continue under conditions labelled indecent by so-
  called polite societies, half a century ago.

[Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr C B HERANDIEN: Mr Chairman, hon President, hon Deputy President,
members of the Cabinet, ladies and gentlemen, from the outset I want to
emphasise that the New National Party will support this budget. But, Mr
Chairman, allow me to remind the hon member of the ID just for the record
that, in a democracy where nation-building is of the utmost importance, I
don't think she - and I can give her a signed letter to that effect - and
her party will last ninety years.

Hon President, when you opened Parliament in 2001, there was an outcry
from all quarters that you had no vision, that you could not unite the
people of South Africa, and specifically they stated and claimed that you
said nothing new. Your 43 objectives at that stage placed the emphasis on
the economy. But although very few people understood the importance of
your speech at the time, the significance became clear 3 years later, with
the elections earlier this year.

In your address after your inauguration in May, you came up with key
deliverables, and specific timeframes. Twenty-eight of these were aimed at
the first economy. The three most important ones are the undertaking that
by the end of this year, no child will be taught under a tree; within five
years everybody will have clean dinking water; and especially within eight
years, everybody will have electricity. Mr President, that is laudable,
and I'm sure that you and your Cabinet are fully geared to reach these
targets.

We achieved our freedom from apartheid and now we need to join hands to
obtain our economic freedom. We cannot afford the luxury of having a
nation of a few super rich, as opposed to the masses of the poor. Poverty
has no barriers of colour, religion, race or sex. We are all proud South
Africans and must, as a nation, continue to foster the miracle that
happened in 1994, a miracle that the world can see is everlasting. You
took opposition parties by surprise. They now all agree that you have a
very good declaration of intent, but as usual they doubt whether it is
attainable. I'm sure that opposition politics will find it extremely
difficult in future. If they want to fulfil their role as watchdog over
the Government, they should first try to understand the politics of
poverty and especially the politics of economic emancipation. [Applause.]

The President kept his word and the people in the community are very glad
that already they clamped down on certain drug dealers as he promised in
his state of the nation address. Two hundred of them are well known. The
people out there applaud you. Seeing that the hon Mr Ellis was making a
few snide remarks, as usual his leader could not resist to make a snide
remark about the former President F W de Klerk. It is well known that they
refused to allow Mr de Klerk to address this Chamber with former President
Nelson Mandela. [Interjections.]

But let me remind them as the DA that this friendship between the
President and former President F W de Klerk is an open secret - there is
nothing to hide. It would help them if they could come here and be
transparent by telling us if they still have friendly ties with the
infamous Jurgen Harksen. They should tell us what happened behind closed
doors when they entered into secret deals with the liquidators of the
Harksen estate. If that is transparency, and if that is the way we are
going to conduct opposition politics in future, Mr President, then we
might as well not have an opposition. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M R MORUTOA: Chairperson, hon President, hon Deputy President, hon
Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon members of Parliament, ladies and
gentlemen, my speech is dedicated to those who made a difference in South
Africa, struggling for the emancipation for women. These are the late
Feronza Adams, the late Ntombi Shope and the late June Mlangeni. I will be
speaking on the vision and programmes of the Office on the Status of
Women.

The ANC National Executive Council in 1990 adopted a comprehensive
statement on the emancipation of women in South Africa. Our definition of
goals towards achieving gender equality are guided by our vision of human
rights, which incorporates the acceptance of the equal and inalienable
rights of men and women. This is a fundamental tenet of our Bill of Rights
and Constitution. This vision of how the ANC had envisaged government to
work is elaborated on in the National Gender Policy Framework. The ANC
Women's League played a pivotal role by leading the National Women's
Coalition in mobilising all women to fight against discrimination against
woman.

The new democratic Government put in place a constitutional, legislative
and institutional framework towards achieving a democratic, nonracial and
nonsexist dispensation. We came up with a Constitution that guarantees
equal rights for all South Africans and prohibits discrimination. The
vision and mandate of the Office on the Status of Women, the OSW, is
located in the office of the President. Its mandate is to support and
monitor gender mainstreaming in Government departments. It has a vital
role to play as the principle co-ordinating structure of the national
machinery on gender equality. It is responsible for developing national
gender plans, as well as the implementation of national strategies.

The Office on the Status of Women has compiled a National Policy Framework
for Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality, which outlines an integrated
framework for gender mainstreaming. Its vision is as follows: to develop
an environment that will guarantee gender equality, hereby empowering
women to gain equal access to opportunities and resources that will
enhance the quality of the lives of women. The principle mandate of the
OSW is to ensure that Government lives up to its constitutional, political
and international commitments by translating these into meaningful and
measurable programmes, thereby making a nonsexist society a reality.

The key programme areas of the Office on the Status of Women are policy,
gender mainstreaming, co-ordinating and planning, advocacy, liaison
networking and capacity-building.

In 2003, the following initiatives were embarked upon. Firstly, gender
mainstreaming. In collaboration with the Department of Local Government,
an initiative was embarked upon to mainstream gender into poverty
eradication programmes. In conjunction with the New Economic Partnership
and Development secretariat of Nepad, a conference was hosted on ``Gender
and Nepad'' to look into the mainstreaming of gender into Nepad-related
initiatives.

In collaboration with the national gender machinery, work has been done to
mainstream gender into national priorities such as poverty eradication.
Work has gone into implementing the National Co-ordination Framework.
Pertaining to capacity-building, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme, a training programme was completed in May 2003. A
training manual was developed as a result of this process and was
disseminated in July 2003. A lecture service programme has been
implemented and lectures were held on Nepad and on 10 years of freedom.

The programme of the Office on the Status of Women during 2004 will
hopefully also look at and focus on the following national priorities:
poverty eradication; ensuring service delivery to women; HIV/Aids; job
creation and the economic empowerment of women; skills development; and
violence against women.

The budget of the Office on the Status of Women is located in the budget
of the Presidency. The main appropriation to the Presidency increases from
R149 million in the 2003-04 financial year, to R173 million in the 2004-05
Budget. This constitutes an increase of 15,6% in nominal terms. The
Presidency has organised its expenditure into the following five
programmes: administration; support services to the President and Deputy
President; Cabinet office policy co-ordination; and the National Youth
Commission. The budget for the Office on the Status of Women is located
within the budget for policy co-ordination. The ANC definitely supports
this Budget Vote.

As part of the ongoing project co-ordinated by the Presidency to assess
the first 10 years of freedom, the Office on the Status of Women co-
ordinated provincial conversations, which culminated in the national
gathering in the Limpopo province. Women at these forums assessed the
impact of freedom on their lives and planned for the next 10 years. The
objectives of the conversations were to acknowledge the strides and
measures that have been made to advance women's equality, review the years
of freedom and examine what it has meant for women, envision the next 10
years and ensure that future Government plans are informed by women and
women's experiences and concerns.

The understanding of many African women scholars, practitioners, decision-
makers and activists across the continent is that women struggle to
balance formal and substantive equality. Similarly, during the
conversations, women agreed that whilst the Constitution embraces the
hopes of generations of men and women, and whilst the overall legislative
framework in South Africa empowers women, the challenge is to implement
these laws and policies to ensure meaningful equality and protection of
women's freedoms. For instance, regarding the Maintenance Act it is
important that we focus on the appointment of maintenance investigations,
and regarding the Domestic Violence Act the focus should fall on the
recruitment of SAPS staff.

Women's participation in public life has increased dramatically since the
1994 elections. The ANC adopted a quota for its parliamentary list, and
the political climate and active women's movements in 1990s resulted in
the substantial increase of women's participation in public positions. The
legislative programme and policies of the democratic Government have taken
the specific concerns and experiences of women into consideration. Maybe
in this Parliament we should come up with a mechanism where we can discuss
with other parties how to comply with the quota system and come up with
amicable solutions.

One of the core features of the apartheid system was the exclusion of
black people from structural ownership of wealth and resources. Therefore,
changing the structural ownership and control of the South African economy
is one of the critical challenges of democracy. The core approach of the
Government is to link the economic indicators to other critical social
development and political aspects of South African life. In its economic
policy, the ANC-led Government aims to redress poverty while creating a
positive economic environment, which invigorates and stabilises economic
development.

The Cedaw report of 1995 stated that 46% of South African women, 15 years
old and older, were classified as economically active. The rate of the
economically active African women who are unemployed has dropped from 47%
in 1994 to 38%.
Poverty eradication and ``a better life for all'' is the overarching
concern of the ANC-led Government and the people of South Africa.

The theme of the report focused on infrastructure, legislative or other,
which enables effective participation of women in the economy. During the
conversations in Limpopo, women explored advances made by women in this
sector and addressed the measures in place and the barriers women continue
to encounter in this sector in order to arrive at an enabling framework
for women's effective participation in the economy.

Regarding the theme of information, communication and technology, ICT, and
its implications for women's lives, women looked at ICT and how it can be
utilised to advance women in the economy. Access to information and
communications technology is crucial for women regarding job creation and
increasing their knowledge base.

One of the enduring legacies of apartheid is the manner in which violence
permeates all levels of society, geography, race and social status. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, hon President, on behalf of the ACDP I
would like to start by conveying our most sincere condolences to the
Director-General in the Office of the President, Rev Frank Chikane, and
his family on the loss of their mother. May the Chikane family be
comforted by the knowledge that their loved one is not lost, but is alive
and well in the presence of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.

The ACDP is concerned about a potential catastrophic war that is looming
in the DRC. Urgent action has to be taken to avert that unwelcome war and
avoid the loss of millions innocent lives. We believe President Mbeki has
to lead this effort and build on the foundation Government laid in 2002,
when a peace deal was broken in that area and agreements were signed in
our country, leading to the withdrawal of Rwandan troops from the DRC. A
mechanism must be found to ensure that peace agreements that are signed by
warring parties become binding and lasting.

Four years are hardly over, and yet another potential war is looming. The
DRC ambassador to South Africa has called on our Government to ask the
Rwandan government to stop meddling in their affairs, as he believes that
South Africa has a moral authority over Rwanda. It is this moral authority
that our Government must guard at all costs, because influence is within
this perceived moral authority. The ACDP believes that the keys to
retaining this moral authority are objectivity and consistency. Our
Government must remain neutral in all these conflicts in order to have the
trust and ears of all neighbouring countries.

The first major challenge of our Government is to see to it that no other
African leader is drawn into this conflict by taking sides with one
country against the other. They must all be reminded that the
creditability of the new African Union's commitment to peace and stability
is at stake and that their actions will be the determining factor. It was
reported in the media that on 2 June President Kabila called for a general
mobilisation of his people to fight Rwanda. If this is true, our
Government must ask him to withdraw that statement, and to give peace
mediation a chance, in spite of the fact that he might have uttered those
words because he blames Rwanda for backing the dissident generals of the
rally for the Congolese democracy, something that Rwanda denies.

President Mbeki, we still believe, must urge him to give peace a chance.
Rwanda claims it has disarmed the dissident officers. If this then is
true, they must be held accountable for their actions, and not allow
Rwanda to be used as a springboard for attacking and destabilising
neighbouring countries. There must be definite commitment from all
concerned parties to have talks that will lead to lasting peace in the
region. President Kabila must be asked not to be tempted to pursue the
dissident officers who have retreated into Rwanda, as indeed Rwanda
pursued the Interahamwe in the DRC, sparking the long, bloody war.
Everything humanly possible must be done to avert another war in Africa.

The reports about South Africa being a destination country for trafficking
persons, while also a source country and a transit country for women and
children that are trafficked to other parts of the world, are disturbing
to say the least. This should not be done in a country that claims to
believe in women and children's rights. The ACDP calls for urgent measures
to be put in place to reverse this trend, and also for this Parliament to
introduce the necessary legislation that will outlaw both prostitution and
trafficking in women and children.

As the year 2004 have been declared the year of the family in Africa, this
Government must be seen to be proactive in promoting the rights of
families and family friendly legislation.

Lastly, the ACDP welcomes the fact that the President has acknowledged,
after meeting his international advisory council, that more still needs to
be done to promote small and medium enterprises. The ACDP believes that
this crucial sector in economic development and job creation is not only
stifled by laws, as the President indicated. The ACDP calls upon on the
President to set up a Cabinet committee to look into how state payments
for services rendered by SMMEs and BEE companies can be expedited. Many
emerging businesses are ruined by departments' late or nonpayment for
services rendered. The President must also look at corruption in the state
tender process, especially in provinces. [Time expired.]

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, Ministers
and Deputy Ministers, comrades and colleagues, in his book entitled
Pedagogy of the Oppressed Paulo Freire states the following:


      Yet it is, paradoxical though it may seem, precisely in the response
      of the oppressed to the violence of their oppressors that a gesture
      of love may be found. Whereas the violence of the oppressors
      prevents the oppressed from being fully human, the response of the
      latter to this violence is grounded in the desire to pursue the
      right to be human. As the oppressors dehumanise others and violate
      their rights, they themselves become dehumanised. As the oppressed,
      fighting to be human, take away the oppressor's power to dominate
      and suppress, they restore to their oppressors the humanity they had
      lost in the exercise of oppression.

These profound words by Paulo Freire were given expression by our people
when, through the TRC process, we witnessed miraculous healing, pain and
uncontrollable grief. We witnessed the previously oppressed offered the
gesture of love he referred to. But this was also made possible because
our people understood that we fought an oppressive and unjust system and
not the white people or individuals of the white community.

There are many reasons why the moral renewal of our society is important,
but we should be guided by what the President referred to in his opening
address to the third democratic Parliament, namely building a sense of
unity, united action and a new patriotism. Linked to these are the issues
and challenges we face with regard to racial and gender inequalities,
proper care for children, the elderly and the disabled.

Apartheid has bred many things through its systematic oppression and
dehumanisation of our people. The struggle in which we engaged for so long
was the response to this oppression and whilst we have achieved a peaceful
political transition and have managed to maintain it for the past ten
years of our democracy, the legacy of apartheid will haunt us for a very
long time.

A qualitative review is to be conducted by Government with a particular
focus on the impact of socioeconomic transformation and how it relates to
issues such as nonracialism, nonsexism, value systems, family structures,
identity and moral regeneration. Many people working tirelessly in our
communities are unsung heroes, trying to make a difference in the lives of
the youth, the elderly and the disabled.

The overwhelming victory for the ANC in the recent national elections
signalled an even greater challenge for us in the next ten years of our
democracy. We spent the first ten years learning many things about
governing, at the same time building a solid foundation to advance towards
a better life for all our people. An element of building this better life
for all is the issue of moral regeneration.

The legacy of apartheid is manifesting itself in many ugly ways and the
opening up of our society is inviting all forms of sinister and antisocial
activities. Primary among these is the problem of drug dealing and the
resultant drug abuse. This problem is threatening our youth as the illegal
drug business expands its tentacles and its market. This presents a
particular challenge to us that starts in the home and spreads to our
education system, law enforcement and civil society. Our people,
knowledge, vigilance and exposure are the greatest enemies of immoral
activities.

The commitment of our people to high moral values was characterised by
their gallant struggle against apartheid. The goodwill of our people
towards each other in search of common goals is also characterised by the
spirit in which we entered negotiations that led to our first democratic
elections. In spite of fierce opposition and rhetoric from some quarters
that planned to derail this process, including the senseless assassination
of Comrade Chris Hani, the advancement towards a peaceful political
transition could not be halted.

Our people have shown through their history of struggle, having fought an
immoral and unjust system, that they are prepared to struggle against the
social ills that have befallen our communities. A major enemy of our
people is poverty and unemployment that inevitably leads to crime and
other antisocial behaviour. The people of South Africa liberated
themselves and we have committed ourselves to the challenge of developing
a caring society with a culture of human rights.

It was in this context that the ANC, in liberating the racially oppressed,
created the space for our former oppressors to liberate themselves from
their racial bigotry. This was and remains our historical duty. When the
Moral Regeneration Movement was launched in April 2002, it was envisaged
that the campaign would reach the farthest corners of our country and that
it would be the responsibility of each and every South African to spread
the message of moral renewal.

Government programmes are promoting a caring society through building
stronger family structures and encouraging respect for the vulnerable. We
need to support the campaigns and initiatives of many organisations of
civil society, including sport and religion. If we are to succeed in this
regard, we must at a political level display some measure of understanding
and maturity of our role in society as politicians.

In the ANC Today of 16-22 April, the President of the ANC wrote the
following:


      In their struggle against our movement, our political opponents make
      certain that they underplay our country's achievements. Unashamedly
      they pretend that these problems that are many centuries old could
      be solved in a mere 10 years, and that failure to solve them
      constitutes an unavoidable failure of our movement.

By now it is a well-known fact that the electorate overwhelmingly
disagreed with this view.

I want to make it clear to those who are not aware that, whilst millions
of our people may be poor and illiterate, this does not mean that they are
unable to think and to reason and to make intelligent decisions for
themselves - contrary to what a few may believe. The people understand
that the problems we have inherited from apartheid and colonialism are
immense and that the ANC-led Government has a mammoth task ahead of it to
eradicate unemployment and poverty.

We have an important weapon, comrade Chairperson, which Maria Ramos, the
CEO of Transnet, put as follows:


      The resilience of ordinary women, who against all odds raise
      children, hold families and communities together and generate so
      much energy, the generosity of our people, and our ability as a
      nation to overcome the inhumanity and cruelty of apartheid and focus
      on our common humanity. It is our people, our leaders and our
      ability to draw on a proud history of struggle that makes us unique.



It is ordinary people through their undying commitment to building a
better South Africa for the future who are our biggest weapon in this
fight against antisocial activities that pervade our society.
This Government has a responsibility of ensuring that it fulfils its
constitutional mandate and in this regard it has implemented many
initiatives to fight corruption. In many respects South Africa leads the
world in this regard. As the ANC we will always be guided by the Freedom
Charter, a document of our people, recently adopted by the New National
Party; a document considered subversive by its predecessor the National
Party. We invite other parties to consider doing the same.

In conclusion, President Mbeki said in his state of the nation address on
8 February 2002:


      The issue of responsibility that each and all of us should take for
      our lives, moving from the understanding that, as we were our own
      liberators in resistance against apartheid, so too should we today
      act as our own liberators in dealing with its legacy.

We know that many have heeded this call by the President and are making a
difference in the lives of many of our people.

Honourable President, this Budget Vote is in your honour, Sir, and enjoys
the unqualified and unwavering support of the ANC. I thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, President, Deputy President,
hon members, since the debate on this Vote last year, a great deal has
happened in South Africa. We have been celebrating and continue to
celebrate the first decade of democracy and freedom in this land. Those
celebrations went ahead with very wide support, barring the odd
inappropriate note played in certain political quarters. It was highly
pleasing to note the degree to which the citizens of a once-divided
country banded together in the splendid way they did to mark a historic
milestone in nationhood. This was a demonstration if ever we needed one,
in a newly turbulent world, of how nations can settle their differences
and concentrate on the things that unite them.

Another major event since we last considered this Vote was the general
election. There have been winners and losers, but the real winner was
South African democracy, on show again in an impressive exercise in a free
and secret ballot - the third of its type since the dawn of democracy here
in 1994. That is another thing to celebrate. Then also there was the
triumph in Zürich where we were chosen as the host country for the Soccer
World Cup in 2010. All South African hearts were beating as one over this
- another unifying event, another indication of our attractiveness as a
nation of growing international choice. It underscored the realisation
that our land is a haven of peace in the world and that we are tackling
our problems in ways which make medium-range planning like this for
complex massed world events a realistic proposition. The contrast with
South Africa's past generations of ostracism and racial tyranny is so
great that it does not bear thinking about.

There will not be many reasonable people who would contest the view that
our national fortunes are on the rise and that the goals we have set
ourselves are steadily being reached. These thoughts have to be tempered
by our acute awareness of the strides that still remain to be taken before
we can really be comfortable with our national success. That state will
come only when the poor are no longer poor, when the hungry are no longer
hungry, when the homeless are housed, when the fearful and sick people of
our land are secure and well. But no one should for a moment underestimate
the urgency with which we face our challenges in line with the commitments
made by our President and Government in recent months and years.

We are and must remain a nation with a sense of urgency. It must never be
business as usual. It must be urgent business as usual all the way. We owe
this not only to the living but to those who have passed on and who worked
so hard for a nonracial, nonsexist, economically strong and caring South
Africa. We must continue the fight for the human rights of women, the
youth, the children and the disabled. It is on them that the most cruel
blows of apartheid fell, particularly in rural areas officially designated
as dumping grounds for human beings.

The manner in which women were treated in law and in practice under
apartheid to this day manifests itself in a variety of ways, including
higher levels of poverty - that's asset and income - lower educational
levels and overall lower quality of life than the rest of the population.
It should be noted that the Government's response to the plight of women,
youth, disabled people and children over the past 10 years has been
structured around specific principles. The key principles are empowerment,
development and the meeting of basic needs; mainstreaming gender,
disability and children's issues; partnership between Government and civil
society; equality and non-discrimination; self-representation; recognition
of the right to equality in customary, cultural and religious practices;
recognition of differences and inequalities among women; and entitlement
to the right of integrity and security of the person.

In relation to youth development, nonetheless, the current situation is
that the majority of women and persons with disabilities still live within
the second economy. They are adversely affected by poverty, unemployment,
lack of financial and capital resources and lack of technical and
professional skills. Their household incomes are still low on average and
their participation in the broader economy contributes a smaller
percentage to the GDP of the country. The major challenge is to ensure
that the labour market is able satisfactorily to absorb women and people
with disabilities into meaningful and gainful employment and that they are
thereby better positioned to take advantage of business opportunities as
entrepreneurs.

In the past decade South Africa has been able to respond appropriately to
international instruments that deal with gender, disability and children's
issues - GDC - ratifying the treaties and fashioning the internal
policies, legislation and norms and standards on services in accordance
with international frameworks. South Africa has ratified the UN Convention
on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination Against Women and is currently part of the preparatory
process of providing input into the Disability Rights Convention through
the UN ad-hoc committee. South Africa has been able to undertake exchange
visits to create benchmarks to enable it to measure progress and assist in
resource allocation. South Africa has also been able to sign a number of
bilateral agreements with donor countries for specific projects on GDC
issues.

The establishment of the three offices in the Presidency covering GDC,
coupled with the projects they pursue, has put them at the cutting edge
and placed them on the world map. A significant response with regard to
policy includes the National Gender Policy, the National Integrated
Disability Strategy and the National Youth Policy.

South Africa has also played a visible role in the international arena by
hosting several conferences, seminars, and workshops which addressed
issues affecting targeted groups throughout the world. In fact, other
countries have been able to copy the South African model regarding
targeted groups on specific projects, policies and regulatory frameworks.
South Africa also chairs a number of international protocols relating to
UN work in respect of GDC considerations.

There is no denying, however, that we need significantly to improve our
participation in bi-national commissions and bi-lateral agreements and to
accelerate the work around the international commitments we have made.
Moreover there needs to be better co-ordination across Government
departments to achieve better comprehensive and coherent coverage by
programmes aimed at improving conditions of the target groups. We must
measure and measure effectively our service delivery process. Better data
is needed not only at the national, but also provincial and local levels.

Improving the performance of the state on GDC issues will be further
enhanced through increasing Government's expertise in these areas.
Disabled persons, the youth, children and women constitute a significant
proportion of the population directly impacted upon by the attitude,
behaviour and performance of public servants. The same sense of urgency
and preciseness that we adopt over GDC issues must apply to youth
development, a major focus of Government effort. We have a range of
programmes aimed at young people, but the challenge remains to ensure that
young people are aware of this and also to build cohesion among these
programmes.

The National Youth Service is ready for roll-out and in the spirit of the
President's most recent state of the nation speech, we have clear time
frames for action. We envisage five thousand young people in accredited
youth service programmes by the end of this year. The National Youth
Service Unit to co-ordinate and be the administrative nerve centre will be
launched during the first half of July 2004. This will include a campaign
to bring in prospective young people to participate in the youth service.
Around 16 June - Youth Day - there was a weeklong youth camp workshop to
assist in registering young graduates to discuss seizing BEE
opportunities, to focus on small enterprises and to set up support
services for youth through the DTI.

I have already touched on the yearlong celebrations to mark 10 years of
freedom and wish to elaborate briefly. A great deal of public
participation has been built into the celebrations - business, civil
society, trade unions, the Proudly South African campaign, International
Marketing Council and so on. The logo is now widely used both domestically
and internationally, though I would like to appeal to the media to use it
more visibly and regularly. On 27 April we witnessed the hugely successful
celebrations at the Union Buildings and the State Theatre with specially
composed songs for the 10th anniversary as well as for President Mbeki.
The re-elected President of South Africa was inaugurated on that day and
it was deeply moving to see the spectacle on the ground and in the air on
this occasion. The anniversary was celebrated not only at the Union
Buildings, but also in all major capitals of the world.

On Youth Day, it will be recalled, there was a third national orders
ceremony where new orders where awarded to honour, among others, epochal
fighters against colonialism and apartheid on the continent and further
afield. This was a recognition of the importance of the international
solidarity, which secured our victory against apartheid. It points to the
new responsibility we have as a nation in furthering international
solidarity and internationalism to secure victory for the emancipation of
Africa.

What lies ahead of us on the national calendar? Women's month begins on
9th August. There will be a major women-only festival on that day in
Mpumalanga. Women's trains will run throughout the month and stop at
various stations around the country with an exhibition and support
services to the communities on how best to access social security, health
services, access to small business, support services and so on. The month
will culminate on 31 August with a thanksgiving service at the Union
Buildings where the 1956 women's pass protest took place

On 24 September - Heritage Day - there will be major celebrations in
Kimberley, with as key focus our national symbols the flag and coat of
arms, the anthem and national orders, etc.

On 2 October we shall mark National Children's Day, and on 3 December the
International Day of the Disabled and on 16 December we commemorate the
Day of Reconciliation. The Decade of Freedom celebrations will culminate
in the Western Cape in the opening of Parliament early in February 2005.

Let us by no means forget the different but inter-related commemorative
dates that fall within the 16 Days campaign Against Violence Directed at
Women and Children, which are: International Day for no Violence Against
Women on 25 November; International Day for Those Living with HIV/Aids on
1 December; International Day for People Living with Disability on 3
December; and International Human Rights Day on 10 December.

As we focus on critical matters of human rights, let us look at how we
have boosted the numbers of the previously marginalised in our National
Assembly. I assume with confidence that we have proportionally more people
with disabilities in our Parliament than any other country in the world.
[Applause.] In fact, we have 16 members with disabilities. Now, please
note the party breakdown is not without interest. I am going to read it
very slowly. Out of the 16 ANC has 14, the IFP 1 and the ID 1. Shame on
those who don't even have one!

Now, a closing comment on the status of those who form the majority in
most societies, and I think hon members will be particularly interested in
the breakdowns I give. Again, I'm going to read them slowly. There were
131, that is 32.75% women in the National Assembly as at May 2004. In 2003
there were 31.3% women and in 1994 the figure was 25.4%. This shows an
increase of 7.35%.

When we look at the party-political breakdown in 2004, it has emerged that
the ANC has 106 women out of 279 seats, that is 38.4% [Applause.]; the DA
10 out of 56 seats, or 20%; the IFP 8 out of 28, that is 28.6%, the ID 2
out of 7, or 28.5%; the NNP 1 out of 7, that is 14.2%; the ACDP 1 out of
6, or 16.6%; the Freedom Front Plus 0 out of 4, the UCDP 0 out of 3, and
the PAC 0 out of 3. Shame! Shame! [Laughter.]

There were 19, that is 35.18%, women in the NCOP as at May 2004. Of the 19
women in the NCOP, 12 are from the ANC, that is 63% of the total women in
the NCOP [Applause.]; 1 from the IFP, that is 5.2%; 5 from the DA, that is
26.3% and 1 from the UDM, that is 5.2%. But I think we must take note,
Comrade President, that the total percentage of women in the NCOP in 2003,
though, was 37.9%. We have gone backward, although the ANC has gone
forward.

We have 16 men and 12 women in the Cabinet - that is, 42.85% women
membership. We have 11 male Deputy Ministers and 10 female Deputy
Ministers - that is, 47.6% women. [Applause.]

Let us now bring into focus the coming local government elections and the
need to see gender equity reflected at that level. At present, the figures
show that out of 8 828 councillors, 6 263 are men and only 2 565 are
women, a ratio of about 71% to 29%. I think all of us should agree that
this is unacceptable. Of 284 mayors, 49 - about 17% - are women. About 29%
of our Councils. Speakers are women. So, we have a lot of work to do.

In both the spheres of disability and women representation, the ANC, as
you can see, is in the forefront, and I should like to appeal to all
political parties to follow this example that the ANC has set.

Most of the areas I have mentioned in this address show progress, yes, but
they also highlight the challenges that remain. Let us move on, not only
in word but also in deed, to meet them.

In conclusion, let me thank and also extend my deepest sympathies to the
Rev Chikane. But, I should like to thank the Rev Chikane, all the advisors
and the officials who work in the Presidency. As you asked us, Mr
President, to do more with less, even though we got an increase in the
budget, we still have to do more with less.

Many thanks to the Deputy President for being there whenever we wanted him
and for giving leadership, both as Leader of Government Business as well
as leader of the ANC in Parliament. But above all, Comrade President, to
you for your inspired as well as inspiring leadership. I must repeat what
I have said elsewhere that it is under your leadership, Comrade President,
that the ANC increased its vote in 1999 compared to 1994, that the ANC
increased its vote in 2004 compared to 1999 and that the ANC in 2004,
being the ruling party, made the major contribution to us winning the 2010
World Cup Bid. Thank you for your leadership, Mr President. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, if I had had time I would have liked to
react to some of those things, but our time is very limited.

The world is busy reorganising itself into bigger and bigger trade blocs.
The Asian trade bloc has a GDP per capita of US$13 000; the American trade
bloc has a per capita income of $15 000; and the European trade bloc has a
per capita income of $18 000. Africa is not part of any of these trade
blocs. Where the GDP per capita in the European trade bloc was US$18 000
in 2000, the African GDP per capita for the same year was $300. That is
$18 000 versus $300.

Meanwhile, we read about new conflicts in the DRC, new disagreements in
Burundi and the crisis in Sudan. In my discussions with international
journalists and businesspeople, I find more and more Afro-pessimism. It is
important for the President to attend the G8 Conference, but President
Mbeki is also right in that Africa will have to work out its own solutions
to its problems. Europe or the United States will not solve our problems.
Therefore, the FF+ supports the African Union and the Nepad initiatives.
There are no alternatives.

A leader once said: ``It is the dreamers that move the world. Practical
men are so busy being practical that they cannot see beyond their own
lifetime. Dreamers and visionaries have made civilisations. It is trying
to do the things that cannot be done that makes life worthwhile. The dream
of today becomes the custom of tomorrow''.

We may dream, but if we are not severely practical in our solutions, then
we shall fail. Afrikaners are dreamers and are practical. South Africa has
the best infrastructure in Africa, and Afrikaners played a major role in
establishing that. I am proud of that achievement, but I never hear any
positive comments on that in this House. For the success of Africa, the
first step must be to improve Africa's infrastructure.

South African companies will play a role in the deployment of the East
African submarine cable system that will complete the cable loop around
the continent. This will make fast modern communication between African
countries possible, fostering trade on a continental basis.

In Europe, there is a well-developed telecommunications network that makes
telephone and Internet communication possible. Africa is miles behind.
However, today's technology makes it possible to skip some of the phases
of this development. Africa is skipping the fixed network phase. We are
witnessing the world's fastest cellular market growth in Africa. It is
South African companies that opened up Tanzania, Nigeria and the DRC with
mobile phones. One statistic is that in the first 100 years of fixed
telephone communication in South Africa, four million phones were
installed, and in the next 10 years of mobile phones 17 million people
received mobile phones.
I think upgrading Africa's road network will stay a dream for many years
if you have been in Africa, as I have. But the dream of linking Cape Town
and Cairo by rail is practical and within our reach, and we also have the
know-how to do it. I am aware of the Greater Inga Integrated Study on
energy development, linking the Congo basin to Namibia. This is possible,
it is within our reach and it can continue.

When I share these African dreams at a public meeting with an Afrikaans
audience, they get exited because they know our fate is linked to Africa's
fate. But, then, they share their problems with me. They are not the elite
Afrikaans speakers that send the President letters. They are the middle
and working class; the voters that helped the FF+ increase our
representation in this House. You dream about Africa they say, but we
struggle to keep our schools Afrikaans under pressure from this provincial
government.

In Gauteng, for example, 13 Afrikaans schools are now English-medium only,
and there are eight in the Free State. Many more are on their way - first
becoming parallel medium and then English only. They say you dream of
Africa, but Mr Heinrich Augustyn, spokesperson for the Justice department,
says the days of Afrikaans in our courts are numbered.
You dream of Africa, but the ANC city council of Pretoria voted R450 000
to change the name of the city which is named after one of our Afrikaner
heroes. You dream of Africa, but 31 community radio stations that used to
broadcast Afrikaans and Christian programmes are no longer allowed to
broadcast.

You dream of Africa, but our children are working in London because they
could not get jobs in South Africa. Companies here blatantly told them
that they had their letters, but that they should not apply again because
they were white. When the Government speaks of Africans in diaspora, they
ask me: Does that include our Afrikaner children in London with no other
homeland, or is it racially defined and only for black people from Africa?
I am not sure how to answer that.

In 1993 and 1996 we were forced to talk to each other about these
problems. Now, elections and the style in this House force us to fight as
opponents. It makes these problems worse and does not solve any of them.
Kofi Annan, the United Nations Secretary-General, said in Durban at the
African Union conference in 2002: ``In Africa the rulers listen to the
ruled and the majority to the minority. Our traditions teach us to respect
each other, to give every man his say and every woman hers. Let's resist
the temptation of short cuts or solutions imposed by force''.

The President spoke about minority rights and how to handle them. Let's
hope that what Kofi Annan said will be true in the future for South Africa
as well, solving our problems together as Africans. Thank you. [Applause]

Mr D J SITHOLE: Chairperson, his Excellency the President, Deputy
President, Ministers and hon members, in the past 10 years the ANC
Government has transformed South Africa from international isolation to a
country that has international responsibility and is a good world citizen.
In doing so, we have had to demand extraordinary patience and wisdom from
our leadership, so as to build a country that will, among other nations,
be proud of itself.

In the past 10 years the ANC has had to persuade not only our internal
skeptics but also the world about the need to work as a collective in
resolving international challenges and problems. Good governance is not
only applicable to nations states but also to international governments.
Only those who believed that only they had a God-given right to whip the
world into order as and when they deemed fit, had reason to resist any
attempt to place the United Nations and other multilateral institutions at
the centre of decision-making about our collective security.

When we declared the 21st century an African century, we did that because
we believed in the ability of Africans to deal with their problems and
find solutions to their challenges. We said this cognisant of the need to
interact with the world in finding solutions to our complex problems.

It is this belief in us that has made the world respect South Africa. It
is the leadership of the ANC Presidency that has steered the ship of South
Africa's international relations to calm waters from the rough seas of
apartheid. It is this leadership that, despite all forms of skepticism,
has stayed focused to contribute to the achievement of peace in the DRC,
Burundi and other places. It is this consistent leadership that made the
African Union and the Sudan government ask South Africa to assist in
resolving problems in Darfu, Sudan.

Our involvement in peace work on the continent is informed by our desire
to contribute to the creation of a continent at peace with itself. It is
true that Africa may not meet the AU's millennium goals, particularly that
of halving poverty by 2015, but we should not despair. We should instead
motivate ourselves to achieve what we can and strive to reach our final
destination.

The newly created Peace and Security Council has the responsibility of
working towards freeing the African continent from wars and conflict and
creating conditions for peace and security, as this will enhance our
chances of reducing poverty and underdevelopment. Good social and
political governance should not constitute a burden to African leaders,
but should be something that we create to ensure that our people prosper.

Yesterday, we had the opportunity to meet with the foreign minister of
Sudan, who indicated that it was the desire of the Sudan people to move
quickly to a resolution of the conflict, so as to contribute to the effort
South Africa was making in creating an environment in which all states on
the continent would achieve their full potential. It is this commitment to
finding solutions to our problems that will assist us in strengthening the
continental and regional structures, in particular the African Union and
SADC, in order to implement our socioeconomic programmes, such as Nepad.
The recent inauguration of the Pan-African Parliament has demonstrated the
preparedness of the continent to move forward with its agenda of bringing
its entire population together to contribute to its rebirth. It is my
trust, Comrade President, that you will do everything in your power and
ability to persuade other heads of state and governments to award South
Africa the opportunity of hosting the Pan-African Parliament.

I am aware that the euphoria of that announcement may not be the same as
the Fifa announcement of hosting the 2010 Soccer World Cup, but it is
equally critical that the summit, in making its decision, consider us. The
Pan-African Parliament protocol encourages each country to ensure that the
opinions of its people are reflected in that country's delegation in its
assembly. However, there are attempts to distort the intention of the
protocol on this matter by people who have accused the ANC of centralism,
whilst they are the worst powermongers and they do everything to squeeze
power. Even if they have to tell stories that border on lies, they are
willing to do so.

Another issue of critical importance is the creation of the assembly of
the SADC parliamentarians. I am aware that this matter is before
Parliament, but it is important that all South Africans find time to
contribute to its discussion and arrive at a view that will see South
Africa contributing to the building of the region. These discussions will
also help parliaments in the region find their role in the implementation
of Nepad and related programmes, as articulated by the SADC strategic
plan.

It is, therefore, critical that we discuss and clarify for ourselves what
we want to create and, at the same time, answer the question as to how
this new body will contribute to implementation and to the consolidation
of the region. The answers we provide will enhance our decisions. It is my
trust that the President will continue to give attention and assistance to
Zimbabwe and Swaziland, in particular to find solutions that will be
embraced by all role-players in those countries.

Yes, there are those who always seek to push us to act unilaterally, who
express frustration and impatience with our policy of collective
engagement in dealing with regional and continental issues. They will
again and again attempt to demonise this Government and, in some
instances, not tell the truth in their endeavours to prove that this black
Government in South Africa is no different from any that exists on the
continent.

Despite the fact that the history of the last 10 years and the reality on
the ground have demonstrated that the ANC has the support of the masses,
as confirmed by our election results, they will continue to propagate the
idea, lying to win the elections and govern this country. It was with
great delight that some of us read that the International Investment
Council has expressed confidence in our policies and systems. It is true
that we are competing very well with other countries that are at our level
of economic development, as far as creating favourable conditions for
investment.

This news, communicated correctly, will result in the possibility of
increased investment. Therefore it is critical that those who own the
instruments of communication help in communicating this message. It is,
therefore, important that we intensify the implementation of our policies
to fight for the poor and poverty-stricken masses of the continent and the
world.

In the not too distant future South Africa will be peer reviewed. The
fundamental issue that must be raised is how this Parliament will relate
not only to the outcomes of the review, but also to the process. We, as an
assembly of our people, therefore need to ask how we can engage our masses
in this process and how we are going to address the outcome of the review,
with a view to improving where we are weak and consolidating where we are
strong. I raise this issue because sometimes we do not inform ourselves
sufficiently, not only in this Parliament, but also across the region, on
progress and development, as the Nepad secretariat and the implementation
committee continue to do their work.

For our country to succeed in its endeavour to build a better Africa and a
better world, it is important that we go back to the tools that we used
during our fight against apartheid, that of mobilising the world towards a
fight that was fought successfully. It is my view that, unless we dig
deeper to that knowledge of international mobilisation and solidarity and
utilise the skills we gained in mobilising our people, we will not win the
battle against underdevelopment and poverty, nor will we succeed in
creating a secure international environment.

So long as conditions that breed terrorism exist, the world will remain
insecure and this will allow the strong to have their way and the weak
will have to succumb to the dictates of the powerful. Our collective
security rests with our unity as a people in the world. The challenge is
to struggle against the tendency of the powerful to decide which leader is
allowed to stay in his country and rule, and which one they will
forcefully evict despite the fact that he was elected by his people.

The unity of the developing countries, as demonstrated recently at the
WTO, must be strengthened to provide security for each other. If we wait
and only come together when we have a crisis, then we will remain weak and
we will continually be put under pressure to accept what is dished out by
the powerful no matter how poisonous it may be - if we reject our master's
voice we will be evicted and vilified for standing up for our rights.

It is critical that we consolidate the South-South and North-South
relations to our mutual benefit. The ANC supports this Vote. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson, the President and hon colleagues, the
Presidency serves as the engine that drives and co-ordinates Government
activities. This office should therefore be equipped with the best human
and material resources. It was way back in 1996 that the President, then
Deputy President, delivered his now world-renowned speech ``I am an
African'' that reverberated across the length and breadth of the
continent.

It is therefore no surprise that he has become synonymous with the New
Partnership for Africa's Development. He has succeeded to put his case in
terms of Nepad so that, whenever the acronym is used, President Mbeki's
image flashes across the inner eye.

President Mbeki, with his unassuming disposition, is always concerned
about the poverty of and need for help by people in Africa. World
audiences, whether at the UN or the G8 countries, know how passionate he
is about the subject. Because of the high calibre of officials in the
Presidency, it is not surprising that capacity demands in Nepad and the
African Union and a high level of involvement in peace initiatives in
Africa have been placed on this office. It is this office that caters for
the head and management of the Nepad secretariat.

In his efforts to get his compatriots out of poverty, the President does
not end up by calling for hand-outs. He keeps coaxing the nation not to be
like dumb driven cattle but urges them to get down to work and to be self-
reliant.

To this end he has called for a revision of the labour laws to attract
investors and cater for the needs of the workers. He has called for a
complete revamp of immigration regulations to ensure that they are
compatible with the principal Act and the Constitution.

Over the past weekend, the President convened his own creation, the
International Advisory Council, and went on to address the International
Council for Small Business in his quest to ensure that economic stability
for his country is attained. The President has turned out to be a man for
all seasons. Traditional leaders in this country sing praises about him.
According to the Chairman of the National House of Traditional Leaders,
the President has found no meeting with them to be insignificant. He has
made himself accessible to them as much as he can.
There is no doubt that the Presidency looks after the interests of all
South Africans. The appointment of the Deputy President to head the
committee set up by Government to assist the 2010 World Soccer Bid
Committee is clear proof that this office leaves nothing to chance.

The fact that Presidents Kabila and Kagame of the Democratic Republic of
Congo and Rwanda respectively, whose countries are at the brink of war,
have called on our President to help stop the hostilities is sufficient
proof that he is held in high regard by other leaders on the continent. We
therefore call on the people of this country to look up to the number one
citizen, and do as he does by waking up early and going to bed late. If we
lived up to his words in the recent state of the nation address, when he
said that his Government had lost patience with penpushers and stamp
handlers who tended to make it their business to get to work as late as
possible and to knock off as early as they could, we would improve our
work ethic.

The role of the Minister in the Presidency cannot be overlooked. He,
according to Justice Kriegler, has to be credited with the establishment
of the Party Liaison Committee to enable parties to thrash out problems
that beset them in the elections. He has tackled his responsibilities in
the Office on the Status of Women, the Office on the Status of Disabled
Persons and the National Youth Commission with the same vigour that belies
his stature. The UCDP supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Miss J E SOSIBO: Chairperson, the hon President, the hon Deputy President,
the hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
we gather here today in order to give account of what the ANC-led
Government has done and how it plans to discharge its resources to improve
the lives of our people.

President Thabo Mbeki once announced 21 development nodes, with 13 for
rural development and eight for urban development in terms of our national
Urban Renewal and the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programmes.
The aim of these programmes is to conduct a sustained campaign against
rural and urban poverty and underdevelopment, bringing together all the
resources of all three spheres of government in a co-ordinated manner.
They further aim to improve living conditions for the urban and rural
people through economic growth, development, infrastructure, social and
institutional development, and the enhancement of delivery capacity.
Moreover, the President in his state of the nation address of February
2002 said:


  The recognition by the peoples of the world of the fact that we have
  established ourselves as a winning nation, as a people determined to
  succeed, places an obligation on us in fact to succeed.

It is against this backdrop that the monitoring and evaluation aspects of
these programmes are indicative of a strong recognition that Government
intends to maximise the impact of its expenditures and investments. The
national Urban Renewal Programme is a programme targeted at supporting
areas with the largest concentrations of urban poverty and, because of
that, eight urban nodes have been identified. The common feature of these
nodes is that they are areas of severe social economic infrastructure
neglect, where poverty is most endemic, where social capacity is real but
where there is potential for growth.

The ANC-led Government has made remarkable progress as far as nodes are
concerned. All nodes have reviewed their IDPs; the Planning,
Implementation and Management Support centres are in place to support
nodes; technical and political champions are in place for all nodes across
all three spheres of government; anchor projects are diversifying and
creating conducive conditions for local economic development; and
sustainable development and communications strategies have been developed
for the nodes.

The URP and the ISRDP represent a commitment to the people-driven approach
to local economic development already envisaged in the RDP. This approach
places poverty alleviation at the centre of development and therefore
seeks to respond by bringing development initiatives closer to communities
within the nodes. It calls for development efforts at the area level, in
places where people live.

Plans are in place for a vigorous visit to these nodes to perform our
oversight responsibilities and contribute to pushing back the frontiers of
poverty. The national Urban Renewal and Integrated Sustainable Rural
Development Programmes are at the cutting edge of promoting effective
service delivery and deepening local democracy, and we see this as a major
step forward in furthering the goals of our national democratic
revolution.

The Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme and the URP are
comprehensive and developmental programmes that are aimed at addressing
the problems of the second economy that include unemployment, poverty and
underdevelopment. Without this effort by the ANC-led Government, jobs
created in these nodal areas would never have been realised. The Urban
Renewal Programme and ISRDP are part of the concrete manifestations of key
strategic programmes engineered by the ANC, which are a correct response
to South Africa's urban and rural challenges to address the immediate
needs of ordinary South Africans.

The local government budget allocations are indicative of the fact that
the ANC and the President were correct when they said that depressed
economic areas should benefit and reap the fruits of our democracy.

Again, in his state of the nation address, the President mentioned that a
central component of rural development was the provision, upgrading and
maintenance of infrastructure for water and sanitation. Government will,
therefore, work to ensure that within the next few years all households in
South Africa have easy access to clean running water.

Investment will continue to go into major infrastructure projects to
ensure sustained water security. The budget seeks to increase the impact
of the ISRDP to those in the far-flung areas of South Africa. While
recognising noticeable challenges, considerable interventions have been
deployed to counter these administrative and capacity challenges. More
work is being done to prevent this by introducing the Intergovernmental
Relations Bill in Parliament later in the year to improve co-ordination
between the three spheres of government and facilitate greater capacity-
building initiatives to improve the quality of spending.

A substantial amount of the equitable share goes to municipalities and
significant additional allocations for local government go directly to the
municipal infrastructure grant, which is a consolidation of infrastructure
grants from other national sector departments. This enables municipalities
to address backlogs in basic municipal infrastructure in a sustainable
manner, and to promote the creation of jobs through the Expanded Public
Works Programme.

While progress has been realised in this regard, the success of the URP
and ISRDP depends significantly on integrated governance. In the interests
of broadening access to services, the Department of Communications not so
long ago hosted provincial summits to discuss issues of local content and
the broadcasting needs of the urban and rural areas of our country. At the
end, a national summit was convened in which ordinary people of our
country highlighted the need for a better reflection of their languages
and cultures in the broadcasting system.

In line with Government's intention for a more equitable geographic spread
of economic activity and gender participation, the Department of
Communication will officially launch the 112 emergency service in
partnership with local government. This will be a major breakthrough for
the most vulnerable sectors of our population.

A total of 177 anchor projects in rural nodes were in place by March 2004,
compared to 115 in March 2003, and the actual investment of national
departments was R5,9 billion. Through the national Urban Renewal
Programme, the eight urban nodes are focusing on 98 anchor projects. Since
their introduction in July 2001, we have seen the quality of anchor
projects steadily improving and have also seen increasing levels of
investment from national and provincial government departments.
The fight against poverty has gained momentum over the past few years,
with the ANC-led Government making ever-greater strides to improve the
lives of the country's poorest. The ANC-led Government should be commended
for coming up with such a remarkable strategy whereby the ordinary people
of our country benefit in ways that improve their socioeconomic
conditions.

This strategy also enables people to sustain their day-to-day lives and
helps poor people who are feeling marginalised to benefit and take part in
Government programmes. The ANC-led Government will not sit by while people
continue suffering, and it will walk side by side with ordinary people to
come up with workable ways to lessen the burden of the scourges of
poverty, unemployment and underdevelopment.

Finally, the dynamics of our country force us to engage with developments.
Therefore this process must be understood within the context of
rationalising our new system of local government and giving meaningful
effect to the call for a people's contract for a better South Africa and a
better world. With these few words the ANC, therefore, supports this
Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, Mr President, the PAC supports this Budget Vote.
There are five Presidential programmes, which this Budget is to serve.
They are administration, support to the President and the Deputy
President, the Cabinet Office, policy co-ordination and the National Youth
Commission. The purpose of the latter is stated as the transferal of voted
funds to enable the National Youth Commission to achieve its goals. It is
further stated that the measurable objective for the Youth Commission is
to monitor its use of funds in its execution of youth development in our
country, as well as on the African continent.

It is important that the fund develops the youth nationally and without
consideration of their party politics. A number of youths complain that
some officials, who run youth affairs through the National Youth
Commission, do not seem to understand that this is a state institution.
Participants in the youth developmental activities facilitated through the
National Youth Commission are largely satisfied with the training they
receive, but some have complained that those who come from afar in the
country are not provided with accommodation, food and transport. They have
had to cut short their stay at the training centres because they had no
funds. It is also very important for information to reach the youth so
that they can benefit from this Commission.

The Office on the Status of Women seems to be underfunded. The Pan
Africanist Congress wishes to see more policy implementation that ensures
that the quality of the status of women is improved. We need to see a
decrease in women suffering as a result of HIV/Aids and unemployment. Next
year will be ten years after the Beijing Conference. Will the lives of
women be found to have improved?

On programme policy co-ordination, I want to repeat what I have said twice
now in this Parliament about the current Government policy on the land
question. Land has been the primary contradiction of our liberation
struggle, from our wars of national resistance against colonialism. It is
our essential heritage. It is worth far more than money. It is a national
tragedy that today, while our own people remain dispossessed and poor, we
have allowed the sale of land to foreigners. I repeat: we must by law
forbid the sale of our land to foreigners. Let them be given renewable 99-
year leases instead.

As long as our land, which is the source of our riches, is sold to
foreigners before it is even equitably redistributed, the indigenous
majority of this country can forget about the eradication of poverty and
underdevelopment. I must add that the Restitution of Land Rights Act,
which limited land claims to 31 December 1998, was illogical and unjust.
It has excluded thousands of land claimants, let alone section 25 of the
Constitution, which confines land claims to the crumbs of the Native Land
Act of 1913. The PAC notes that capacity demands have been placed on the
Presidency in respect, inter alia, of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development, Nepad, and the high level of involvement of this country in
peace initiatives in Africa.

The PAC believes that peace is a necessary ingredient for the development
of Africa. The wars that continue to erupt in various parts of the
Continent are not ours. These wars are sponsored by the imperialist
forces, which are only interested in the riches of this Continent. There
has never been a time when Africa needed to speak more with one voice on
issues of foreign debts, HIV/Aids and the eradication of poverty than
today.

The Pan African space of the African Union and Pan African Parliament must
be a vibrant space which formulates policies in the African context that
are driven by the African people themselves. The PAC will continue to
persist on the Pan African road. It is the only road for the survival and
security of Africa and its assured prosperous future.

Forty-five years ago, two giant Pan Africanists authoritatively stated the
need for the African Union. On 24 May 1963 Kwame Nkrumah said:


The resources are there. It is for us to marshal them in the active
service of our people. Unless we establish the African Union now, we who
are sitting here today shall tomorrow be the victims and martyrs of
neocolonialism.

[Time expired.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Chairperson, hon President, Deputy President, members,
comrades and distinguished guests, this month, the youth month, also marks
the 49th year since the adoption of the Freedom Charter by the Congress of
the People in Kliptown. On the economic front, this charter proclaims:


  The People Shall Share in the Country's Wealth!

It continues:


  The national wealth of our country, the heritage of South Africans,
  shall be restored to the people ...

Our Government inherited a skewed economy based on race and male
domination. In essence, white males elevated themselves to being the
captains of South African industries. This was a direct result of boosting
the lives of the poor urban Afrikaner and consequently the subsidisation
of white farming communities.

Elsewhere around the globe, similar processes were unfolding,
characterised by the oppression of one by the other. The creation of the
world institutions in 1945 further subjected the nations of the south to
poverty and underdevelopment. Among these institutions are the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, of IMF. In its evolution, South
Africa's apartheid economy, which was structurally flawed, continued to
systematically marginalise the indigenous people through inter alia,
discriminatory laws, inferior education and a lack of skills development.
The end result was the super exploitation of the working masses of our
land.

This then witnessed the unionisation of this sector against the same
slavery situation. Addressing the 45th Annual Conference of the ANC, the
then President Albert Luthuli said:


  The length of the term of slavery depends largely on the oppressed
  themselves and not the oppressor.

When we say we inherited a horrible legacy, we mean these thorough going
systematic projects of marginalisation, which saw its day since the advent
of private ownership of the means of production. We mean a state where the
developed countries of today use resources and wealth of the Third World
countries to thrive. When we today approach the wealthy nations of the
north, we are not doing so as beggars, but with the full appreciation of
this historical reality. This is why our Government emphasizes south-south
and north-south co-operation without some dictating terms to others. It
implies nations of adults that are sharing these perspectives.

The first nonracial, nonsexist democratic government chose to create the
Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP, as its comprehensive
socioeconomic programme, the content of which is in line with what was
envisaged in the Freedom Charter 49 years ago. The RDP, the core of all
post-1994 policies, has amongst its objectives the building the economy.
We have witnessed continuous economic growth since 1994 and we have
created jobs but not enough to keep up with the number of people looking
for employment. Our economy has stabilised over the past decade and none
is in dispute of the fact that Government policies have freed resources
for social expenditure by reducing the interest we have to pay on debts.
The budget deficit fell from 9.5% in 1993 to 1% in 2002-03. The public
sector debt fell from 60% to 50%.

In the state of the nation address, the President focused on honouring the
contract we entered into with the people of South Africa to fight poverty
and create jobs. To this extent, he pledged that we need to encourage the
growth and development of the first economy, increasing its ability to
create jobs, implement our programme to address the challenge of the
second economy and building a social security net to meet our objective of
poverty alleviation. A unified approach for agencies dealing with the
small and medium business sector will yield necessary spin-offs for such a
sector. This is even more real given the R120 million pumped into it for
growth and development purposes during this calendar year.

Learnership programmes in particular are beginning to be the hope of those
who want to participate in the economic development of our country. Many
young men and women have benefited through this scheme, which has
increased their employability status. We applaud the Government in this
regard, especially the President's directive for a register of all
graduates so as to link up with the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. Furthermore, we
would like this registration eventually to include young aspirant
entrepreneurship formations with an objective to structurally co-ordinate
them at national level. This is borne out of the experience of the youth
heeding the call Government's call of vukuzenzele.

Sihlalo, singumholi wombutho wesizwe futhi nanjengohulumeni olwulayo
esifundeni sakwaZulu-Natal, sakhe uhlelo olungunxantathu olunalezi zinhla
kuwo: elokuqala ukuhlanganisa izakhiwo zomphakathi, ezamabhizinisi,
ezenkolo nezobuholi bendabuko; ukuqhakambisa ukuthula nokuzibophezela
kukho manje nangesikhathi esizayo. NgolweSine mhlaka-24 kule nyanga
uhulumeni walesi sifundazwe ubize ukhukhulelangoqo womhlanganomkhuleko
ezinkundleni zaseKings Park eThekwini. Sizobe sibonga umphakathi wonke
ngokhetho olube nokuthula futhi laphathwa ngobulungiswa nangokungachemi.
Okunye ukuthi sizobe sibheka ukuhlangana phakathi kwamaqembu amakhulu
kulesiya sifundazwe okuyiANC neIFP, ikakhulukazi sigcizelela ebuholini
besifundazwe ukuze selekelele ezinhlelweni zobuholi balezi zinhlangano
ezingeni likazwelonke.

Yigxalaba Mongameli esifisa lifakwe ezinhlakeni eziseqoqweni lezokuphepha
nokuvikela ezweni lonke ikakhulukazi ezobulungiswa. Amalunga ombutho
kaKhongolose awakhululekile ngokuxhaphaka kwezikhali ezingekho emthethweni
esifundazweni. Iningi lazo asiyazi imvelaphi yazo kodwa ukubhadanywa
kukamnumzane Philip Powell ngonyaka ka-1999 nentaphane yezikhali ajike
angaboshwa kusenza singathakasi ngezokushushisa kwezwe lethu. Muva nje
endaweni yaseziNqoleni iqulu lentsha elazibiza ngamalungu e-IFP lathi
uKhongolose akambophi umnumzane Powell ngoba engumlungu kodwa nakhu iNkosi
uKhawula osewakhotha yena waboshwa. Asivumelani-ke nalo mbono kodwa
njengabaholi besifundazwe sinxusa uNgqongqoshe omusha wezoBulungiswa
aluphakamele lolu daba. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, as the leadership of the organisation of the country and the
provincial government of KwaZulu-Natal, we have created a three-way
programme with the following aspects: to combine the community, business,
religious and traditional leadership structures; to promote peace and to
commit ourselves to it now and in the future. On Thursday, the 24th of
this month, the provincial government of this province has called for a
prayer meeting at the Kings Park stadium in Durban. We will be thanking
the whole community for the peaceful elections that were just and fair.
The other thing we will look at is the coalition between the majority
parties in that province, which is between the ANC and IFP. This will
emphasize in particular our willingness to help in the leadership of the
province through programmes of leadership within these organisations at
the national level.

This is what, Mr President, we wish to be included in the cluster of
national safety and security - and in justice in particular. Members of
the African National Congress are not comfortable with unlicensed firearms
that are found everywhere in the province. We do not know where most of
these firearms come from, but the apprehension of Philip Powell in 1999,
with lots of firearms in his possession but not being prosecuted, makes us
very much unhappy about the judicial system of our country. Recently, in
the area of Nqoleni, a youth mob who called themselves IFP members said
that the African National Congress did not prosecute Mr Powell because he
was white, whereas Chief Khawula, who has since passed away, was
prosecuted. We do not agree with this opinion, but as the leadership of
the province we appeal to the newly appointed Minister of Justice to take
this matter very seriously.]

We want to bury the hatchet in the province of KwaZulu-Natal and not fight
with weapons. For if we do the latter, the chances of going back to peace
will be abandoned. Our province is on the threshold of everlasting peace,
economic growth, development and prosperity. We would further urge the
Government to embark on random search-and-seize operations by South
African Police Service members. This, we believe, would come in handy
especially after this service has successfully combated crime in townships
like Esikhawini.

In conclusion, we are upbeat with the prospects of humanity's social
progress in the province. There is no need to be pessimistic as we said
during the election campaign:

Ikhona indlela eya phambili entuthukweni. [There is a way forward to
development.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, Comrade President of the Republic of
South Africa and the Deputy President - he is no longer here. When things
are not going well in the running of any country, we all cast our eyes
beyond Parliament and the Ministers to the Presidency. It is therefore not
surprising that, from time to time, Azapo does criticise some aspects of
the work of the Presidency, and at other times heaps praises onto the
Presidency. In all these instances we are motivated by the desire that our
country should continue to succeed and be governed well.

Obviously we do not expect the Presidency to determine all aspects of our
people's lives or change the behaviour of every single individual in
society. But Azapo is aware of the destructive and reactionary forces in
our society. We will always urge the President, in particular, to
accelerate the changes that are taking place in our society for the
benefit of the poor, so that these reactionary forces should not use the
poverty of our people to reverse the gains that we have thus far achieved.
[Applause.]

Azapo has noted with appreciation and support the Presidency's involvement
in conflict resolution in Africa, particularly in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We have noted further the work that is being
done in the area of the international struggle to make bodies such as the
United Nations more democratic. These and similar interventions in Africa
and in the world demonstrate the important task that the Presidency has
embarked upon on behalf of our country and its people. [Applause.]

The establishment of the Pan-African Parliament is another important
milestone in the lives of South Africans and all inhabitants of the
African continent. This parliament places a responsibility on our
preparedness to move a step further towards integration of states in
Africa.

A natural tendency is to hold on to our own constitutional and legal
rights and resist any intention of the people of Africa to live as one.
The challenges that lie ahead point to one thing: to see to it that the
Pan-African Parliament becomes an important platform for political, social
and economic integration of the continent.

In preparation for the future, the youth of our country, through the
National Youth Service, should be encouraged to take the affairs of Africa
seriously. Azapo is concerned that the National Youth Service's activities
are not prominent enough to turn the youth our country into responsible
future citizens.

Azapo recognises that the youth are an important component of our society
and that it is the youth who should be nurtured into the future upholders
of the values and norms of our society. It is indeed the youth who are the
future leaders of our country and the continent. We should as a country
channel the energies of the youth into positive and productive activities.
To this end, Azapo believes that in particular the youth must be made to
interest themselves in developmental issues, issues of Africa, youth
service to communities, including the creation of forums for debate on
issues of Africa and the whole world.

Azapo supports the Budget Vote.

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Chairperson, hon President and hon members,
before I start my speech, I would like to inform this House that I am
using South African Sign Language. The interpreter, who is voicing for me,
is Ronel. I am informing the House because a well-known magazine
interviewed a staff member of Parliament who claims that she stands at the
podium to voice for me. This misleading information brings down the
integrity of Parliament and that is not the reason why we, as members with
disabilities, are here in Parliament.

I have lived in the United States of America for six years and I have met
many deaf students from developing countries. Many of these deaf students
do not want to return home upon graduating because of the lack of access
for people with disabilities in their own countries. I came back because I
believe that changes will happen in South Africa that many things will
become accessible and possible for people with disabilities. I thank the
hon President for establishing the Office on the Status of Disabled
Persons, OSDP, first in the Deputy President's office and currently in the
Presidency. [Applause.] I am a proud South African and proud of the
achievements made by our Government for people with disabilities. Yes,
there are still many things that need to be changed, but we are on course
to make many more changes possible.

Since 1994, from the start of democracy in South Africa, the ANC has been
making sure that changes were being put in place to make the lives of
people with disabilities easier. This is indicated in the Bill of Rights
in the Constitution, the INDS, and in various laws that have been revised
to include people with disabilities, such as the Promotion of Equality and
Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, the Employment Equality Act and
the SA Schools Act. As I have said, the OSDP was in the then Deputy
President's office, and then moved to the Presidency. This move has
enabled the OSDP to effectively participate in the development of critical
legislation, which guides the principles of Government with regard to the
inclusion and integration of disability.

In 1994 there was only one disabled member of Parliament, and that
increased up to about nine members in 1999; and now in 2004 I have lost
track of how many members with disabilities there are and I have stopped
counting. [Applause.]

Parliament has established a joint monitoring committee on children, youth
and people with disabilities, so that this committee can provide oversight
and monitoring over Government departments in these areas. For example, a
disability desk has been established in provincial offices and some local
offices. Different programmes announced by the president, such as the
Expanded Public Works Programme, will include people with disabilities.

These are but a few achievements to mention, because there are so many
that I can mention. The OSDP published a document called A 10-Year Review
on Mainstreaming of Disability Issues in Government Policies and
Programmes. I cannot speak about all it entails, but I will highlight some
of the achievements and challenges for people with disabilities.

We are now moving away from a welfare and medical model to a social and
human rights one, thereby creating a better life for people with
disabilities through meeting all their socioeconomic needs. These are
achievements and challenges in the different sectors. In the social
sector, the social grants per person with disabilities have increased.
However, as such persons with disabilities make up 6% of the population,
only 2,1% receive disability grants. We need to work to ensure that more
people with disabilities receive or have access to these grants. The
challenge facing the OSDP is to train more civil servants in the use of
assessment tools and to improve the identification mechanisms and
procedures. An example that I can give here is that in a certain province
district doctors believe that because deaf people appear physically
healthy, they should not receive the grants - but the fact is that
deafness prevents them from getting the work.

In the job creation programme of the Department of Public Works provision
is made for training in trade and life skills. The challenge here is to
make all Government buildings and service points accessible. In the
education sector, special schools have been transferred into resource
centres and full service schools. The audit of special schools has been
completed. However, I am not sure if this report has been tabled in
Parliament so that members of the education committee can read it.

The Department of Health has made provision for assistive devices. The
Minister of Social Development announced on 1 July 2003 that people with
disabilities would be able to access health care services in the public
health sector free of charge. One of our members, hon Hendrietta Bogopane-
Zulu, sits on the South African National Aids Council and she has been
involved in making available resources for HIV/Aids awareness to people
with disabilities. There are also many different challenges still being
faced in the health sector by people with disabilities.

In the transport sector, we have already seen some public buses and taxis
on our roads that are accessible to our people with disabilities. The
challenge will be to implement a subsidy scheme to benefit people with
disabilities so that that kind of transport is not expensive for our
people. I am happy to know that the housing subsidy system includes people
with disabilities and the target of 5% to 6% housing subsidies has been
set for people with disabilities.

Communication has become my favourite topic, as it hits to the heart of
the needs of people who are deaf. Information is power and we lack access
to information, especially via television. The ANC through our resolutions
have stated that the SABC must become accessible to people with
disabilities. We have passed the Broadcasting Amendment Act, which states
that the SABC must cater for the needs of people who are deaf and people
who are blind. We are now looking forward to seeing TV programmes becoming
accessible to us. There has been progress in this sector, such as ICASA
having special workshops for people for disabilities, and the involvement
of people with disabilities in production and implementation of community
radio programmes.

A total of 0,25% of the total public servants employed are people with
disabilities. The challenge is for the Public Service as a whole, and each
line department, to achieve the 2% target of employment of people with
disabilities by 2005. I hope that when we have achieved that target
percentage in 2005, it can then be increased.

We have to make our courts accessible to people with disabilities, such as
with the provision of sign language interpreters and the Braille
translation of documents. The OSDP states that the equality courts have
been a success. The OSDP is also involved in the African Decade, Nepad and
the development of the proposed UN Convention on the Equalisation of
Opportunities for People with Disabilities. This was done in partnership
with the Department of Foreign Affairs. I have just read an e-mail from a
friend in Cameroon. She feels that there is a need for South African
assistance in informing the Cameroon government about the needs of people
with disabilities.

The OSDP has reported that 70 officials have been trained in the provinces
and 70 at national Government level. Nine disability desks have been
established. I still need to know about the number of disability desks at
district and metro level. There are 24 officials representing the national
Government in the OSDP's interdepartmental collaborative committee.

Before I end off, I would like to say something to my honourable members
on my left. Do not try to get votes from people with disabilities,
especially deaf people, just before the elections. I believe that the DA,
ACDP, ID and FF Plus have tried to lobby for votes and some of you have
given them a false impression that they will get seats in Parliament. But
I am disappointed that during your last five years of term you have not
been vocal about the needs of people with disabilities. [Applause] The ANC
gained 70% of the votes anyway and people with disabilities know who is
really vocal about their needs and who is working to ensure access for
them. Chairperson, the ANC supports Budget Vote No 1. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs C-S BOTHA: Chairperson, hon President. I would like to take this
opportunity to compliment the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs on her
very good taste in jackets. [Laughter.]

The President's promotion of so many women to Cabinet has strengthened
South Africa's precious legacy of respect for the status of women, which
is so deeply embedded in our Constitution. But, there is one man in South
Africa who seems to have the power to undermine this entire edifice. This
is a man, Chairperson, who claims that he is untouchable, because he is a
personal appointee of the President.

It is therefore necessary that the hon President lays to rest, once and
for all, the suspicion that this man - South African ambassador to the
Republic of Indonesia, Norman Manuel Mashabane - has the power to hold the
women of South Africa, the Office of the Status of Women, the Gender
Commission, the Constitution, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the
Presidency, to ransom.

Let me elaborate. For more than two years the hon Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Ms Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, refrained from taking steps, despite
the fact that two senior departmental officials recommended not merely
that the ambassador be suspended, but that he be dismissed, having been
found guilty on 22 counts of sexual harassment.

We all know what courage it takes to bring such demeaning, intimate
experiences into the public domain and to speak out against people who
hold your livelihood in their hands. That is why we fought so hard to have
an Office of the Status of Women in the Presidency and sexual harassment
codes in every Government department.

Hoekom het hierdie man so 'n uitsonderlike houvas oor die agb Minister dat
sy bereid is om haar feministiese reputasie op te offer om hom te beskerm
en in die proses 'n bespotting te maak van ons verbintenis tot die
bemagtiging van vroue? [Why does this man have such an exceptional hold on
the hon Minister that she is prepared to sacrifice her feminist reputation
to protect him, in the process making a laughing stock of our commitment
to the empowerment of women?]

This is a man identified in disciplinary reports as an unreliable witness,
who states in staff meetings that the thought of sleeping with a white
woman disgusts him, who is found guilty on multiple charges of sexual
harassment, yet is exonerated - while the women who brought the charges
are slandered by totally unsubstantiated generalisations.

I quote the Minister: ``Sometimes, when so many people complain about
exactly the same thing, it is likely that they have been put up to do
it''. What is being said is not that this man is obviously a serial sex
pest, but that all the women are stupid enough to be bamboozled into
making public clowns of themselves!

But, moreover, we stand to be further humiliated by the fact that the
ambassador has agreed to be a keynote speaker at an international
symposium on gender, nogal, in Djakarta this September; the very place
where he allegedly molested his domestic staff and harassed his employees.

We therefore have to implore the hon President to tell this Assembly why
Ambassador Mashabane is being allowed to make such fools of all of us.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, the President of the
Republic, Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
good afternoon.

We would like to take this opportunity to extend our condolences to the
families of the South African soldiers who, earlier this month, were
killed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We salute all those who
have given their lives to ensure that we achieve the goal of creating
peace and friendship. We honour their heroism, conscious of the importance
to us and all humanity of peaceful international engagements.

We must achieve stability so that we can concentrate our attention on the
problems pertaining to developing our countries. We have an obligation to
expend every effort to banish underdevelopment with all its allied
afflictions such as poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy and lack of
skills. Ours is about honour and dignity.

This coming Saturday we will observe the 49th anniversary of the Freedom
Charter. As we celebrate 10 years of freedom, the assertion made by our
people in 1955 that the people shall govern has not only been realised,
but its progressive deepening is beginning to show in the continued
resilience and stability of our democratic process.

The assertion that South Africa belongs to all who live in it guided the
drafters of our Constitution to give legal recognition of citizenship
rights to all South Africans. It places a responsibility on all of us not
only to lay claim to these rights, but also to contribute to the
development and progress of this country.

As we move on and develop, we are always confronted with a degree of
negativity and backwardness, as some amongst us seem to have assumed the
shameful position that, while enjoying all the benefits that have come
with the advent of democracy, they will do everything they can to avoid
contributing towards development and progress. They argue that their role
is to be watchdogs.

In a country where centuries of history were characterised by racial
oppression and exploitation, they figure their contribution can only be to
play a role as watchdogs. In a country where for centuries women were
oppressed, exploited and relegated to the status of minors, they are
prepared to contribute towards progress in this regard, but only as
watchdogs. For centuries, the majority of our people lived their lives in
conditions of slavery, having been robbed of their birthright to land,
liberty and peace. For decades, cheap labour policies in employment and
segregation concentrated skills in the white section of our community.

In the face of this and many other social, political, economic, moral,
cultural and environmental ills, the hands of our watchdogs, as they wish
it, will remain clean, never to be dirtied in the practical and broader
service of the South African nation. Our history and conditions demand
from all South Africans that they should take part in a people's contract
to defeat the painful legacy of our past. As part of celebrating the first
decade of freedom, we must, all of us, as these people to whom South
Africa belongs, for our own sake and that of us all as human beings,
embrace and take forward the Letsema volunteer campaign to give effect to
the concept and goal of a new patriotism.

The President has made the call for all of us, as South Africans, to work
together, to create work and to fight poverty; and we do this as part of
our pursuit of the goal of a better life for all the people of our
country. One way to ensure that we sustain our democracy is by investing
in our youth. The establishment of the National Youth Commission emanated
from the very real need to address the challenges confronting our youth.
The main objective of this commission is to facilitate, co-ordinate and
monitor the development and implementation of integrated policies and
related problems, in order to promote youth development in South Africa
and on the African continent.

To this end, the National Youth Information Service was established to
provide accurate and relevant information regarding sexual, career and
academic development. In addition, a National Youth Service was created to
provide opportunities for the youth to contribute towards socioeconomic
development in the country.

In the fight against poverty, we are faced with numerous challenges. The
imbizo campaign brings Government structures face to face with the
material aspects of underdevelopment and poverty. Running concurrently
with imbizo are the sectoral engagements the President holds with other
key stakeholders in the country. Such campaigns and interactions ensure
that the people of our country understand and work effectively with
Government. In this regard, we should also expect that key policy issues,
such as the issue of land ownership, for instance, will emanate as part of
the engagement and public policy debates.

The Ten-Year Review which evaluated Government's performance revealed an
increase in adult literacy rates since 1996, and free health care for
women and children under the age of six years. The Integrated Nutrition
Programme now reaches almost 4,58 million children. Dedicated expenditure
on HIV/Aids programmes across national departments has increased from R30
million in 1994 to R342 million in 2001-02. The proportion of households
having access to clean water translates into around 9 million citizens.
Access to sanitation increased to 63% of households and approximately 70%
of households receive electricity.

Despite the gains made, much still needs to be done. We need to ensure
that mechanisms focus on outputs; make decisions transparent; link cost
and benefits; encourage and support commitment, loyalty and integrity. Our
society needs good communicators who are able to motivate people through
persuasion and conviction rather than seniority and orders. Public
representatives must themselves embrace and promote the values of
selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness and
honesty. We need people who are dedicated to improving the lives of our
people. We need to replace these adverse cultural and practice mechanisms
that control rather than liberate.
Some time ago we launched the Batho Pele - the people first - programme.
The principles encompassed within this programme emphasised, among others,
consultation with the people on the level and quality of public services,
equal access to services, and being treated with courtesy and
consideration. Our duties extend beyond promoting or demanding high
standards of moral behaviour. But, in introducing integrity through public
awareness campaigns and targeting our youth through morality in action,
our accomplishments as a young democratic nation regarding oversight and
accountability have been a beacon in times of rough seas.

We have much to be proud of. We have voted appropriate anti-corruption
legislation that criminalises corruption and outlines appropriate
punishment. We have codes of conduct, a register of members' interests. We
have the Public Finance Management Act which holds Government departments
accountable and ensures that they establish internal audit functions,
reassessments, training, etc. We have promoted the passage of the freedom
of information legislation that allows for access to information. We have
electoral legislation that encourages and enforces transparency in the
electoral process. We have streamlined and ensured the equity of laws and
regulations on government programmes and procedures, taxation,
administration of justice, etc.

We can be proud of these mechanisms, but we know we can do much better in
ensuring that the maximum use of our constitutional and other legal
mechanisms for ensuring oversight of government is utilised effectively.
We must execute our roles with compassion and dedication. We have a duty
to institute and reinforce oversight. Our committee structure of this
Parliament provides a valuable forum for scrutinising Government business
and we need to ensure that we make optimum use thereof. Strengthening the
powers of - and resources to - committees when analysing Government
department budgets and the execution of budgetary plans, is crucial.

The state has made significant progress in recent years in improving
policy co-ordination both within and across spheres of Government, but
these need to be consolidated through focusing on implementation.

South Africa's role in world affairs is growing. We are faced with the
challenges posed by globalisation. We have to be more determined to
consolidate democratic institutions and culture through multilateral
processes. South Africa's prominent role in Nepad places heavy demands on
the Presidency, as has the significant role and involvement of South
Africa in peace initiatives.

However, the positive spirit that derives from these efforts is captured
in the words of Professor Maria Nzomo, head of the University of Nairobi's
institute of diplomacy and international studies, who said: ``Africa is
coming of age in handling its own affairs. There is a new sense that
Africa ought to be refereeing its own disputes.''

This observation confirms the correctness of our approach. The critical
issues in our next decade of political history include human and
institutional development, diversifying structures, raising
competitiveness, taking care of natural resources and mobilising resources
for development financing. All of these are crucial elements in increasing
the capacity of South Africa to accelerate and sustain growth and to fight
poverty.

With this immense responsibility and the renewed momentum in the
continent's pursuit for peace and prosperity has come the need for more
resources. International and continental demands on the Presidency have
necessitated an increase in support services and thus an increase in
expenditure. In the fight to eradicate conflict on our continent, African
efforts need stronger international support - politically as well as in
the economic arena - where greater debt relief and market access for more
diversified African exports are crucial to ensure better living standards
that promote stability.

Within the Presidency is the Policy Co-ordination Unit, which oversees the
Offices on the Status of Women, on Disabled Persons and on the Rights of
the Child. Each of these have been involved in advisory services on the
implementation of the gender policy framework, systems for monitoring the
Integrated National Disability Strategy and the advisory service on cross-
cutting sectoral policies on children and monitoring implementation
respectively.

Worth noting is the fact that the outputs have resulted in the development
of a national action plan by the Office on the Status of Women, capacity
enhancement in Government by training provincial officials and drafting a
local government framework by the Office on the Status of Disabled
Persons, and the Office on the Rights of the Child playing a key role in
involving stakeholders in developing a comprehensive document on
children's rights.

All of us must commit ourselves to play our part in forging the people's
contract for a better South Africa, inspired by our commitment to
democratic consultation, mass participation and voluntarism, moral
regeneration, as well as people-centred and people-driven development. We
support the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate interrupted.

The House adjourned at 18:13.

