---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-09-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, it is indeed a wonderful spring day
to have the Springboks with us. I also wish to inform members that SA Rugby
has provided mementoes for all members. These will be given to members at
their caucuses tomorrow. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker …

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Deputy Speaker.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker - but you are as good as a
Speaker, and that is why I said so. [Applause.] I just want to say that we
bring to the attention of Mr White, the coach, that the Minister of Defence
was an excellent wing when he was on Robben Island and that he must be
considered for the team. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr White, I am sure you got that message. He says thank
you very much for bringing that knowledge and information about the
Minister of Defence to his attention. I do not know whether he is on the
right side of age though, but I am sure they can give him… [Interjections.]
Yes, on a point of age. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:  Madam Speaker, just to say that I was at the last
game against the Aussies and I was just getting ready to go and change when
they scored the winning tries. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: If only we had known that. Well, of course we are all
excited and I think we can’t stop … Mr Gibson, would you like to say
something to the ``Bokke’’?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, during all the years when
we were not winning matches I was always available to play and none of
these coaches came to me. [Laughter.] Now that they want me to play, I
refuse.

Dr C P MULDER: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, ek wil graag namens die VF Plus
vir die Springbokke baie geluk sê. Die feit dat hulle vandag hier is, bewys
maar net weer eens die stelling: Daar is geen plaasvervanger vir sukses
nie. Mag hulle so voortgaan vir baie jare. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like, on behalf of the FF
Plus, to congratulate the Springboks. The fact that they are here today
once again proves the adage: Nothing succeeds like success. May they
continue in this vein for many years. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Baie dankie, meneer.  [Thank you, sir.]

I don’t know if we can take advantage of the presence of the Deputy
President, just to wish the Springboks, ``geluk’’[good luck].

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, Madam Deputy Speaker, I was there. I
participated. [Laughter.] Thank you very much for making us a leading
country in rugby. Thank you very much indeed. We feel very proud.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Malibongwe. [Praise.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy Speaker. I also want, on
behalf of the Minister of Sport and Recreation, Mr A Rajbansi, to
congratulate the Springboks and wish them all well. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you. The ACDP would also like to add their
congratulations, and we all felt like we were there playing with you. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the players are also very
happy to hear that the nation is so happy about their performance. You made
us, each and every one, very proud. Thank you very much. [Applause.]


                                   RULING


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members. During the debate on the travel
voucher saga in the House on 24 August, Mr Gibson raised a point of order,
asking me to rule as unparliamentary a statement by the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, Mr Goniwe, which Mr Gibson described as racially
disparaging of hon members. The statement being contested with reference to
parties releasing names was:

       You can easily do so with the hon Morkel because he is a minority
       coloured in a largely white environment.

I indicated that I would consult the Hansard and then give a ruling. Having
now had the opportunity to consider the Hansard, I wish to rule as follows:
While it is true that this country is still recovering from a racially very
divided past, it is however incumbent on members of Parliament to
discourage and desist from racial stereotyping. It is indeed the
responsibility of each one of us to ensure that we exercise the right to
freedom of speech in a considerate and responsible manner. As public
representatives it is imperative that we set a good example for the country
to emulate.

In 2001, members of 50 parliaments met in Durban to consider the role
parliaments should play in fighting racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance. They then submitted a declaration to
the UN World Conference Against Racism. Reporting to the House on those
events, the former Speaker, Dr Ginwala, on 18 October 2001, dealt with the
action Parliament and individual members can take in the fight against
racism. She said the following:

      To what extent do we consider the impact of our example and
occasionally desist from scoring party-political points? How  often do we
curb our words and refrain from addressing each other in  disparaging
language? It is not whether a particular phrase is unparliamentary or not,
or whether it leads to disorder in the House, but rather of being sensitive
to the message we are
conveying and the example we set.

She also said that members of Parliament have a unique opportunity to
demonstrate tolerance, diversity and inclusivity.

Hon members, I want to reiterate the appeal by the former Speaker: indeed
we have a unique opportunity actively to take the lead in eradicating the
scourge of racism in our country. It is up to us to give guidance to the
country and to set the tone. I therefore urge hon members as public
representatives to refrain from resorting to racially disparaging
statements that detract from the dignity of this House, and rather to be
sensitive and mindful of the message we convey and the example we set.
Thank you.

To this end, I have been requested by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party
to be given a second to address us when this ruling has been delivered.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much, Madam Deputy
Speaker. I understand the context; I have not heard from the ruling whether
it is unparliamentary or not. I understand the spirit. However, I have
taken the opportunity and the liberty, Madam, to phone hon Morkel and I
extended my personal apology, if in any way the statement I made hurt him
in any manner, and he accepted.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That then deals with this matter and settles it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is not clear to
me whether you have ruled on that matter or not. Certainly the whole House
would have supported what you have said. Was Mr Goniwe in contravention of
the Rules of the House when he made the statement?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, if that was the case, I would have asked him to
withdraw the words. Now what I am saying is that we come from a past based
on race and there will always be an occasion for members to refer to that
in their speeches, but to the extent that it is damaging, we have to rule.
There is just no way that we can not refer to where we come from, but it
should be done in such a way that people refer to it without damaging other
people’s integrity. I was actually humbled by Mr Goniwe when he said,
“Whichever way you rule, I think I owe Mr Morkel an apology”, and I am
happy that he has done that.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I felt that he owed the Democratic
Alliance an apology as well, because he was talking about our actions and
about us, but I thank him for being big enough to do what he did and
perhaps he set an example for all of us …

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Gibson, you are out of order now. Will you please
take your seat.

During the same debate a point of order was raised by Mr Frolick on an
interjection apparently made by Mr Waters. According to Mr Frolick, during
the input by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Mr Waters said the
following: “It is your corrupt MPs”. I indicated also that I would consider
the Hansard and then give a ruling. However, there were many interjections
and the interjection said to have been made by Mr Waters is not captured in
Hansard and therefore I would like to ask you, Mr Waters, whether you did
say the words being attributed to you. Mr Waters would you please address …


Mr M WATERS:  Yes, I did say that, Madam Deputy Speaker. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you said that, will you please withdraw the words,
Mr Waters?

Mr M WATERS:  I withdraw.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, sir.


                      PRECEDENCE NOT GIVEN TO QUESTIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party on the
Order Paper, as follows:

     That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 29(8), Questions shall not
     have precedence today.

 Agreed to.

    VOICE OF AFRICAN WOMEN: WHAT SHOULD BE THE ROLE AND PLACE OF THE PAN-
                     AFRICAN WOMEN’S ORGANISATION, PAWO.

                          (Subject for Discussion)


Mrs N B GXOWA:  Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Deputy President, hon
Chairpersons, hon members, I am delighted to get the opportunity to address
the House on the Pan-African Women’s Organisation.

Some of us who were present when the Federation of South African Women was
formed, are delighted that Madam Speaker has seen fit to allow a debate on
the Pan-African Women’s Organisation as we celebrate its 41st anniversary.
My speech will be educational, as some of our women have not had an
opportunity to interact with Pawo.

The Pan-African Women’s Organisation, also known as the Conference of
African Women, was founded on 31 July 1962 in Dar es Salaam, nine years
after the establishment of the Federation of South African Women, whose
biggest affiliate was the ANC Women’s League.

Madam Deputy Speaker, I am mentioning this because the objectives of the
Federation of South African Women were quite similar to those of the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation. The aims were to unite African women’s
organisations; to allow an exchange of points of view and to undertake
joint action; to promote human rights with a view to eliminating any form
of discrimination irrespective of birth, race, religion or sex; to support
political, economic and social liberation of the African continent in order
to contribute to the progress of its peoples through conscious, real and
constant action; to ensure full integration of women into economic and
social development; to accelerate the promotion of African women so that
they can achieve full development; to promote true friendship,
understanding and co-operation in an active and united effort between
African states; to establish lasting relationships or friendships and co-
operation between women in Africa and throughout the world; and to fight
poverty and diseases, especially HIV/Aids.

The reason for starting the Pan-African Women’s Organisation is still as
relevant today as it was when it was first formed. It is even more relevant
because of the many developments that have taken place in our continent
since 1994. Today Africa is talking about economic development of the
continent through Nepad. We have also established the African Union, and
women need to ensure that gender issues that affect them are integrated
into these processes.

Women have contributed to peace, and have, together with their male
counterparts, fought for the liberation of this continent. Thus we have a
right to be a part of all that happens in the whole of Africa.

The Amina Lawal saga is an example of the reasons the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation is still relevant today. The whole continent reacted to her
issue because it was a common issue that affected all women, not only on
the continent, but in the whole world.

The initial objectives of Pawo were to create awareness about the role of
women in the African liberation struggles; to co-ordinate women’s
activities at regional levels; to establish close contacts and co-operation
with other women’s organisations for collective processes and disseminating
information about women of African descent; to promote women’s initiatives
by establishing gender-sensitive programmes, holding workshops and
providing training to unite all African women regardless of race, creed and
class; to conduct research in and outside Africa on current issues that
directly affect women at all levels; to organise workshops, debates, talks,
conferences and meetings on various issues that concern African women and
advance the spirit of Africanism and the efforts of women to meet these
challenges; and to organise workshops involving groups of women from
various schools of thought to participate in various activities and in
international forums of the OAU, regional organisations and the United
Nations agencies.

The above are some of the aims of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation. As
I have already stated, they are relevant. However, they need to be expanded
to include the current issues that face women.

Women are able to organise themselves. The Amina Lawal case is an example
of the kind of unity that exists among women. All women reacted, came
together and fought against one issue, irrespective of their religious and
political affiliations.

The other reason I mentioned the Federation of South African Women is that
it was the only organisation that brought together women’s organisations at
the time to fight against common issues that affected women, such as the
pass laws and many other laws that discriminated against women.

So, Madam Speaker, we have this debate today to sensitise women and ask
them to continue organising and building the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mev C-S BOTHA: Agb Mevrou die Speaker, daar is ŉ ou Afrikaanse liedjie wat
lui:

       En hoor jy die magtige dreuning? [Oor die veld kom dit wyd gesweef:
       [Die lied van ŉ volk se ontwaking [van harte wat sidder en beef.

Kan hierdie liedjie omvorm word om ook vir my, Afrikaanssprekende wit vrou,
‘n stem en `n rol in die Pan-Afrika-vroueorganisasie te gee? Die antwoord
is eintlik voor die hand liggend: uitsluiting is dikwels selfopgeleg,
terwyl deelname ŉ onvoorwaardelike keuse behoort te wees.

In die Kongo is daar 200 etniese groepe. In Rwanda en Burundi – onlangs die
slagveld van volksmoord – woon Hutu’s en Tutsi’s steeds saam. Daar is
Moslems en Christene, mense vanuit Indië, Asië en Europa. As Pan-
Afrikanisme enige betekenis het, sal dit wees deur die erkenning van
eenheid in hierdie veelheid.

Vrou van Afrika is ek en dit is al regverdiging wat ek nodig het om globaal
my deel by te dra. Ons pad na Afrika loop deur haar, nie oor haar of om
haar nie. Dit beteken geensins dat ŉ Pan-Afrikaanse vrouebeweging slegs ŉ
mondstuk vir huidige politieke bedelings moet wees nie.

Daarom is dit ook tyd dat ons kyk na die vroue in Zimbabwe, en nie net na
die politici nie, en in Darfoer en waar ook al ongeregtigheid blyk. Dan kan
Afrika se vroue se morele gesag ook geld oor Irak en Kosovo en Guantanamo
Bay. Daar is `n omvattende agenda van aksie wat op vroue wag en waarop hul
geloofwaardigheid sal groei of bloei, afhangende van die morele onderbou
van die organisasie.

In 1997 het Gertrude Mongela, eerste president van die Pan-Afrikaanse
Parlement, dit onverbeterlik gestel met haar nadruk op debat en dialoog en
die vereistes van duidelike beginsels: (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mrs C-S BOTHA: Hon Madam Speaker, there is an old Afrikaans song that
goes: En hoor jy die magtige dreuning? [Oor die veld kom dit wyd gesweef:
[die lied van ‘n volk se ontwaking [van harte wat sidder en beef.

Can this song be transformed to also give me, an Afrikaans-speaking white
woman, a voice and a role in the Pan-African Women’s Organisation? The
answer is actually self-evident: exclusion is often self-imposed, while
participation should be an unconditional choice.

There are 200 ethnic groups in the Congo. In Rwanda and Burundi – recently
the battlefield of genocide – Hutus and Tutsis still live together. There
are Muslims and Christians, people from India, Asia and Europe. Should Pan-
Africanism have any meaning, it will be in the acknowledgement of unity in
this diversity.

Woman of Africa am I, and that is the only justification I need to globally
contribute my share. Our pathway to Africa runs through her, not over her
or around her. But this by no means implies that a Pan-African women’s
movement should only be a mouthpiece for current political dispensations.

Therefore it is also time we looked at the women in Zimbabwe, and not only
at the politicians, and at the situation in Darfur and wherever else
injustices are evident. Then the moral authority of Africa’s women can also
be applied to Iraq and Kosovo and Guantanamo Bay. There is an extensive
agenda of action that awaits women and on the basis of which their
credibility will thrive, depending on the moral foundation of the
organisation.

In 1997 Gertrude Mongela, the first president of the Pan-African
Parliament, put it so perfectly with the emphasis on debate and dialogue
and the need for clear principles:]

You have to be clear what you want and what you stand for. You must stand
for principle. Principle will never let you down. You have to be able to
choose what are the principles worth dying for.

Today, the African continent represents the world’s greatest developmental
challenge. Despite significant achievements, particularly in the realm of
political representation, African women remain the world’s most deprived.
Many of the issues that face African women across the continent stem from
the perceived inviolability of cultural practices vis-à-vis the concept of
equality and universal human rights. We have to choose according to our
principles.

Yesterday, we heard again how thousands of young women bared their breasts
and danced in Swaziland in the hope of trading a life of poverty for one of
royal comfort as experienced by King Mswati III’s many wives.

In any climate of political and legal uncertainty, human rights, and
particularly women’s rights, are at risk. But, it is often economic
imperatives that make women and children slaves and whores and silent
accomplices to domestic violence - actions that can be directly linked to
the economic conditions which prevail and which are informed by the
decisions women make at a political level.

We don’t have to redefine any agenda. We can simply commit our governments
to the acclaimed Beijing and Vienna Declarations and Platforms for Action.
And it is not – as we have often heard repeated – a case of rights claimed
in the name of Western values being far from those that are perceived as
rights, say in an Islamic country. These can be defined as natural rights;
they speak a universal language.

This is admirably confirmed by one of Africa’s numerous remarkable women,
Suzanne Mubarak - wife of the Egyptian president. Hers is a true African
voice, whilst it preaches universal values. Speaking in Cairo, in February,
she said the following:

      What is certain, is that women in a country like Egypt and women
  in Western or Hindu or African countries have much in common.

  These women with very different needs are united by the search for, and
  the affirmation of, rights that are similar or identical.


So also is the instrument of nonviolence, which is a potentially universal
language. It does not belong to anyone in particular, but to everyone.

Our agenda is simple: We must speak for that which is universally
recognised as right. The African woman’s voice must speak out against all
forms of racism and racial discrimination, xenophobia and ethnic cleansing
with its concomitant systematic rape of women. These are crimes, which stem
from the same impulse as apartheid. They justify discrimination on the
basis of difference and can nullify the very basis of action, which should
unify a Pan-African movement.

And, if we don’t speak for our children, we will have no future. Sub-
Saharan Africa has 48 million children; nearly one third of children aged
14 and under are involved in child labour. In all actions concerning
children, the best interests of the child should be our primary
consideration.

We must work for human security. Violations of the human rights of women in
situations of armed conflict are violations of the fundamental principles
of international human rights and law. We must literally fight our way into
peacekeeping negotiations and structures.

Laat vroue se stemme gesien word deur hul dade, nie net deur hul woorde
nie. Daardeur sal die stem van Afrika se vroue oor die wêreld weerklink.
Baie dankie. [Applous.] [Let women’s voices be heard through their actions,
not just their words. In this way the voice of Africa’s women will resound
across the world. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Ms S C VOS: Madam Deputy Speaker, colleagues, in one of South Africa’s
national newspapers this week, 15-year-old Amy Simelane from Swaziland was
quoted as saying she wanted to marry His Majesty King Mswati III as a way
of escaping her poverty-stricken life. Her father had died of Aids and she
and her mother lived, she said, in a leaking mud hut and existed on aid
from the World Food Programme.

Amy and another young girl, 13-year-old Thabisile Dlamini, said they were
desperately hoping that the king would choose them following the annual
reed dance. Sadly, for these girls marriage is clearly seen as a way of
survival and nothing more.

Throughout Africa, and indeed elsewhere around the world, tens of millions
of women endure almost unimaginable hardship in their often short lives. We
must think today, as has already been mentioned, of the women of Darfur,
women in the Great Lakes region, and women and children suffering closer to
home in Zimbabwe. Millions and millions of women throughout Africa are in
pain and we all know there are many, many forms of pain.

Many in this House know about hardship and sacrifice. They watched their
mothers and their grandmothers and their great-grandmothers bear the real
brunt of the evils of apartheid. Today I often refer to these women as the
final victims of apartheid. They remain shackled by a lack of education,
and by poor health caused by hard work, stress and appalling living
conditions. With extraordinary fortitude and grace these women now care for
those among us who are sick and dying of Aids-related illnesses. They
nurture the unemployed from their meagre pensions.

So we are here today essentially to discuss what the women of Africa can do
to help the women of Africa, and what the real role and function of the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation is. We can talk, like I have done, of helping
girls such as Amy and Thabisile to have dreams beyond marriages of
convenience, and to be enabled and empowered to be what they really want to
be as full citizens of this world. We can acknowledge, again with words,
the suffering of many of the women in our land, some of whom we know
personally.

Talk, we all know, is not enough. Women throughout Africa now really need
to become activists. It is not a question of us asking women to please
become activists. We all have a duty to become activists. The Constitutive
Act of the African Union is quite clear with regard to our collective
African obligation to promote gender equality and its acknowledgement of
the critical role of women in social and economic development.

The feminist activism – call it what you like - of many of the women in
this Parliament and, indeed, some men who entered this Parliament in 1994,
needs to be rekindled. The role of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation
needs to be placed firmly on the agenda of this Parliament and relevant
portfolio committees, not merely as a means to enable oversight of its work
and to talk about it and keep talking and not doing.

We also need to establish our own capacity to facilitate the participation
of diverse groups of women, and youth in particular, to enable Pawo to
carry out its functions in its research and decision-making. The
constitution and structure of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation is not
perfect, as I read it, but it broadly outlines objectives and aspirations
and proposed action – the usual stuff. It outlines our responsibilities to
each other to face the problems of women in our own country and elsewhere
throughout the continent.

But, it is time that we really empowered one another and Pawo to initiate,
for example, quality research that will lead to better-informed decision-
making and programmes of action. We need to debate legislative and
developmental frameworks for women in Africa and to tackle African regional
human rights systems and, critically, issues relating to women in
situations of war, as well as the pandemic of gender-based violence.

Pawo must have a long list of issues on its agenda. In addition to those
mentioned by me and the previous speaker, others will no doubt highlight
matters relating to marriage and inheritance laws as they affect women
throughout Africa, as well as harmful traditional practices; the gender and
human rights dimensions of HIV/Aids; and, on top of all of this, of course,
women and war and conflict, as it goes on and on and on in Africa.

Clearly, the protection and empowerment of women is integral to the
successful development of Africa. As the African Union and the Pan-African
Parliament embody a collective desire for Africans to constructively seek
African solutions to African problems, we cannot assume that somebody out
there, somebody in these bodies, is going to do all the work for us. We
cannot abdicate our own personal responsibilities to others out there
somewhere to do all the hard work. We have to act, and we have to act in
the true spirit of our ubuntu botho. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Deputy Speaker, first of all, I must apologise for not opening
the debate as I was supposed to. I would like to explain that it was
because I did not want to leave the briefing with the Cape Town Press Club
before answering every single question that they had on the matter of the
travel investigation in particular. I am glad to report that I believe it
was a very meaningful and useful interaction. Hon De Lille and hon Harding
were there and can vouch that this was so.

I believe it is historic that today this House is debating the Pan-African
Women’s Organisation – an African organisation about which very little is
known, certainly in this country. Yet, South African women were founder
members of this important organisation.

On 1 and 2 July this year, two former members of this House attended a
Southern African regional conference of the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation in Maputo, Mozambique. This regional conference is one of the
many around the continent that will take place towards a continental
congress, which is going to be hosted in South Africa in 2006. So this
debate tables a range of questions that South Africans, broadly, must apply
their minds to as to the current status of Pawo and the future of Pawo.
That is why it becomes important that Parliament, as the forum for national
debate, applies its mind on a range of issues and questions that arise
around this important organisation.

I think hon Gxowa, the first speaker this afternoon, indicated the history
of Pawo which was formed a year before the formation of the Organisation of
African Unity by the heads of state of Africa in Dar es Salaam. Former
members, hon Gertrude Shope and hon Adelaide Tambo, together with women
from the PAC of Azania, were founding members who participated at that
point in the founding of this important organisation.

Pawo, over the years, has held a seat in the Organisation of African Unity
as well as in the UN. It sits in those organisations and therefore finds a
way of making an input and giving guidance, and channelling and
spearheading issues relating to the needs and plight of women generally. We
can say with pride that Pawo has championed the cause particularly with
respect to political and legal issues, the role of women, and the rights
and status of women.

We can even say that the fact that this Parliament today reflects the whole
question of equality is due, in part, to the role that Pawo has played
politically over the years.

Hon members, if you look at the document that is attempting to review the
status of Pawo, you will find that Pawo has been experiencing a range of
challenges over the years. In fact, it is presently in a very, very
difficult situation in terms of resources, because many organisations of
member states have actually not been paying their dues in terms of
subscriptions to Pawo. That has created great difficulties for the
organisation in terms of resources, and has prevented the organisation from
playing its role more effectively over the years.

If you look at the constitution of Pawo as it stands now - certainly those
of us who have looked at it and have applied our minds to some of the
aspects feel this way - you will see that some areas of the constitution
are not satisfactory, in the sense that it creates a situation in which
only women’s organisations that have the support of governments can be
members of Pawo.

In our view this is not a satisfactory position, because what it translates
to is that even women’s organisations that are founder members of Pawo, if
they are no longer in government in their various countries, are unable to
be members of Pawo. I’ll illustrate this by using the example of South
Africa. Unless the government explicitly indicates how it approaches the
issue of which women’s organisations it recognises or what its approach is
on who can affiliate to Pawo in this country, the situation remains that
there is an assumption that only women from the ruling party should be
members of Pawo. And we think this is not correct because, for instance in
South Africa, PAC women are also founder members of Pawo.

Another example is Zambia where the women from the UNIP are founder members
of Pawo, but because presently the UNIP is not in government, is not in
power and is not a ruling party, those women are marginalised. Therefore,
it is the view, certainly of those of us within the women’s wing of the
ANC, that the constitution needs to be addressed in respect of that. We
believe Pawo must be more broadly representative of the women of any
particular country in order for it to be an organisation that can fully
represent the views of the masses of the women.

When Pawo was formed, it was formed mainly by women who were involved in
liberation struggles, and who came from liberation movements of which many,
at that point, were in exile. As I said, the ANC, the PAC, Frelimo, Swapo
and so on were all in exile, hosted by Tanzania. Now, once those
organisations went into government, clearly that probably affected how that
relationship was constructed. It can thus easily be said - in fact, many
times it can be said with validity - that only women that are elite can be
representatives in Pawo. That is how we are regarded by the masses of the
people that are members of Pawo. And yet, it´s an organisation that has
always sought to speak for the ordinary woman on the ground, the woman in
the squatter camp and the woman in the rural areas. It must raise and
sharply champion the cause of a better life for the ordinary African woman
who really is at the bottom of the pile in each of the countries that we
are talking about.

Therefore, it is on that basis that we believe that the constitution of
Pawo must be revisited, and it must create a situation in which Pawo is
more representative and can speak validly and with pride on behalf of the
majority of women. However, there is a range of other questions that need
to be addressed, for example: What should the status of Pawo now be in the
light of latest developments, and in terms of us now having the AU? These
are questions that we must all apply our minds to. That is why I really
appreciate this opportunity for these questions just to be brought to
light, and therefore the debate involves not only the few who are involved
so far, but the country and, in particular, the women of the country as a
whole.

The AU is a structure of governance of Africa. Of course, it has organs
that obviously ensure that the voice of the people is heard, in particular
through the Pan-African Parliament, and also through Ecosoc. The question
is: What is the status of Pawo? Is Pawo one of many NGOs that will sit in
Ecosoc? Does the fact that Pawo’s history comes from governments of the
continent coming together and determining that there was a need for an
organised voice of women and therefore creating Pawo, even before the OAU
was formed, mean that Pawo has a special place in the history of the
continent, and therefore should enjoy a special status - even within the
AU?

These are questions that one would like to pose. We want to say that they
are open questions, and that we should take positions. We should apply our
minds to them and really think deeply about these questions.

We have talked to the Africa Institute in Pretoria, and have asked them to
do some research, especially in terms of the role that Pawo has played over
the decades within the OAU in any debates. We know, for instance, that the
presently existing directorate within the office of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the AU, which in fact already existed during the OAU era, was
created as a result of the proposals of Pawo.

We believe that there might be many more decisions, just in terms of
history, that we would like to have insight into, just to have more of an
appreciation as to what role this organisation has played over the years.
The head of the Africa Institute thus tried to get some material when he
was last in Addis Ababa, and he reported that he didn’t find anything in
the archives. He proposed that perhaps we had to go to the Africa
Liberation Committee archives in Dar es Salaam or in Tanzania; we might be
able to find more material.

We also hope that the first headquarters of the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation, which was Algeria, might actually have a lot more material
that would reflect on the past, the history, the contribution and the role
of Pawo.

For the first 18 years of Pawo’s existence it was located in Algeria, and
for the past 17 years it has been located in Luanda, Angola. The next
conference is going to be held in South Africa, as I said, in 2006. We
believe that the preparations for that congress must be broadly reflective
of our position, namely that Pawo must not be an organisation owned only by
ruling party women. We will still process this matter with women from all
the parties in this organisation, but we hope that we will adopt an agreed
approach to the process, in particular the preparations towards the
congress and what issues need to be addressed.

Certainly,one of the issues that have to be addressed is the mandate of
Pawo in the new situation, in particular in the era of the AU. Should Pawo
perhaps be restructured?  These are some of the questions that we should
all look at. We should take a position to a council meeting that must take
place, and which Namibia has offered to host, in the course of 2005.

So, when the 2006 congress takes place in South Africa there must be clear
positions as to what the future of Pawo should be. Do we want to disband
Pawo? Do we want to create a new organisation, or do we want to give a
renewed mandate – perhaps strengthening whatever weaknesses we might be
finding within the structure of Pawo and its functioning at the present
moment?

It really is a great honour for me to have been given an opportunity to
speak about this important organisation in the history of the continent.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, we have just concluded a
month of celebrating the role and freedom of women in South Africa.

South African women have demonstrated that they can turn freedom and
opportunity into extraordinary accomplishments in every sphere of society -
from the corporate boardrooms in the large cities to their farms in the
deep rural areas. For many years our country was cut off from the rest of
the continent, whilst they selflessly provided support for those who
opposed the former oppressive regime.

Now we have rejoined our African brothers and sisters, and we have taken a
leadership role through Nepad and the African Union. The time has therefore
come for South Africa to open its arms to the women of the continent. As a
symbol of democracy and emancipation, South Africa should become a leading
advocate of women’s rights and ensure that the concerns of women are
represented in Nepad, the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament.

Pawo could be the vehicle of pursuit of these objectives. The role of Pawo
should therefore be clearly defined as that of a full participant in all
these African initiatives, so that we can participate in determining our
destiny. It is not acceptable that women become a token item on the
calendar and agenda to be discussed once a year and then forgotten. For
Pawo to become a representative of … [Time expired.] [Applause.]

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH:
Malibongwe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Igama lamakhosikazi!

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Phini likaSomlomo, Phini likaMongameli,
angiqale ngibonge kuSomlomo wale Ndlu ukuthi asinikeze ithuba lokuthi
sibambe iqhaza kule nkulumo-mpikiswano ngale nhlangano yobumbano lomama
base-Afrika. Lokhu kusinikeza ithuba njengabantu baseNingizimu Afrika
ukuthi nathi sifake igalelo kulezi zingxoxo.

Njengoba-ke siqala le nyanga kaZwelonke yamaGugu namaSiko, kufanele siqale
ngokuthi sibonge komama base-Afrika okungenxa yegalelo labo ukuthi
namhlanje sikhuluma njengabantu abakhululekile baseNingizimu Afrika.
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows)

[THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Praise!

HON MEMBERS: The name of women!

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, let me
start by thanking the Speaker of this House for giving us the opportunity
to participate in the debate on the unity of women’s organisations in
Africa. This gives us an opportunity as South African people to contribute
to these discussions.

As we celebrate the national month of heritage and culture, we acknowledge
the contribution made by African women because today we talk as free South
Africans.]

In acknowledgement of that heritage, I wish to dedicate this speech to the
endurance and strength of our grandmothers, the vision and patience of our
mothers and the dreams of our daughters. I hope women in civil society will
take up this debate, as their participation is crucial and will enrich and
shape the agenda of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation, Pawo.

Here I want to pause and salute the ANC Women’s League for getting Pawo off
the ground. The ANC Women’s League has kept the revival of Pawo on its
agenda and has had consultations with women in SADC in preparation for the
continent-wide conference of 2006, which Madam Speaker has spoken about.
This will be used to influence women on the continent to utilise Pawo as a
tool to fight poverty and the scourge of HIV and Aids, and for the
promotion of the continent as a contribution to the Nepad programme.

Membership of Pawo is open to all organisations recognised by their
governments. Putting this debate on the agenda is an invitation for all
political parties and NGOs to consider joining the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation and making the voice of women heard on the African continent.

Let me recognise, at this point, and acknowledge the excellent role played
by the Secretary-General of Pawo who has nurtured the organisation over
many years. I wish to pay tribute, also, to the government and people of
Angola for hosting Pawo for 17 years under very difficult economic and war-
ravaged conditions. And, of course, I wish to acknowledge the role played
by Algeria in hosting Pawo in the first 18 years of its life.

It has been said that Pawo was established in 1962 and it played a
significant role in building African unity and solidarity during a crucial
period in the struggle to free Africa from colonial bondage. I wish to note
here that Pawo was formed before the OAU. This is very interesting because,
in our own country, the Women’s Charter was adopted before the Freedom
Charter. So, this illustrates the role that African women have played in
Africa – a leadership role.

This is in sharp contrast to the image one has become used to of a helpless
African woman bent double under the heavy burden of poverty and oppression.
However, it is worth noting that the role of the African woman is not
always recognised or acknowledged. The dream of a peaceful and prosperous
Africa has been delayed by this lack of recognition of the important role
women can play and are playing.

African women are a rising public voice. The President of the Pan-African
Parliament, the Chair of the African Union Peace and Security Council, 50%
of the AU commissioners, Botswana’s governor of the reserve bank,
Mozambique’s Prime Minister and Nigeria’s finance Minister are all women.
[Applause.] Africa has women writers, poets, musicians, academics,
scientists and captains of industry. All this is so despite the hardship we
face of oppression, deprivation and marginalisation.

The AU has adopted the Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa in the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. The Secretary-General of the
United Nations released a message to the AU session on gender in Addis
Ababa on July of this year. He said, “Africa cannot develop unless women
exercise real power.” This highlights the important role and urgent aspects
of the Pawo agenda. I further quote what Kofi Annan said. He said:


      Increasingly, Africans understand that their continent cannot develop
      unless its women exercise real power in the home, in the local
      community, in the nation and in the union itself. Indeed, the New
      Partnership for Africa’s Development has set women’s advancement,
      along with the eradication of poverty, as its two key long-term
      objectives.


      But, let us be clear, inextricably linked with both of these is the
      need to halt the spread of HIV and Aids. The epidemic is proving a
      devastating obstacle to development, while taking an increasing and
      terrifying toll on Africa’s women. But women also have an
      indispensable part to play in all aspects of the struggle against the
      epidemic.

  No less important is the recognition of the role of women in the work for
  peace and security in Africa. Time and again women have played a
  constructive and essential part in peace processes. They are gradually
  finding a place at the negotiating table, in the implementation of peace
  agreements, and in post-conflict rehabilitation, reconstruction and
  disarmament. It is high time they were included in those processes in a
  more formalised way, at all levels and at all stages.

That is why I wish to acknowledge the role being played by our first lady,
hon Mrs Zanele Mbeki, in ensuring that women indeed do participate in the
negotiations. [Applause.]

With that support from the top and the support from our own President, the
task is no less urgent. The time is opportune for major advances for women
to exert real power in Africa. Pawo has an important role to play.

The feminisation of HIV and Aids, in terms of the statistics according to
which more women than men are dying and being infected, highlights the
context in which poverty, unequal gender relations and limited access to
health care are prevalent. Unequal power and gender relations limit women’s
ability to negotiate sexual relations and make informed choices. These are
issues that need the serious attention of Pawo.

UN Resolution 1325 calls for the full inclusion of women in international
peace and security processes, and action in four areas related to women and
peacekeeping. These four areas are participation of women in conflict
resolution; integration of gender perspectives in peacekeeping missions;
protection of women and girls in conflict zones; and, mainstreaming of
gender sensitisation in UN reporting and implementation systems.

The role and status of women, with respect to the institutions of
traditional leadership and practice, need special attention - particularly
with respect to land ownership and inheritance. An issue of growing concern
for African women is the issue of polygamy within the context of high
levels of poverty and communicable diseases. Although women are said to
participate willingly in these practices, the question needs to be asked
whether they do not just see it as an escape from poverty.

I wish to share here with you a prayer from the Masai of Kenya, which has
been given to us by Wanjiku Kabira who describes the grief of a young woman
at the prospect of an arranged polygamous marriage. She says:


  My father, why do you send me to Olei Kasero? Why do you send me to such
  an old man? Olei Kasero has 11 wives. You say he can look after me but
  he’s too old. Father, why do you send me to Olei Kasero?

Such songs are not unusual in traditional Kenyan societies. Women challenge
gender-based oppression in institutions such as marriage, polygamy and
political governance, which have perpetuated their marginalised positions.


With the launch of the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament, Pawo
can play an important role in the issues facing African women, as well as
the urgent need for the restructuring of international institutions,
particularly with respect to gender.

I wish, at this point, to acknowledge the role being played by our previous
Speaker of this Parliament, Dr Frene Ginwala, in the Commission on Human
Security and in putting human security on the international agenda. Writing
in the report on human security, she emphasised that rethinking security is
imperative for Africa. She said:

  Notable in Africa was the way the women’s movement linked struggles for
  national independence and security to the struggle for equality and
  social equity. Thinking about security broadened from an exclusive
  concern with state security to a concern with a security of the people.
  Along with this shift came the notion that states ought not to be the
  sole or main referent of security. Peoples’ interests or the interest of
  humanity become the focus.

The Speaker of our Parliament has outlined the questions and the tasks that
we must engage in, in rebuilding this powerful organisation, the Pan-
African Women’s Organisation. We need to look at its constitution and see
how to make it relevant for modern-day Africa.

We should ask: What should be the agenda of Pawo? How should Pawo be
structured and resourced in order to respond in an all-inclusive way to the
women of Africa as a whole and to the world? How should Pawo be made
relevant in modern times?

In summary, Pawo’s time has come to initiate an important and urgent
campaign for the rights and role of women in Africa. There is an
opportunity now for women’s organisations to participate in the Pan-African
Women’s Organisation and to campaign for women to exercise real power. In
particular, we can translate into reality the objectives of UN Resolution
1325 without delay since implementation of this landmark will be reviewed
this October. We can also campaign and support those living with HIV and
Aids to overcome the scourge, which undermines our efforts for peace and
development. We can campaign for the full participation of African women in
all spheres of life.

Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILE: Malibongwe! [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Let the name of women be praised!

HON MEMBERS: Let it be praised!  [Applause.]]

Ms F BATYI: Hon Deputy Speaker and members of the House, as the only
political party in South Africa which has a woman as its elected leader,
the ID feels that it should serve as an example to all African women that
women are just as competent as men. Pawo needs to harness the skills it
used to fight for the liberation of the continent to overcome the
challenges posed by diseases such as HIV and Aids, as well as by food
security and environmental degradation.

Women throughout Africa had an important role to play in the resolution of
conflicts. Pawo must, therefore, spearhead a movement for peace on the
continent and find ways of preventing conflicts and wars as far as
possible.

It is widely known that women are the main pillars of many African
economies. Despite this, they do not, in many cases, own the land on which
they grow food and market what they produce, and they do not get the
proceeds from the sales. Pawo must change this scenario.

Pawo should also drive gender processes in conjunction with the various
state mechanisms such as the Office on the Status of Women at the national
level, and with SADC, Nepad, the AU and other organs at regional economic
community level.

The ID looks forward to working with this organisation to advance women’s
liberation on the African continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP is conscious of the significant
and important role Pawo has the potential of filling. Having been in
existence for 41 years and comprising a membership of 53 African countries,
prosperity, freedom, peace and justice on the continent of Africa are
worthy goals. With determination and conviction, women in this organisation
may once again leave their mark on history. Real, sustained human
development in Africa can only happen if African women are not sidelined or
disregarded.

Today, because of the courage and tenacity of many women, individually and
collectively, we in South Africa have realised a decade of political
freedom and the ACDP salutes the women of Africa.

Today the issue of gender equality is firmly on the agenda in political,
social and economic discussion the world over. Women’s organisations are
often surprised at the relative ease with which they have succeeded in
ensuring women’s representivity in many bodies. The African heads of state,
for example, have unanimously endorsed and accepted the need for women’s
representivity in the affairs of the African Union.

Justification for the oppression and exclusion of women is becoming more
and more indefensible each day. It is clear that neither culture nor
religion can be used as an excuse for the oppression and exclusion of
women.

Women have led throughout history, sometimes at the fore, and mostly behind
the scenes. Today women are succeeding in taking their place, not just
behind the scenes, but also at the scene. However, the struggle is not
over, with the majority of women starving, their children dying, and too
often being victims of rape. Women are unemployed in large numbers and,
again, too often abused by men.

There are challenges that still face women in leadership and one of these
is: if women in power are going to be intoxicated with that power, they
will just become the enemies of women, and their conduct will undermine the
progress that has been made.

The voices of African women must be heard. Many of these voices are crying
out in frustration and pain, whilst they still suffer in intolerable
circumstances. Women are suffering under the scourge of abuse and violence
for just being born women, and many are still treated …[Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI:  Deputy Speaker and hon members, this debate is most
appropriate as it comes after we have just celebrated women’s month. There
is merit in the call for women in Africa to stand up and speak out.

We call on those communities that, to this day, do not allow the mingling
of and attendance by women at their religious services, and even funerals.
Such communities hide behind their culture. Culture and customs should not
enhance discrimination.

We call on those men, especially politicians, who keep discriminating
against their womenfolk, yet claim to be nonsexist, to desist from the
practice. The ability of women to deliver when shackles of womanhood and
patronage have been removed has been informed by the election of the first
woman bishop – Bishop Vashti McKenzie of the African Methodist Episcopal
Church - at the general conference in Cincinnati, Ohio, in the United
States.

As head of denominations in Botswana, Swaziland, Mozambique and Lesotho,
she did very good work to improve the cause of the church by renovating
existing structures, putting up new ones and increasing membership. She
achieved this feat in four years, proving that where there is a will, there
is a way; and that being a woman is not an impairment.

Empowering women is not the responsibility of politicians and governments
alone. All entities in society should accept that women were not created
from the crumbs of the soil that fell from the master’s table as he created
men. They are happy people, created in the image of God.

Women know that they are mothers, wives, workers, peacemakers and even
undertakers. Their integrity should not be called into question, because if
that happens, the proverbial worm will turn, and you will hear expressions
such as: “Wathint’ abafazi, wathint’ imbokodo” [When you strike a woman,
you strike a rock], or they will sing: “Suta suta wena Strydom, fa o sa
suti, re a go gata” [Move, move, Strydom; if you do not move we will step
on you], signalling that whoever is in the way, wherever he or she is, he
or she should give way. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N R MOKOTO: Hon Deputy Speaker, Deputy President, members and members of
the public in the gallery, I greet you all.

I want to make the assertion, echoing the previous speakers, that women’s
empowerment is the cornerstone of community development. It is very
important to reflect on the formative period of the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation, Pawo, whose task has been to unite women across the continent
into a cohesive force for enhanced mobilisation on issues that affect
womenfolk and for the broad liberation of the people of Africa as a whole.

Throughout the period preceding the 19th century, there was no single or
formalised organisation or movement that provided leadership, clarity and
vision in terms of representing the views, concerns and struggles of women
on the African continent. The subsequent launch and existence of Pawo
managed, to a certain extent, to close the existing gap that had gradually
and consistently become wider and remained unfilled.

Apart from providing a home for all the forces of change at the time, the
Pan-African Women’s Organisation has been a vehicle through which African
women from all walks of life could voice, lobby and advocate for
recognition of their daily frustrations, concerns and aspirations to their
governments and the world at large.

We must appreciate the fact that the coming into being of Pawo coincided
with a time when the political and economic repression in Africa was at its
height. Whatever the case, through its massive contacts and networking both
in government and broadly in the liberation movement, Pawo managed to
influence the continent and the world in favour of women’s politics. It
revolutionised and elevated women’s politics from being regarded as mere
local gossip, which was very private and beyond public scrutiny, to the
regional, national and international mainstream political arena.

Today, as we enter Heritage Month, we must recognise that institutions like
Pawo will continue to occupy a very special place in our hearts. We, as
Africans and women in particular, must take pride in our forebears who for
centuries carried the responsibility of instilling leadership, hope and a
common vision for a nonracial, nonsexist, prosperous and democratic global
society. We shall continue to appreciate the level of commitment displayed
at all levels for the cause of the women’s struggle throughout the height
of its massive activism, even during a period of organisational weakness.

As we entered the 21st century and adopted this millennium as the African
century, we entered the terrain fully aware of the massive challenges
facing the peoples of Africa, the world and especially women and young
women. Whatever the case, whilst appreciating the level of progress made by
different governments across the world in relation to the introduction and
adoption of policies and legislation that promote the empowerment of women
and that ensure women also take positions of authority in the political
sphere, a lot still has to be done in other sectors such as finance and the
economy.

Of significance is the placing of gender and equity issues on the agenda at
the recent ILO meeting attended by the Minister of Labour, Comrade
Membathisi Mdladlana, and his tripartite delegation comprising business,
labour and the government. This attitude is very encouraging for most of us
women, and we urge that there be more co-operation from the rest of the
business sector in our country.

In the same breath, I want to dwell on the relevance of Pawo in today’s
struggle for women’s emancipation. We must acknowledge that recent
developments in the political arena of our continent had relegated Pawo to
the status of a totally isolated organisation, seen as an exclusive society
of a few old and politically connected women in terms of which it could no
longer purport to represent the will of all women on the continent; this,
given the fact that many of our women on the continent, young and old,
continue to suffer from political, social, cultural and economic
marginalisation arising from centuries-old customs and attitudes
detrimental to their complete integration into the life of their society.

We are now posed with the challenge to reshape the organisation into a mass-
based and diverse women’s movement that will infuse broader public
participation of all women across the age spectrum, both individually and
collectively on the continent. This will also assist the organisation to
garner collective and individual support and ownership for its programmes
and campaigns both locally and globally.

In that respect, we call on women’s organisations, stokvel societies –
mogodisano – and individual women, whether young or old, and on the entire
civil society to make a joint effort to advocate for support of this
visionary organisation, called Pawo, in order for it to be a vibrant
organisation that will collectively face the challenges and the remnants of
colonialism and patriarchy in our society.

We must endeavour to facilitate the integration of women into the economic
life of their societies, and encourage young women to make full use of
opportunities made available by the democratic government, which promotes
access to scarce skills, new technologies, employment opportunities,
education and information programmes. We must strive to deepen the level of
understanding of issues affecting women in Africa and across the world,
especially amongst young women. We must ensure that they are part of
decision-making processes in order to enable them to conceptualise and
realise their visions and common objectives for their society.

Using the existing resources and capacities that we have on the continent,
we have to latch onto the milestones that have been achieved in the 42
years of the existence of Pawo. We must ensure that we build a strong layer
of leadership that will inject vibrancy, vigilance and dynamism into the
organisation. Young women must be supported and recognised as effective and
active agents of change, not recipients thereof.

The role of young women in the broader struggle for the socioeconomic
development of our continent remains an immense one. However, the support
and recognition accorded by governments of the world and by institutions
like the AU, the UN and so forth to women’s liberty have opened a lot of
access points for women to diverse opportunities in order to empower
themselves. This places them in a more advantageous position to effectively
address the issues facing them today as Africans and citizens of the world.

The advantages of politicking in a globalising world have presented us with
many opportunities and challenges, which we never imagined or anticipated.
Today, women are more empowered to interact in a globalising world, an
advantage that has given more urgency, impetus and space to issues that
affect women. Also, this has enabled women across the world to share common
visions and frustrations on issues that affect them on a daily basis.

The onset of ICTs has also assisted in terms of global mobilisation and
advocacy on the plight of women across the world. These efficiencies have
resulted in concerted global solidarity campaigns, which have put pressure
on governments to abandon some inhuman policies targeted at women.

Amina Lawal of Nigeria, who was due to be stoned to death, is a case in
point that attracted not only global solidarity and media campaigns to
abolish some aspects of sharia law practices in Nigeria and Africa, but,
like never before, this case generally created new, necessary and diverse
platforms to elevate the level of women’s politics across the broader
political landscape previously dominated by men.

For the first time, technological interventions have brought with them
highly efficient communications networks that have presented new
opportunities and possibilities in terms of the complete reversal of the
inequalities facing women.

Of late, we have seen an increasing recognition and acknowledgement of
women’s fundamental role in the national and international socioeconomic
system. In view of the latest developments in our country, we have to
congratulate the ANC Youth League on having given leadership to the broader
South African society in terms of its adoption of a 40% representation of
women in leadership across all levels. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, hon members, from the PAC’s point of view,
the Pan-African Women’s Organisation should be a women’s movement,
independent of government interference. Its key objective should be to
rally African women under the banner of Pan-Africanism. It should revisit
and revive the strategies and objectives that inform the long-standing
vision and plans for African development. Those strategies and objectives
were advanced by great Pan-Africanist visionaries such as Sobukwe,
Mothopeng, Nkrumah and Lumumba.

The Pan-African Women’s Organisation should serve to unite African women,
with the goal of working towards the unity of African women. In this
regard, it should be accredited to all the organs and structures of the
African Union. The women of this continent have the task of shifting
Africa’s paradigm away from dominant neoliberal ideas towards continental
unity based on a different set of principles, policies, programmes,
processes and participation.

The Pan-African Women’s Organisation should stand out as a premier
continental women’s structure that is clearly opposed to globalisation,
poverty, foreign debt, macroeconomic frameworks and development plans that
are inimical to the lives of women. It should elevate the lived experience
of African women and use its influence to challenge governments to change
their policy directions in favour of bringing about social, political and
economic transformation for women of the African continent.

It should be organised as an inclusive structure that does not play to
sectarian tendencies, which serve to marginalise millions of women. This
means the establishment of national platforms that organise at the local
and national levels and intervene to change government policies in such a
way that they will change regional and continental structures and
relations. It should engage women in different sectors and form regional,
continental and international alliances through which to engage in, or
around, continental structures and institutions in order to influence and
radically change policy. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the MF would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Pan-African Women’s Organisation on their
42nd anniversary which fell on 31 July 2004. Mothers of our continent, we
salute you.

We acknowledge the status of Pawo in the African continent and globally. We
are proud that this organisation comprises membership of all 53 African
countries. Regarding this organisation, South Africa holds an office for
the southern region of Africa.

With poverty being Africa’s major challenge and with women often victims of
the harsh reality of circumstances, we are pleased that Pawo exists, and
that it is determined to overcome these challenges and liberate women
throughout Africa. South African women have, thankfully, found liberation
through our national Constitution of 1996. But, many African women do not
enjoy privileges such as human rights - as one may recall Amina Lawal and
what she faced for having a baby out of wedlock.

The MF feels that the Pan-African Women’s Organisation plays a very
important role in the liberation and upliftment of African women. Their
aims and cause are all in line with human rights. We need to support Pawo
to ensure that human rights will be exercised as African rights. This will
benefit the continent in our social and economic development.

We also know that women play a very important role in the fight against HIV
and Aids. By uniting and liberating all African women, we may increase our
army in the fight against disease, and HIV and Aids throughout the African
continent.

The MF calls for the earnest incorporation of, and assistance to Pawo in
our efforts to stamp out poverty, stop the spread of HIV and Aids, and
promote liberation and integration of African women. We salute the women,
again. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, having noted the
salient points highlighted by speakers before me, allow me, in broad
general terms, to state that the heading of the subject of debate is a
little troubling, because it conjures up a sad scenario of a belated
awakening of a lethargic patriarchal society, despite the great strides
taken regarding women and the unprecedented human achievements gained in
the fields of science, technology and human development.

In the context of basic human rights entrenched in our Constitution that
espouses equality, and the unequivocal clarion call for a nonracist,
nonsexist and democratic South Africa, one wonders why South Africa, Africa
and indeed the whole world should be belatedly debating,“the voice, place
and role of women”.

Women and children, by virtue of being human beings, deserve to be heard,
cherished and respected so that they can occupy their rightful place in
society and enjoy full participation in human affairs at all levels of
society, irrespective of sectarian positions.

Patriarchs, let us face it: Women’s breath and soul of life do not ensue
from, nor are they dependent on, male superiority and chauvinism. Women are
inextricably an integral part of society and nations, period. The voice of
women in general and of African women, specifically in Africa, must be
heard. This is and should be non-negotiable.

Let’s not speak of, and about, women as though they are aliens from outer
space and have recently landed on planet earth. Perhaps, we need a Ms
Soukeyna Ndiaye Ba, President of the Women’s Development Enterprise in
Africa, to jolt us a bit by informing us that Africa is overflowing with
women leaders. They lack only training and the means to bloom, yet they
have simultaneously and effectively contributed to the advancement of
families and communities at the economic and sociopolitical levels.

Don’t even try to ignore the price they have paid in human conflicts and
the struggles for freedom. It is sad to state that not enough recognition
is given to their voice, place and role in all strata of society. Yes,
attention is being given, perhaps too slowly or even grudgingly, if not
reluctantly.

Compatriots on the other side of the gender divide have already and will
succinctly sketch out the long, sad history of the struggle for
recognition, rights and contributions of women over the past decades and
towards a future full of recognition and participation in the affairs of
communities and Pan-African states. I can only pay tribute to all the
efforts made by our mothers, wives, sisters and daughters, with the hope
that those with hardened patriarchal mind-sets will shift their paradigms.
The silence must be broken. The ceiling must be cracked. Women have a right
to be and to live life to the full, making their abundant and generous
talents available for the wellbeing of all members of our society.

It is not only through organs such as the Pan-African Parliament that women
should be heard and allowed - for lack of a better term or apt word - to
play their role positively and to contribute to the welfare and affairs of
human endeavour. Develop a woman and develop a nation.

A leina la bomme le rorisiwe. Nako e gorogile. [Praise be to the women’s
name. Now is the time.]

Paying glowing tribute to women is good but it is marred by the tragic and
brutal abuse of women, the girl-child and even the boy-child in our
societies. Rampant rapes, woman-bashing and the outright murder of women
and girls is a cancer that must be fought tooth and nail. Women need to
challenge governments and establishments not to shed their responsibilities
in curbing the assault on womenfolk. We men, born of women, need to bow our
heads in shame and stand together with our womenfolk to deal with the
callous attack on women and femininity. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Malibongwe! [Praise the name
of women.] [Laughter.] You have never heard me say that before, have you?

Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, I hope that my being the last speaker in
this debate, and that is what I am, doesn’t send out the wrong message,
namely that we need a man to have the final word on this subject.
[Laughter.] This is definitely not the final word. I have been given the
task, to some extent, to fill in the gaps and not to repeat what other
people have said, but to emphasise and to confirm many of the good points
that have been made in this debate. Some people call this role of speaking
at the end of the debate a sweeping role. Therefore, you become a sweeper.
Jeremy Cronin said earlier today, when I said I would have to sweep, that
it was good, because it was high time that men learned to sweep as well. I
will attempt to play this role as a sweeper.

The Speaker gave us a good sense of what the challenges are when we
consider the role of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation on this African
continent in addressing the many challenges that we and women face, and
that we as men have to take the co-responsibility for. Above all, she said
we are left in this debate with a number of open questions. This cannot be
the last word, but we should apply our minds, and we in this Parliament
should play a leading role in defining the role that the Pan-African
Women’s Organisation can and should play.

She also made the point that it cannot just be for members of the ruling
party or ruling parties in a country alone. Despite its proud history, it
has to be representative of all the women of this continent. In our country
we have to make sure that all women have a sense of ownership of this
women’s organisation that has this critical role to play on our continent.

Of course the constitution will have to be re-examined. The organisation
has to be seen to be representative, and there has to be a feeling of
ownership amongst the people and women of our continent. It must vigorously
take up issues that women are facing every day of their lives. It must take
up gender issues vigorously. It must ensure real and meaningful
participation of women in all the structures of the African Union and the
Pan-African Parliament.

Above all, it should result in real empowerment of the women of our
continent. It has to fight all forms of discrimination. When we talk about
this empowerment of women, we clearly need to understand what the current
reality and context are. What is it that disempowers women? There are many
things that disempower women on our continent and in our country. Johanna
Kehler of Nadel put it this way, and she ascribed it to persistent
patriarchal systems more than anything else. She says:

  These patriarchal systems, as well as male domination in all spheres of
  society, define why women are continuously confronted with inequalities
  and why they remain oppressed and discriminated against despite
  commitment to gender equality, as expressed within South Africa’s
  Constitution and our legislation.

And she goes on to say that society’s seeming acceptance of male dominance
that defines women by their reproductive and domestic responsibilities is
one of the key attitudinal reasons that women remain oppressed and that
gender equality has not yet been achieved. We are still a long way from
achieving genuine gender equality in our country and on our continent.

She also talks about socialisation. Clearly a lot of it is about male
attitude. Socialisation begins at a very early age. That is perhaps one of
our biggest challenges. Disempowerment happens when people do not receive
education, when women are deprived of education and when we have the wrong
kind of education as well.

I believe gender education should be a key element of our new curriculum.
Young children should be made aware of the realities of our society, of the
challenges that we face and of our constitutional commitment to gender
equality and women’s right. Young children should be made aware of those
things. Young children should be taught at an early age not to be sexist in
their behaviour, and to combat sexism and all forms of racial
discrimination. They should grow up in that environment, and that will make
a real difference towards the ultimate achievement of our goals.

As we are debating, we are preparing for the World Summit on Sustainable
Development follow-up. One of the targets set by the World Summit on
Sustainable Development two years ago was the promotion of gender equality
and empowerment of women. A specific target was set to eliminate gender
disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and at
all levels by 2015.

We are a long way from meeting those goals, but those are challenges we set
for ourselves. This summit happened on our soil and in our country, and we
have to be serious in our attempts to meet these challenges and these
goals.

Another thing that results in disempowerment of women is – and this is
quite a sensitive subject – customary law. We must be careful that
customary law does not entrench customs and conventions that keep women
trapped in a patriarchal society. Patricia McFadden writes:

  In the context of Southern Africa and across the continent, the existence
  of customary law only compounds the difficulties faced by black women, in
  particular, in exercising their rights. In many countries it supersedes
  the constitutional guarantees to women as citizens.

In Zimbabwe, for example, which is raised as an example, there is
specifically a clause in their constitution which gives customary law
precedence over the rest of the constitution. These are matters that we
need to be aware of. They need to be taken up by the Pan- African Women’s
Organisation in their participation in the Pan- African structures and the
African Union.

Zimbabwean women have been fighting this for many years, but often male
judges block their attempts to break down these barriers that customs and
conventions put between black women and the realisation of their civil
rights.

To give an example, I would like to reiterate what was said earlier on by
the Deputy Minister of Health. She spoke about polygamy. I am not here to
judge whether polygamy is a good practice or not. But I dare say … Kader
Asmal wakes up …[Laughter.] … that if you were to do a survey here in this
Parliament and beyond, and ask men and women what they feel about polygamy,
whether we should we retain it, whether it should be allowed or not, you
would get a different outcome. Far more men would say: “Yes, we believe
polygamy should be allowed. It is part of our custom; there is nothing
wrong with it.” And women would say the opposite.

Sheila Camerer said that this exercise was done in their committee, and I
presume that it produced the same result. You can go anywhere and it will
produce the same result. Therefore, we can’t just say customary law and
customs are there forever. They are there to be critically evaluated. They
must reflect real needs and real rights and must be compatible with the
Constitution.

These are struggles that are going to have to be faced on the African
continent. Women have to be given real choices. If given choices, it’s
quite clear that in most cases they would opt for a more dignified life.
They will vote against those barriers to the achievement of a more
dignified life. That is quite clear.

I think that as we talk about the future of the Pan-African Women’s
Organisation, we have to say that it has a gender activism role. It must
have. We should proclaim ourselves to be gender activists; we shouldn’t be
ashamed of that. The ANC is proud of its vision and commitment to a
nonracial, nonsexist South Africa. We are proud of that, but we need a
vision for a nonsexist continent in which all women are able to live lives
of dignity and enjoy rights equal to those enjoyed by men.

We need strong women’s representation in the structures of the African
Union and the Pan-African Parliament to help us to achieve that. The
reality is that much has changed here in this Parliament and in our country
as a result of the struggle of the women of our country. The very fact that
one third of our parliamentarians are now women, almost 50% of the members
of the Cabinet are women and four out of nine of the Premiers in our
country are women is not unimportant in that struggle to ensure that laws
in our country are gender sensitive and that the Budget is gender
sensitive, Mr Manuel.

The reality is that women’s participation in decision-making structures and
women’s occupation of leadership roles in society make the big difference
as to whether we achieve these goals or not. We can talk about education,
but the truth is that if education is dominated by male policy-makers and
by male educators, it is very unlikely, or less likely, that those messages
of gender equality will go out strongly to young learners. That is a
reality. Therefore, these achievements are not unimportant.

People out there would say: So, big deal - 30% of this Parliament are women
- how has that changed our lives? However, the truth is that it is an
essential and very important ingredient towards changing people’s lives.
Laws have changed. Attitudes still need to change a lot more, and we have a
long way to go.

We have to help define the role of the Pan-African Women’s Organisation,
but it needs to complement the work done by other organisations. It can’t
just do it on its own. It needs to be the voice of all the women of the
continent and it needs to truly represent women’s needs and women’s
aspirations on this continent. It needs to be complemented by organisations
of civil society.

We have strong women’s organisations on our continent that we can be proud
of. We don’t want to marginalise them. We want those organisations to be
part of this process of transforming our continent in many different ways,
for example by the eradication of poverty and disease, and by having a more
educated continent, but a continent where men and women are equal; and that
is a massive challenge. If we don’t mobilise, then we won’t achieve. The
Pan-African Women’s Organisation should be seen as a mobilisation tool.

The ANC Women’s League has done that. We have a lot to be proud of. It has
played a critically important role in ensuring the achievement of the
rights and the gains that have been made in our country. [Applause.] But
that is not to say that other organisations or women who are not members of
the Women’s League haven’t played a very important role; they have. The
Women’s League is now confronted with a number of challenges. The Women’s
League should not just strengthen itself as an entity, but should play a
leading role in achieving unity amongst the women of our country, and
achieving these goals of a genuinely nonsexist country with true gender
equality. It cannot do that on its own. It doesn’t intend doing that on its
own. But it has to rise to that challenge.

An appeal to the Women’s League, and I am sure that they will take this up
very strongly, is that they must put meaning to this notion of a people’s
contract, of working together towards achieving these noble objectives. The
Women’s League is the one organisation that has a presence all over the
country. In other words, it has to play a leading role. It cannot do it
alone, but its role has to be assumed and respected. So, we would appeal to
all women to work closely with the Women’s League to help us achieve our
goals.
Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise the name of women.]
Debate concluded.


QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr P J GOMOMO: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall  move  on  the
next sitting day of the House as a subject for discussion:

   The introduction of a single national Public Service without compromising
   the advantages of proximity to the community  and  flexibility  of  local
   government in service delivery.

Mr A H NEL: Chair, I hereby give notice  that  I  shall  move  on  the  next
sitting day of the House as a subject for discussion:
*****
      The potential for rural instability in the  light  of  the  fact  that
      insufficient money has been budgeted to meet  government  promises  on
      land reform.

Ms N R NTSHULANA-BHENGU: Deputy Chairperson, I hereby  give  notice  that  I
shall move  on  the  next  sitting  day  of  the  House  as  a  subject  for
discussion:

      The coming local government elections, believing that these  elections
      are  an  anchor  in  the  consolidation  of  democracy  and   national
      development in our country.

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that  I  shall  move  on  the
next sitting day of the House as a subject for discussion:

      Broad-based black economic empowerment as  a  tool  to  bring  greater
      numbers of South Africans into the mainstream economy.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move  on  the
next sitting day of the House as a subject for discussion:

      The restructuring of the United Nations and its agencies to serve  and
      protect the  poor  of  the  world,  who  constitute  the  majority  of
      humanity.

Ms R TALJAARD: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall  move  on  the  next
sitting day of the House:

      That the House -


        1) Notes -


              a) South Africa’s second quarter Gross Domestic Product growth
                 figure of 3,9% fuelled by recent interest rate cuts;


           (b)   that this growth, while a highly laudable  improvement  on
                 the 2,9% growth expected for this financial  year,  is  far
                 from the more than 6% required to fuel employment creation;
                 and

           (c)   that this  growth  is  supported  by  the  growth  in  the
                 property market and a sound performance by agriculture  and
                 manufacturing, despite  the  challenges  posed  by  a  5,9%
                 increase in unit labour costs and rand strength; and

        2) calls on the government to proceed with labour market reform  to
           curtail rocketing unit labour costs and to deal responsibly with
           the panel on foreign ownership of land and  the  Black  Economic
           Empowerment Charter in the agricultural sector.


                            BIODIVERSITY PROTOCOL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

  As South Africa is a signatory to the Biodiversity Protocol and as the
  National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act comes into force
  today I call on the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs and the
  Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to implement environmental
  impact assessment requirements for GMOs forthwith.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): If there are no objections,  I  shall
put the motion. Hon member, is that an objection?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: It is a point of  order,  Chair.  I  think  such  motions
should be circulated amongst political parties before they are read  in  the
House. Our party did not get this motion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S Botha): I will take that as an objection  and
this will then become a notice of motion.

Mr K D S DURR: On a point of order,  Madam  Chairperson:  The  fact  of  the
matter is that I do not think that any member of this House  can  object  to
the  House  calling  for  the  implementation  of  an  Act  which  is   law.
[Interjections.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: I rise on a point of order, Madam Chair. I think it is  just
a convention and a courtesy that a motion without notice  is  circulated  to
all the parties beforehand, and that is the principle that we are  objecting
to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs C-S BOTHA): Thank you. We have concurred.


  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF DECISIONS OF 1999
       BEIJING CONGRESS – UNIVERSAL POSTAL UNION, IN TERMS OF SECTION

                           231(2) OF CONSTITUTION

Mr M K LEKGORO: Madam Chair, the Universal Postal Union is an
intergovernmental organisation and a specialised agency of the United
Nations. It was founded in 1874 to encourage collaboration and development
within the international postal sector. With the dawn of democracy, South
Africa emerged from years of international isolation and, amongst other
things, was admitted to the Universal Postal Union and thus became a
signatory.

The UPU participates in the modernisation of postal services. It deals with
regulatory, legislative, operational, economic and commercial aspects of
international postal services. It passes laws that bind member states on
postal matters.

The plenipotentiary council, a permanent body of the UPU, met in Beijing in
1999 and amended its constitution subject to ratification by member states.
The plenipotentiary amended article 22 to ensure that general regulations
are binding on all member states. Article 25 makes provision for the people
responsible for signature authentication, ratification and approval of Acts
adopted by the Union. Article 27 gives member countries the right to accede
to any additional protocols and other Acts of the union at any time.
Article 29 gives member countries the right to present proposals concerning
the Acts of the union, either to congress or between congresses.

In order for South Africa to have voting rights and to participate fully in
the next congress of the UPU, it must have ratified the 1999 Beijing
congress amendments. The Department of Communications has confirmed that
the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development has scrutinised
the final Acts and decisions of the 1999 Beijing congress and has found no
conflict with domestic law. The Department of Foreign Affairs has also
scrutinised the final Acts and decisions of the 1999 Beijing congress and
advised that South Africa should sign the constitution and the convention
of the UPU.

After its deliberations on the matter, the portfolio committee wishes to
recommend that Parliament should ratify the decisions of the 1999 Beijing
congress.

There was no debate.

Decisions of 1999 Beijing Congress – Universal Postal Union approved.

The House adjourned at 17:52.
                                 __________


                AANOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          THURSDAY, 26 AUGUST 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 26676 of
              16 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         26 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (i)     Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              26648 of 4 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 27 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 August 2004:


         (i)     Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the Joint
         Committees mentioned, viz:

         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Women:

              African National Congress

                  Luthuli, Dr A N
                  Maine, Mrs M S
                  Makasi, Mrs X C
                  Meruti, Ms M V
                  Morutoa, Ms M R
                  Ngwenya, Mrs M L
                  Ntuli, Mrs B M
                  Tshwete, Ms P

                  Direko, Ms I W (Alt)
                  Hajaig, Ms F (Alt)
                  Mabena, Mr D C (Alt)
                  Manana, Ms M N S (Alt)
                  Maserumule, Mr F T (Alt)
                  Morobi, Mrs D M (Alt)
                  Ngele, Ms N J (Alt)
                  Ngcobo, Ms B T (Alt)

              Democratic Alliance

                  Botha, Mrs C-S
                  Semple, Ms J A

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Vos, Ms S C

              Independent Democrats

                  Batyi, Ms F

              United Democratic Movement

                  Mdaka, Ms N M

         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:

              African National Congress

                  Bhengu, Ms P
                  Bogopane-Zulu, Mrs H I
                  Kholwane, Mr S E
                  Kondlo, Ms N C
                  Mohlaloga, Mr M R
                  Moss, Mr M I
                  Newhoudt-Druchen, Mrs W S
                  Tobias, Ms T V

                  Bhengu, Mr F (Alt)
                  Chohan-Khota, Ms F I (Alt)
                  Louw, Mr T J (Alt)
                  Makgate, Ms M W (Alt)
                  Mogase, Mr I D (Alt)
                  Mthethwa, Mr E N (Alt)
                  Ngcobo, Ms B T (Alt)
                  Nzimande, Mr L P M (Alt)

              Democratic Alliance

                  Morkel, Mr C M
                  Weber, Ms H
                  Swathe, Mr M M (Alt)

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Dhlamini, Mr B W (Alt)
                  Roopnarain, Dr U

              United Democratic Movement

                  Mdaka, Ms N M

         Joint Budget Committee:

              African National Congress

                  Asiya, Mr S E
                  Cwele, Dr S C
                  Hogan, Ms B A
                  Kannemeyer, Mr B W
                  Mabe, Ms L L
                  Mashiane, Ms L M
                  Nene, Mr N M
                  Schneemann, Mr G D
                  Sikakane, Mr M R
                  Zita, Mr L

                  Baloyi, Mr M R (Alt)
                  Davies, Dr R H (Alt)
                  Moloto, Mr K A (Alt)
                  Sithole, Mr D J (Alt)

              Democratic Alliance

                  Rabie, Dr P J
                  Taljaard, Ms R

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Smith, Mr P F (Alt)
                  Woods, Dr G G

              United Democratic Movement

                  Stephens, Mr M

              African Christian Democratic Party

                  Durr, Mr K D S

         Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

              African National Congress

                  Asmal, Prof A K
                  Bloem, Mr D V
                  Booi, Mr M S
                  Chikunga, Mrs L S
                  Diale, Mr L N
                  Fihla, Mr N B
                  Kalako, Mr M U
                  Koornhof, Dr G W
                  Mathebe, Mr P M
                  Maziya, Mr A M
                  Mgabadeli, Ms H C
                  Mngomezulu, Mr G P
                  Morwamoche, Mr K W
                  Ntuli, Mr S B
                  Phungula, Mr J P
                  Rwexana, Ms S P
                  Sibande, Mr M P
                  Sithole, Mr D J
                  Sotyu, Ms M M
                  Tolo, Bishop L J
                  Van Wyk, Ms A

              Democratic Alliance

                  Jankielsohn, Mr R
                  Sayedali-Shah, Moulana M R
                  Schmidt, Adv H C
                  Swart, Adv P S
                  Taljaard, Ms R

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Mncwango, Mr M A
                  Ndlovu, Mr V B


     (2)    The following members have been appointed to serve on the
         Committee mentioned, viz:

         Standing Committee on Private Members' Legislative Proposals and
         Special Petitions:

              African National Congress

                  Ainslie, Mr A R
                  Carrim, Mr Y I
                  Gerber, Mr P A
                  Kondlo, Ms N C
                  Magwanishe, Mr G B
                  Maine, Mrs M S
                  Montsitsi, Mr S D
                  Mshudulu, Mr S A
                  Tsenoli, Mr S L
                  Tshwete, Ms P

              Democratic Alliance

                  Jankielsohn, Mr R
                  Lowe, Mr C M

              Inkatha Freedom Party

                  Mars, Mrs I (Alt)
                  Zulu, Prince N E

              United Democratic Movement

                  Sigcau, Ms S N

              Pan Africanist Congress of Azania

                  Likotsi, Mr M T

              Minority Front

                  Rajbally, Ms S



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Secretary to Parliament for 2003.

2.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 126-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Sector Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 39-
         2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 50-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 140-2004].


                           FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


         (i)     Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 26704 of 20 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Water
         Affairs and Forestry of the National Assembly, as well as referral
         to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
         of Joint Rule 160, on 30 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Water Services Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister
         of Water Affairs and Forestry on 27 August 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

National Assembly

1.    Membership of ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly:

     The following members have been nominated to represent the South
     African Parliament in the African Caribbean Pacific-European Union (ACP-
     EU) Joint Parliamentary Assembly for the duration of the term of the
     current Parliament: Dr R H Davies (ANC), Ms D G Nhlengethwa (ANC) and
     Mr D H M Gibson (DA).




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance
         of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
         respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Democratic
         Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

     (c)    Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria for the
         Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
         with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     (d)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
         of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

2.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Education, Training and
         Development Practices Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 44-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Accounting
         Services Sector Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 38-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
         Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 54-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Chemical Industries
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 40-2004].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Wholesale and Retail
         Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 62-2004].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverage
         Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 46-2004].

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the Tourism, Hospitality and
         Sport Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 60-2004].

     (h)    Report and Financial Statements of the Police, Security, Legal,
         Justice and Correctional Services Sector Education and Training
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 55-2004].

     (i)    Report and Financial Statements of the Mining Qualifications
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 53-2004].

     (j)    Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government, Water
         and Related Services Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 51-2004].

     (k)    Report and Financial Statements of the Health and Welfare Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 48-2004].

     (l)    Report and Financial Statements of the Clothing, Textiles,
         Footwear and Leather Sector Education and Training Authority for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 41-2004].

     (m)    Report and Financial Statements of the Media, Advertising,
         Publishing, Printing and Packaging Sector Education and Training
         Authority (MAPPP) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (n)    Report and Financial Statements of the Information Systems,
         Electronics and Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 49-
         2004].

     (o)    Report and Financial Statements of the Primary Agriculture
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 155-2004].

     (p)    Report and Financial Statements of Transport Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 61-
         2004].

     (q)    Report and Financial Statements of the Forest Industries
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 47-2004].

     (r)    Report and Financial Statements of the Sector Education and
         Training Authority for Secondary Agriculture for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 58-2004].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 - Department of Science and
     Technology for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 145-2004].



COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Decisions
     of 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union, dated 27 August
     2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
         request for approval by Parliament of the Decisions of 1999
         Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union, referred to it,
         recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Decisions.

     Request to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 2 from "ATC0827e"

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Financial
     Administration of Parliament and Provincial Legislatures, dated 25
     August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance reports as follows:

              This Report is made in terms of a resolution adopted by the
              National Assembly on 24 June 2004. This resolution instructed
              the Portfolio Committee on Finance to take over a mandate
              given by the House to the Ad Hoc Committee on Finance on 18
              June, viz to "consider the subject of the financial
              administration of Parliament with a view to introducing a bill
              dealing with the matter, in accordance with the Assembly
              Rules". The Portfolio Committee was instructed to confer on
              this matter with the Select Committee on Finance of the
              National Council of Provinces and to report to the National
              Assembly by 31 August 2004.


              1.  The Committee decided to build on work begun on this
                  subject in the previous Parliament under the auspices of
                  the then Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of
                  Provinces.

              2.  A joint meeting of the Portfolio and Select Committees was
                  held on 6 August to receive a presentation on a draft
                  Bill on this subject, prepared in November 2003.

              3.  The Committees agreed that this draft could serve as the
                  basis for further work, but felt that additional comments
                  and inputs would be useful to prepare a further draft
                  that could be introduced and processed through Parliament
                  according to Assembly Rules.

              4.  The Presiding Officers and Secretaries of the two Houses,
                  the Speakers of Provincial Legislatures and the National
                  Treasury were invited to submit comments. The Committees
                  are still awaiting these comments.

              5.  When these comments are received, the Committees plan to
                  meet to evaluate them and initiate a process of producing
                  a further draft Bill.

              6.  The Committees envisage publishing this draft for
                  introduction and public comment according to normal
                  procedures.

              7.  The Committees would hope that a Bill on this subject
                  could be passed before the end of this year.

     Report to be considered.


                           MONDAY, 30 AUGUST 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Government Notice No 850 published in Government Gazette No
         26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of members and alternate
         members of the Public Accountants' and Auditors Board in terms of
         section 3(6) of the Public Accountants and Auditors Act, 1991 (Act
         No 80 of 1991).

     (b)    Government Notice No 860 published in Government Gazette No
         26576 dated 23 July 2004: Appointment of member to the Amnesty
         Unit in terms of section 23 of the Exchange Control Amnesty and
         Amendment of Taxation Laws Act, 2003 (Act No 12 of 2003).

     (c)    Government Notice No 886 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Exemptions: Financial Intelligence
         Centre in terms of section 92 of the Public Finance Management
         Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (d)    Government Notice No 896 published in Government Gazette No
         26603 dated 30 July 2004: Cancellation of appointment of an
         authorised dealer in foreign exchange in terms of paragraph (3)(a)
         of the Exchange Control Regulations Government Notice No R1112 of
         1 December 1961 as amended: Regal Treasury Private Bank Limited in
         terms of the Currency and Exchanges Act, 1933 (Act No 9 of 1933).

     (e)    Government Notice No 853 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the commemorative R2 circulation coin in terms of
         section 19(1)(a) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act
         No 90 of 1989).

     (f)    Government Notice No 854 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: The dimension of, design for, and
         compilation of, the new R5 bi-metal circulation coin in terms of
         section 16(2) of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No
         90 of 1989).

     (g)    Government Notice No 855 published in Government Gazette No
         26588 dated 30 July 2004: Amendment of schedule 2 section (b) of
         the South African Reserve Bank, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
         Inspectorate for 2003-2004 [RP 142-2004].

  (b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear Energy
  Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
  Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Institute for Drug-
     Free Sport for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 118-2004].

4.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
     Educators (SACE) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
     Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                           TUESDAY, 31 AUGUST 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 114-2004]


     (2)    Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic of
         South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 2 - Parliament for
         2003-2004.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural
     Development Bank (Land Bank) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 147-
     2004].

3.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 - Department of
         Labour for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 64-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
         Fund (UIF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 65-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Commissioner
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 65-2004].

4.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 - Department of Water
         Affairs and Forestry for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 131-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
         Authority (TCTA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Government Notice No 897 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Mvoti to Mzimkulu Catchment Management Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 898 published in Government Gazette No
         26602 dated 30 July 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Crocodile (West) - Marico Catchment Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 937 published in Government Gazette No
         26649 dated 13 August 2004: Release of parts of state forests
         which are no longer required for forestry in terms of the National
         Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (f)    Government Notice No 966 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Jan Fourieskraal
         Irrigation Board, Division of Calitzdorp, Province of the Western
         Cape, into the Jan Fourieskraal  Water User Association, Water
         Management Area Number 16, Province of the Western Cape, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 967 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Stompdrift-
         Kamanassie Irrigation Board, Division of Oudtshoorn and
         Calitzdorp, Western Cape Province, into the Stompdrift-Kamanassie
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 16, Western
         Cape Province, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (h)    Government Notice No 968 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Stellenbosch,
         Helderberg and Lower Eertse River Irrigation Boards, Division of
         Stellenbosch, Province of the Western Cape, into the Wineland
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 19, Province
         of the Western Cape in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (i)    Government Notice No 969 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Zanddrift
         Irrigation Board, Division of Robertson, Western Cape Province,
         into the Zanddrift Water User Association, Water Management Area
         Number 18, Western Cape Province in term of the National Water
         Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (j)    Government Notice No 970 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Establishment of the Vanrhynsdorp
         Water User Association, Division of Vanrhynsdorp, Province of the
         Western Cape, Water Management Area Number 18, Western Cape
         Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
         1998).

     (k)    Government Notice No 971 published in Government Gazette No
         26663 dated 20 August 2004: Transformation of the Lower Sundays
         River Irrigation Board, Magisterial Districts of Alexandria,
         Jansenville, Kirkwood, Port Elizabeth, Somerset East and
         Uitenhage, Eastern Cape Province, into the Lower Sundays River
         Water User Association, Water Management Area Number 12, Eastern
         Cape Province in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36
         of 1998).

     (l)    Government Notice No 985 published in Government Gazette No
         26698 dated 18 August 2004: Proposal for the establishment of the
         Breede-Overberg Catchment Management Agency in terms of section
         78(3) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (m)    General Notice No 1767 published in Government Gazette No 26704
         dated 20 August 2004: Invitation for written comments on the Water
         Services Amendment Bill, 2004.

5.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 136-2004].

6.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum of
         Bloemfontein for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 84-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
         Gallery for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
         Theatre for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Blind
         Workers Organisation for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
         Republics for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre of
         the Free State (PACOFS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

7.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
     Council (elrc) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 151-2004].

8.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                         WEDNESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Research Council
     (ARC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 88-2004].

2.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
         Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 106-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Sentech for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of the Enery Sector Education and
     Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 45-2004].

4.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 - Government Communication
     and Information System for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 148-
     2004].

5.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 15 - Department of Education
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 144-2004].

6.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 - Department of
         Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Parks for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 29
     August 2004 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
     of the Assembly of the employment of the South African National Defence
     Force:

     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE
     SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE FOR PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF THE PRESIDENT
     OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA DURING AN OFFICIAL VISIT TO THE
     DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

     This serves to inform the National Assembly that I authorised the
     employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
     personnel to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), for service in
     co-operation with the South African Police Service for protection of
     the President of the Republic of South Africa during an official visit
     to the DRC on 30 and 31 August 2004.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 19(3) of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of thirty-six (36) members will be employed for service in co-
     operation with the South African Police Service as from 29 August to 1
     September 2004.

     The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the deployment
     of personnel to the joint operation is R 150 000-00 which will be paid
     out of the SANDF's Special Forces Brigade budget. Transport and
     accommodation cost will be borne by the South African Police Service.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Council
     of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to
     the notice of the National Assembly.

     Regards

     SIGNED

T M MBEKI





COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 1 from ATC0901E

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 2 from ATC0901E





