---
title: 'National Assembly - 27 May 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-05-27
---

TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2004
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms H ZILLE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that I intend  moving  the
following motion:


  That the House resolves to debate the Krugersdorp by-election of 26  May
  2004  caused  by  the  defection  of  the  sitting  Democratic  Alliance
  councillor to the  Independent  Democrats  and  the  fact  that  the  DA
  defeated the ANC, the FF Plus and the ID, which ended up with only 6% of
  the vote.

[Applause].

     REPLY TO DEBATE ON STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE
                          REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon
members, and our special guests, the young ladies from the schools around
Cape Town ... [Applause.] ... last Friday, speaking on behalf of our
national government, we detailed a programme of action covering the period
immediately ahead of us. As we reminded the House then, when we presented
the state of the nation address in February, we said that the President
elected after the 2004 elections would table such a programme of action.

We deliberately avoided detailing this programme in  February  because  we
didn't want it to be expunged from  the  public  mind  by  the  inevitable
cacophony that would accompany then the forthcoming elections.  It  seemed
to us then, as it does now, that it would be necessary for as many of  our
people as possible critically to engage this programme of action,  outside
the context of the election campaign. We consider this engagement to be of
the greatest importance. This is because it remains our firm view that  we
should unite as many of our people as possible,  together  to  pursue  the
goal of a better life for all.

I am therefore pleased to acknowledge with sincere  thanks  the  generally
positive response  of  the  hon  members  to  the  detailed  programme  we
presented. I also accept that nevertheless the opposition parties  have  a
right and a duty to criticise our performance where  they  think  this  is
justified and necessary. The point has also been made, quite legitimately,
that the setting of timeframes  will  assist  these  parties  properly  to
monitor  the  implementation  of  our   undertakings   and   enhance   the
effectiveness of Parliament in exercising its function of  oversight  over
the executive.

I have also been informed that quite a few of our newspapers called on  us
to implement what we had voluntarily  committed  ourselves  to  implement,
with no pressure or prompting by anybody.  I  would  like  to  assure  the
editors that we would not have made time-specific  commitments  unless  we
knew we would honour them and unless we knew we had the capacity to fulfil
them. [Applause.] I hope that in addition  to  being  vigilant  and  vocal
observers of the process of the birth of the new  South  Africa,  the  hon
members will also roll up their sleeves  and  join  the  millions  of  our
people as builders of that new South Africa. [Applause.]

I am certain that these millions would applaud this engagement, regardless
of the political affiliation of any of the builders of the new  nonracial,
nonsexist and prosperous South Africa. Again I would like to  confirm  the
government's commitment to working with all hon members to accelerate  the
process of the reconstruction and development of our country.

However, it would appear that there are some in our country who  find  the
notions of national consensus, national unity and united  national  action
very  discomfiting.  To  explain  this   discomfiture,   those   who   are
uncomfortable with  these  concepts  and  practices  seek  to  argue  that
national consensus and united national action constitute  a  threat  to  a
necessary diversity of opinions in our country and a vibrant democracy.

Yesterday,  the  hon  Lechesa  Tsenoli  referred  to  the  protracted  and
continuing struggle of our  national  liberation  movement  to  unite  our
people. In the past we worked to unite all our people against  racism  and
apartheid, in favour of a democratic South Africa. We worked to unite  all
our people to achieve a peaceful resolution of the  historic  conflict  in
our country, in favour of a democratic South Africa.

Today, we continue to work to unite all our people to eradicate the
painful legacy of racism and sexism we inherited from our past, again in
favour of a democratic South Africa. We continue to work to unite all
South Africans to defeat the scourge of poverty and underdevelopment, in
favour of a democratic South Africa.

We will strive to unite all our people to implement the programme of
action we announced on Friday, in favour of a democratic South Africa that
truly belongs to all who live in it. We will do this because we are
convinced that our unity gives us the possibility to accelerate our
advance to a South Africa that is free of poverty and the racial, gender
and geographic disparities bequeathed to us by our history.

But as we have said, it would appear that there are some in this House and
the country who think that the imperative to sustain our democracy argues
against the desirability of seeking the national unity around common goals
that has been and continues to be a fundamental feature of the historic
effort to set our country on a winning path. Obviously we disagree with
this proposition and approach. Nevertheless, we will have to be satisfied
with the reality that our inherited, our current and different life
experiences over many centuries dictate that we should accept that some
among us genuinely and honestly believe that the effort to construct a
people's contract is inimical to democratic practice.

I am certain that the very thoughtful intervention of the hon Andries Nel
will have helped all of us the better to understand the philosophical
basis that informs this divergence between us and those of our compatriots
who see an inherent and irreconcilable contradiction between concerted
national action and the entrenchment of democracy.

I trust that this deeper understanding will also help all of us to accept
that the holding and propagation of views with which we fundamentally
disagree, does not necessarily make those with whom we disagree
unpatriotic, as various hon members of the DA said.

In addition, I would like to take this opportunity once more to confirm
our determination to pursue the centrally important element of our
programme of action, the mobilisation of all our people to join the
people's contract for progressive change, as was urged by such hon members
as Fezile Bhengu and Ben Mthembu, who spoke yesterday. Happily, the
overwhelming majority of our people, regardless of race, class, gender or
age, agree that we need the people's contract, and are ready to be part of
this exciting advance in our continuing pursuit of the goal of national
unity and reconciliation.

We took this matter further in the state of the nation address when we
said that the circumstances relating to the global celebrations of our
tenth anniversary of freedom, and the success of our bid for the 2010
Soccer World Cup, suggest that perhaps the time has come for the emergence
of a united movement of the peoples of the world that would come together
to work for the creation of a new world order.

This would respond to the urgent need to address the concerns and
interests of the billions of our universe who are poor and marginalised,
as are the same masses in our country who must be the principal focus of
our efforts to build a caring and people-centred society.

I know that there are some in this House and our country who dismiss  this
proposition as being  nothing  more  that  a  mere  flight  of  fancy,  an
extravagant pipe dream. They are certain that any attempt to build such  a
united movement of the peoples of the world would be a futile  and  wasted
effort.

Again we hold a different view, based  on  what  we  have  seen  with  the
natural  eye.  The  outcome  of  our  general  elections,   the   national
celebrations of our first decade of freedom, and the powerful explosion of
joy at the decision of the FIFA executive committee about the 2010  Soccer
World Cup, all told an extraordinary story of how far we  have  progressed
towards the emergence of one nation united by common human national goals.

The joy we experienced in our own country was  replicated  throughout  our
continent of Africa.  In  their  millions,  the  ordinary  African  masses
spontaneously took to the streets of their  cities,  towns  and  villages,
repeating the words that passed among the people of Rwanda: We have won!

Yomi, a Nigerian, called a radio station and said, ``I feel  like  jumping
up and shouting Uhuru!'' Another Nigerian, Adekunle Ayewo, said, ``Boy, oh
boy, Africa has arrived and I am so happy.'' [Applause.] President  Nujoma
spoke proudly of the songs and dances in the streets  of  our  cities  and
towns of Namibia last Saturday.

A Cameroonian, Patrice Nde, said, ``South Africa is a country of great
achievements. Come 2010, FIFA will not regret having awarded the World Cup
to South Africa. I will open a special bank account into which I will save
some money for going to the tournament''. [Applause.] The champion athlete
of Mozambique, Maria Mutola, said, ``I am extremely delighted''. The
Senegalese musician Ishmael Lo said, ``South Africa was always way ahead
and it will be a glorious event for the whole of Africa.''

President Kufuor of Ghana said, ``Ghanaians from all walks of life are
very enthused about this triumph with its many prospects for prosperity
that lie ahead for the continent. It is our hope that through this
tournament our nations will be brought even closer to enable us to forge
ahead for more glory''. Michael Oti Adjei wrote in the Ghanaian Chronicle
that ``the whole continent was immersed in the joy of South Africa's
triumph in Zürich''.

President Toure of Mali said, ``We are happy that South Africa has been
chosen to host the event''. The communications minister of Egypt said,
``This win is a victory for the whole of the African continent''. Fisho
Mwale, the deputy president of the Football Association of Zambia, said,
``All of us are winners and I am headed for my champagne glass''.

Mr Sepp Blatter, the president of FIFA, said, ``With South Africa being a
multicultural and a multiracial country, it is a dignified representative
of Africa for the organisation of the World Cup. It is the beginning of a
new era in Africa.''

A comment posted on Ghanaweb said, ``Thank God South Africa has won.''
[Applause.]

But beyond, and in addition to, these and many other reported comments,
was the amazing spontaneous festival that erupted throughout Africa on
Saturday, May 15, with millions of the simple folk who constitute the
African masses happily living out the thought: Thank God South Africa won!

The commentator on Ghanaweb described South Africa as ``a most authentic
African country''. He said that contrary to many other African countries,
it has the best road infrastructure, the best schools, the best hospitals
and the best everything. It is no wonder that black Africans throughout
Africa now deem South Africa a heaven.

The millions of Africans who celebrated with us on May 15 were making the
statement that they would like to see all our countries having the best
road infrastructure, the best schools, the best hospitals and the best
everything.

They were saying that we have sought to do in our own country to change
the lives of all our people for the better and to build a stable democracy
in our multiracial, multiethnic and multicultural society is consistent
with the best aspirations shared by Africans throughout Africa. They are
confident that the African Union and Nepad will succeed to unite our
continent in a common effort to achieve its renewal.

On Friday and elsewhere we commented on the way the peoples of the world
joined us to celebrate our first decade of democracy, in certain
instances, as in New Orleans in the United States, taking to the streets,
as did our continent when we were granted the opportunity to host the 2010
Soccer World Cup. The peoples of the world were also making the same
statement as did the African masses, indicating their readiness to join
with these masses to build a better world.

Yesterday's press carried reports of the highly successful launch by our
National Treasury of a $1 billion 10-year global bond. These reports
indicated correctly that this was the lowest coupon on record for a South
African dollar-denominated bond, which also had the lowest spread yet for
a South African dollar bond.

The Treasury director-general, Lesetja Kganyago, also correctly observed
that all this reflects investor confidence in South Africa and that the
fact that it was oversubscribed constituted a resounding vote of
confidence in South Africa. [Applause.]

 All this and everything else we have said must surely inspire all of us
to redouble our efforts to accelerate the process of the reconstruction
and development of our country. I trust that our national Parliament will
respond to the call made by some hon members so to organise its work
schedule as to give members the possibility to participate in the process
of the implementation of the programme we announced last Friday.

Inevitably, we will also have to continue to respond to the minority
inside and outside our country, which continues to propagate negative
images of our country. Earlier this week, the CEO of Anglogold, Mr Bobby
Godsell, alerted all of us to the continued existence of these negative
sentiments among London-based fund managers. Correctly, he said that we
must join in a concerted effort to put out positive messages about
ourselves. Describing the concerns of the fund managers as wrong, he said
that some elsewhere in the world held a view that everything in Africa was
bad, resulting in it not being competitive.

Again quite correctly, Mr Godsell called for the speedy implementation of
the new mining legislation which, he said, should put to bed international
scepticism about expropriation. It is most unfortunate that we still have
others in our country who engage in conveying the negative images about
ourselves that Mr Godsell spoke out against. For instance, I have been
informed that some within the mining sector are involved in an
international campaign to demonise the new mining framework, approved by
this Parliament, which other mining companies such as Anglogold are, to
quote Mr Godsell, ``very keen to implement as soon as possible''.

Something similar took place after the publication of the report of the
FIFA inspection group. On the subject of safety and security in the
country, the group said: ``General information indicates that South Africa
shows a lack of security, but the group was not aware of any such claims
during the visit, although it was possible to read press reports on some
violence in marginal areas during our visit to the country. We therefore
came to the conclusion that as long as people attending the 2010 Soccer
World Cup kept within certain boundaries, they should not encounter any
trouble. After a presentation by the police service, we concluded that
they have enough experience with this kind of event to handle them without
difficulty.''

After the publication of the FIFA report, there were some in our country
who insisted that safety and security was a matter of major concern to
FIFA, whereas the inspection group had said that during its visit to our
country it had not been made aware of any substantiated claims of lack of
security that would endanger our hosting of the Soccer World Cup.

The challenge we face, as identified by Mr Godsell, is also reflected in
outrageous observations made by a US-based company that provides country
risk profiles to the global investor community, like the fund managers
that Mr Godsell spoke about. Among other things, in a report dated 1 March
2004, this rating company says, ``The passage of legislation to expedite
the process of land redistribution creates the potential for a rise in
illegal land seizures. Add to that the likely eruption of conflict over
crime, unemployment, corruption and a possible third term effort by Mbeki,
and the country appears to be headed towards a future that looks less like
the rainbow nation envisaged a decade ago than a country headed towards
considerable political, economic and social upheaval.''

It says that by standing for a second term, ``Mbeki has already defied
Mandela's precedent by seeking re-election''. It says that South Africa is
``a de facto one-party state''. It says, ``The Government has also been
unable to cope with the illegal land occupations, themselves a consequence
of the failure to move forward on land reform.'' And it says, ``The
military has been troubled by the difficulty of defining its role since
apartheid ended. Officers hope that future roles in African peacekeeping
will boost morale''.

It says, ``The police are widely viewed as both inept and corrupt. Even
after their conviction, most notorious criminals are able to bribe their
way out of incarceration.'' And it says, ``The road to the elections and
their aftermath are likely to be bumpy.''

We are fortunate that the overwhelming majority of the hon members who
participated in the debate rejected this fundamentally false image of our
country projected by people who have a clear agenda to see us fail.

But the fact that this negative campaign persists, despite everything that
has happened in our country over the past ten years, emphasises the need
for us to join in united action to address the challenges we have all
identified, relating to the pursuit of the goal of a better life for all
our people.

It is clear that, in the end, those who are intent on deliberately
propagating falsehoods about our country will be proved wrong and defeated
more by what we do than what we say. The public responses of our
Ministers, premiers, mayors and heads of the state-owned corporations to
the state of the nation address indicate the firm commitment of the public
sector to implement the programme of action we announced last Friday.

We have also been greatly encouraged by the positive response of the
private sector, the trade unions and the rest of civil society to that
address. We look forward to the further strengthening of our links with
both these social partners, together to meet the goals we indicated in the
state of the nation address.

Two days ago the African Peace and Security Council, in the presence of
our Deputy President, was launched at the headquarters of the African
Union in Addis Ababa. This has sent out the important message that our
continent is extremely serious in its resolve to confront the challenges
that have plagued the African millions for a very long time. In this
regard, necessarily and correctly, among other things, the Council took
further decisions to reinforce the intervention of the African Union to
end the bloody conflict in Darfur in Western Sudan.

Yesterday in Kenya the government of Sudan and the SPLA concluded their
negotiations and signed the peace agreement so dear to the Sudanese people
and the peoples of Africa. We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the negotiating parties, as well as President Mwayi Kibaki,
the government and people of Kenya and others who had the patience to work
with the Sudanese negotiators to produce an excellent result. [Applause.]

We are ready to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to us by the
Sudanese and the African Union, to lead the African process in support of
the post-conflict reconstruction of the Sudan.

A peaceful and democratic Sudan will add to the defeat of those who, as Mr
Godsell said, hold the view that everything in Africa is bad.

Today the staff of the President's Office has been enlarged by the
inclusion of seven young girls studying at various schools in Cape Town. I
am pleased that they are sitting in the House, in the Director-General's
box, with their boss of the day, the Director-General in the Presidency,
the Rev Frank Chikane. [Applause.] They are here because we are
participating in the national campaign to ``Take a girl child to work''.
[Applause.] Among other things they worked on the response to the debate I
am currently tabling before the House. [Applause.]

In addition to participating in editing the draft, they have also
contributed some additions, some of which we have included in the text. I
apologise that I cannot include all of them today, but I will use them in
other speeches.

Noélle Koeries of Holy Cross High School in Maitland says, ``I look
forward to the day when a person will be viewed as a person. On paper we
are all equal, but in reality the struggle for equality continues. We must
forever remember that we are human beings before anything else and that
makes us worthy to be appreciated and acknowledged.'' [Applause.]

Annika Hendricks, also from Holy Cross, says, `` I am very glad that this
country has a democracy which our forefathers fought for. South Africa
definitely has the potential to shine and is alive with possibility. Today
I am very proud to say I am a South African. Being a young woman in South
Africa, I want the people of our land to recognise the rights of women in
future, not only for me, but for the generations to come.'' [Applause.]
She says, ``Women are going places. Equality for all.'' [Applause.]

 Delia de Villiers of Brackenfell High School writes: ``In a country such
as South Africa, with its diverse and vibrant cultures, it is of crucial
importance that people, especially women, are encouraged and empowered to
rise above their circumstances to make a valuable and progressive
difference in society.'' [Applause.]

Zandile Mazwayi of Good Hope Seminary Girls High School writes: ``South
Africa is only ten years old and therefore it is likely that in our growth
process, we are likely to make mistakes. I therefore make it every South
African's task, instead of fighting over who makes what mistakes, let us
rather help show each other the way.'' [Applause.] And she says, ``Let us
focus on involving the youth more in Parliament.''

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: They are writing your speeches.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Yes, Mr Leon, they are my speechwriters,
you are quite right.

Nandi Dlelapantsi of Harry Gwala Senior Secondary School says, ``Today's
dream is definitely tomorrow's reality.'' [Applause.]

I could not agree more, both with her and all the others.
I thank the hon members for their contributions to the debate and thank
you all for your attention. As we said last Friday, let us get down to
work in a people's contract to build a better South Africa and a better
world. Thank you, Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I say anything more, may I recognise Dr
Mocumbi, who is the former prime minister of Mozambique, sitting in the
gallery.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 14:33.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 26383 of 20 May 2004.]


         Introduction and referral to the Ad hoc Committee on  Finance  of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the  Joint  Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         28 May 2004.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Strategic Plan of Statistics South Africa for 2004-2007.


     (b)    Sixty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for 2003 and the South African Revenue Services' response
         thereto.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution of
     Land Rights for 2003-2004 [RP 67-2004].

