---
title: 'National Assembly - 07 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-09-07
---

TUESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY


The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                 CONDOLENCES ON THE DEATH OF DR BEYERS NAUDÉ


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes with shock and profound sadness the death of “Oom Bey”, Dr
        Beyers Naudé, who passed away early this morning on 7 September 2004
        at the age of 89;


   (2)      recognises that Dr Naudé was a South African patriot who, in his
        life, demonstrated profound commitment to the liberation of the
        people of our country;


   (3)      recalls that he played an active and leading role in
        conscientising the South African religious community about the
        immorality of apartheid racialism;


   (4)      acknowledges the dynamic contribution Dr Naudé made in the anti-
        apartheid struggle towards the birth of our country’s nonracial and
        nonsexist constitutional democracy;


   (5)      believes that he leaves behind a legacy of dedicated service to
        our country that will serve to inspire future generations to
        continue working for the deepening of democracy and the
        reconstruction and development of our country; and


   (6)      conveys its sincerest condolences to the Naudé family, their
        friends and the entire religious community in our country.

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Adjunkspeaker, die DA betuig sy meegevoel met die
naasbestaandes van dr Beyers Naudé. Ons harte gaan veral uit na sy vrou,
Ilse, wat hom met groot innerlike krag deur al die jare bygestaan het. Sy
kinders en die res van die familie kan troos vind in die feit dat hy ’n
lang en vol lewe gelei het waarin hy met sy groot bydrae tot versoening ’n
onuitwisbare indruk in Suid-Afrika gemaak het.
Dr Beyers Naudé was ’n Afrikaner in murg en been. Reeds aan die
Universiteit van Stellenbosch waar hy studenteraadvoorsitter was, het hy
leiding geneem en die kritiese denke ontwikkel wat hom later beslissende
keuses sou laat maak. Op kerklike en geestelike terrein het hy sy boodskap
helder en duidelik verkondig. Hy was bereid om verguising te verduur vir
die beginsels waarin hy geglo het en vir sy onvermoeide ywer teen
apartheid.

Min mense ervaar die voorreg om, soos hy, in sy tyd die verandering te sien
waarvoor hy hom beywer het. Dit is jammer dat hy weens sy hoë ouderdom nie
’n meer aktiewe rol in die nuwe Suid-Afrika kon speel nie. Hy was deurgaans
’n simbool van versoening tussen rasse. Vir die helingsproses in Suid-
Afrika was dit van groot betekenis dat dr Beyers Naudé terugontvang en
geëer is deur verskeie samelewingsinstansies waarmee daar ’n breuk was,
soos met die Nederduits-Gereformeerde Kerk.

Dit was daarom ook goed dat hy op talle terreine vereer is. Dit dien vir
ons as Suid-Afrikaners as voorbeeld van wat ons in hierdie land kan bereik
as ons bo onsself sou uitstyg. Suid-Afrika het ’n groot brugbouer verloor,
iemand wat waardes wou oordra en nie ingestel was op persoonlike mag, eer
of hoë posisies nie. Ons eer sy nagedagtenis. Dankie.(Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Deputy Speaker, the DA  expresses its sympathy to the
family of Dr Beyers Naudé. Our thoughts are especially with his wife, Ilse,
who supported him during the years with great inner strength. His children
and the rest of his family can be consoled by the fact that he led a long
and full life during which he made an indelible impression on South Africa
with his great contribution to reconciliation.

Dr Beyers Naudé was an Afrikaner to his very core. Even at the University
of Stellenbosch, where he was chairman of the students’ representative
council, he assumed leadership and developed the critical  way of thinking
which would later cause him to make crucial choices. On an ecclesiastical
and spiritual level he proclaimed his message clearly and distinctly. He
was prepared to endure vilification for the principles he believed in and
for his tireless vigour in the fight against apartheid.

Few people experience the privilege, like he did, to see in their  time  the
changes to which he devoted himself. It is a pity that, due to his  advanced
age, he was unable to play a more active role in the new  South  Africa.  He
continued to be a symbol of reconciliation between  races.  As  far  as  the
healing process is concerned, it was of great significance  that  Dr  Beyers
Naudé was accepted  back  into  and  honoured  by  various  institutions  in
society with which there had been a split, as was the case  with  the  Dutch
Reformed Church.

For this reason it was also good that he was honoured at many levels. This
serves as an example to us as South Africans of what we can achieve in this
country should we rise above ourselves. South Africa has lost a great
builder of bridges, someone who wanted to convey values and who was not
focused on personal power, honour or high positions.

We honour his memory. Thank you.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP would like to associate itself
with the sentiments expressed about the late Dr Beyers Naudé. Our hearts go
out to Tannie Ilse and the Naudé family with the passing of one of South
Africa’s greatest sons.

The long walk to freedom of Dr Mandela was indeed shared by this remarkable
white Afrikaner. He was a man, a theologian, who, despite being
indoctrinated with the wrong philosophy and religious values, rebelled
against them and, on his own, led a singular revolution against his peers.
He was a man of principle who stood up against evil, despite knowing the
consequences of banishment from his own community and from the church of
which he was a leader and moderator.

As Afrikaner is ek vandag trots dat hy ons kon voortgaan. Die voorbeeld van
oom Bey behoort in Afrikanergeledere nagestreef te word, en ons hoop dat
die nageslagte en die geskiedenis aan oom Bey en tannie Ilse daardie
spesiale plek en staanplek in die geskiedenis sal gee. Wanneer ek in Beyers
Naudérylaan in Northcliff ry, daar digby die NG-gemeente in Northcliff
waarin hy sy laaste dae deurgebring het voor hy verban is, dan salueer ek
’n groot gees van die Afrikanerdom. Ons eer jou, oom Bey! (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[As an Afrikaner, I am proud today that he could lead the way. The example
of Oom Bey should be emulated amongst Afrikaners, and we hope that
posterity and history will grant that special place and position in history
to Oom Bey and Tannie Ilse. When I drive down Beyers Naudé Drive in
Northcliff, close to the Dutch Reformed congregation in Northcliff where he
spent his last days before being banned, then I salute a great spirit of
Afrikanerdom. We salute you, Oom Bey!]

Hamba kahle! [Rest in peace, Oom Beyers.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Sadly, we have lost another
wonderful contributor to our democracy. We sadly grieve the loss of Dr
Beyers Naudé of the ANC. As he retires from our victory, he must know that
he shall be greatly missed. South Africa salutes him for all his efforts
and contribution to where we are today.

The MF conveys its condolences to all bereaved family members, friends,
loved ones and especially the ANC, on the loss of Dr Beyers Naudé. Dr
Beyers Naudé, may you rest in peace, and may the Almighty place you in the
greatest seat in heaven, as a man of worth and of his word.

Almighty, give the bereaved the strength to overcome this difficult period,
and guide South Africa to being a true democracy and a God-fearing nation.
Thank you.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, this morning’s passing away of
Dr Beyers Naudé closes one of the most remarkable chapters in the life of a
man who broke ranks when it was treacherous to do so. Azapo joins the
family and friends of “Oom Bey”, as he was popularly known, in mourning as
well as celebrating the life of this gallant soldier and campaigner for
human dignity and freedom.

We will remember him as a very determined and yet very religious and humble
servant of God. Beyers Naudé understood very well the biblical teaching
that all men are born equal before God. As a result, he stood up and
practised what God commanded him to do until this morning.

To Azapo, Dr Beyers Naudé was not just another Afrikaner who was born into
a society which accorded him better privileges than blacks, but was one of
those who were not part of the problem, but part of the solution. For the
love of humanity, he gave his life for a free and democratic South Africa.

Those of us who were in the leadership of Saso and the BPC in the seventies
will remember the many sacrifices he made by assisting us with resources,
including the hiring of cars and kombis to enable us to carry on with the
struggle for freedom. He has been an inspiration to many freedom-loving
people all over the world. Azapo wishes to offer its deepest-felt
condolences to his family and friends. May his soul rest in peace.
[Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, the UCDP noted with sadness the
passing away of Dr Beyers Naudé. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to his immediate family, friends and associates.
His death should remind us of the importance of nation-building across
colour and of interdenominational unity.

During his lifetime, he was one of the few religious leaders who stood up
against the unjust apartheid government that sought to justify the evils of
the ungodly and unchristian apartheid system. He spoke openly about
equality and all humans being created in the image of God, irrespective of
race.

To him, blacks and whites were the same, irrespective of colour, and what
made them different had nothing to do with their birth rights. Indeed,
during those tough years he dedicated his life to helping create a
nonracial society. Today we say to Oom Beyers, you have achieved your task
which God mandated you to carry out. We do not only have a democratic and
free South Africa, you have made us understand the role and importance of
the church in the community and how it can protect the weak and the poor.
We say to you: “Robala kakagiso, oom Beyers” [rest in peace, oom Beyers].

Mnr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Mev die Adjunkspeaker, dit is met hartseer dat ons
afskeid neem van dr Beyers Naudé. Ons voeg ons stem by almal wat vandag
hulde bring aan hierdie man wie se naam sinoniem geword het met die
totstandkoming van ŉ nie-rassige samelewing in ons land. Hy was een van die
groot kampvegters vir die afskaffing van apartheid, en sy bydrae tot die
daarstelling van ’n samelewing waar die kleur van jou vel nie jou waarde as
mens bepaal nie, is prysenswaardig. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Mr A Z A VAN JAARSVELD: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is with sadness that we
bid farewell to Dr Beyers Naudé. Today we add our voice to those who are
paying tribute to this man whose name has become synonymous with the
establishment of a nonracial society in our country. He was one of the
great champions of the abolition of apartheid, and his contribution to
create a society where the colour of one’s skin does not determine one’s
worth as a human being is commendable.]

He was a man who placed his country’s interests first and dedicated most of
his life to bringing about racial reconciliation in South Africa. It is
because of great men and women like Beyers Naudé that we are privileged
today to live in a nonracial society.

Gedurende die apartheidsjare was dit mense soos Beyers Naudé wat die hoop
lewend gehou het dat Suid-Afrika eendag ’n tuiste sal wees vir wit, swart,
bruin en Indiër, sonder enige vorm van diskriminasie. Die pad wat Beyers
Naudé gestap het, was nie maklik nie en hy moes baie opofferings maak. Hy
is selfs deur sy eie mense verstoot, maar niks het hom van stryk gebring om
te help bou aan dit waarin hy geglo het nie. Hy sal altyd onthou word as
een van die groot helde in ons land se geskiedenis. Ons innige simpatie aan
sy gesin, familie en vriende. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[During the apartheid years it was people like Beyers Naudé who kept the
hope alive that someday South Africa would be a home for white, black,
coloured and Indian, without any form of discrimination. The road that
Beyers Naudé travelled was not an easy one and he had to make many
sacrifices. Even his own people ostracised him, but nothing stopped him
from contributing to that in which he believed. He will always be
remembered as one of the great heroes in our country’s history. We express
our deepest sympathy to his family, relatives and friends. Thank you.]

Mr L M GREEN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I wish to align myself with the words
of former President Nelson Mandela, when he said the following of Dr Beyers
Naudé, also affectionately known as “Oom Bey”, on his eightieth birthday,
and I quote:


  Dr Beyers Naudé has reached his fourscore years, proving to us
  yet again that he is a man of strength. His is a strength of body
  and of mind, and of that indomitable spirit that defied the evil
  of apartheid to make him a hero of our people.


  Beyers Naudé became an outcast amongst the Afrikaners, amongst many
  whites and amongst the church that he loved. Such is the price that
  prophets are required to pay. His life is a shining beacon to all South
  Africans, both black and white. It demonstrates what it means to rise
  above race, to be a true South African. If someone asks me what kind of
  person a new South African should be, I will say, take a look at Beyers
  and his wife Ilse.

It is with these words that I, on behalf of the ACDP, along with many
others in this House and in this nation, would like to pay tribute to Oom
Bey.

In 1963 Dr Beyers Naudé resigned as moderator of the DRC and founded the
Christian Institute, an ecumenical organisation to pursue reconciliation
through interfaith dialogue. Beyers Naudé spoke out against the rising tide
of black violence, as well as against the apartheid system.

He was a committed Christian leader who stood against the tide. He will
always be remembered as a patriotic and an unselfish Christian leader, a
man who was prepared to pay the price for a free, democratic and nonracial
South Africa. Oom Bey, we pay tribute to you today. We salute you for your
courage. Our deepest sympathy goes to the family and friends of Beyers
Naudé. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID would like to associate itself
with the motion and sentiments expressed in this House today. The passing
of Beyers Naudé is indeed a sad moment for all South Africans in the whole
of this country. We have lost a father and a guiding light.

Oom Bey will be remembered for his commitment to human rights and his
unassuming and humble manner. He took a stand and continued to take a stand
on basic rights, particularly at times when it was unfashionable, often
making huge sacrifices for himself and his family.

To me as a young South African, he is an icon of the struggle against
apartheid in this country. He was passionate about South Africa and all its
people. He set an example to all South Africans to follow, and was
committed to human rights, simplicity and dignity. On behalf of the ID, I
would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to Tannie Ilse and her
family. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Mev die Adjunkspeaker, in die vroeë oggendure is een van
Suid-Afrika se groot seuns, dr Beyers Naudé, die beminde oom Bey, oorlede.
Hy was ’n nederige, beginselvaste persoon met oneindige integriteit wat
nooit eer en erkenning gesoek het nie, maar dit deur sy optrede en dade
verdien het. Hy is ’n ikoon vir alle Suid-Afrikaners, oor rasse-, taal-,
geslags- en klassegrense heen. Hy was ’n studenteleier, ’n kerkleier, ’n
vryheidsvegter en ’n gesinsman. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Dr E A SCHOEMAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, in the early morning hours one of
South Africa’s great sons, Dr Beyers Naudé, the beloved Oom Bey, passed
away. He was a humble, principled person with endless integrity who never
sought honour and recognition, but earned it through his conduct and
actions. He is an icon for all South Africans across racial, language,
gender and class boundaries. He was a student leader, a church leader, a
liberation fighter and a family man.]

He was named after an Afrikaner rebel, Genl C B Beyers. Maybe he himself
was destined to become a rebel – a rebel who at one stage became the
youngest member of the Afrikaner Broederbond, from which he resigned after
22 years.

As a Dutch Reformed Church minister, he became the moderator of the
Southern Transvaal synod in 1961. He established the Christian Institute to
unite Christians of all ethnic groups, and was editor of its newspaper, Pro
Veritate.

His liberal and reconciliatory stance after the Sharpeville massacre
resulted in him eventually losing his status as a minister and being
excommunicated from the Afrikaner establishment. He received much
recognition for his stance from various overseas countries and was honoured
to be the first Afrikaner theologian to preach at Westminster Abbey. He was
continually harassed by successive apartheid governments and was
continually placed under house arrest.

Beyers Naudé, soos talle ander, het sy vryheid opgeoffer sodat ons vandag
’n vry en demokratiese, nie-rassige, nie-seksistiese Suid-Afrika kan wees.
Hy het van homself gegee sodat ons kan ontvang. As ’n Afrikaner is hy
verwerp terwyl hy die weg voorberei het sodat ons as Afrikaners ’n bydrae
op die speelveld van die nuwe Suid-Afrika kan lewer. Hy het brûe tussen
gemeenskappe gebou sodat ons die vrugte van ’n vreedsame oorgangsproses kon
geniet. Hy het geloofwaardigheid aan die konsep van versoening verleen
sodat swart, bruin en wit vandag kan hande vat op die pad van ’n verenigde
Suid-Afrikaanse nasie. Die kerk wat hom verwerp het, het erken dat hy reg
was en hulle verkeerd. Hy kon weer preek in sy geliefde Aasvoëlkopgemeente.

Die pad van eenwording tussen die Afrikaanse Gereformeerde Kerke kan in
geen geringe mate nie aan hom toegeskryf word. Deur sy jare van verbintenis
tot ’n regverdige bestel in Suid-Afrika, het sy gesin groot opofferinge
gemaak. Aan sy eggenote van 64 jaar, tannie Ilse, hul kinders, kleinkinders
en agterkleinkinders betuig ons ons opregte dank en meegevoel. Hul
positiewe rol in sy lewe word opreg waardeer. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Beyers Naudé sacrificed his liberty, as did many others, in order for us
to be a free and democratic, nonracial, nonsexist South Africa today. He
gave of himself so that we may receive. As an Afrikaner he was rejected
while preparing the way in order for us as Afrikaners to contribute on the
playing field of the new South Africa. He built bridges between communities
in order for us to enjoy the fruits of a peaceful transitional process. He
gave credibility to the concept of reconciliation so that today black,
brown and white can join hands on the path of a united South African
nation. The church that rejected him acknowledged that he was right and
they were wrong. He could preach again in his beloved congregation of
Aasvoëlkop.

The road to unification among the Afrikaans Reformed Churches can be
attributed to him in no small measure. Through his years of commitment to a
fair dispensation in South Africa, his family sacrificed greatly. To his
spouse of 64 years, Tannie Ilse, their children, their grandchildren and
great-grandchildren, we express our sincere thanks and condolences. Their
positive role in his life is truly appreciated.]

We pay tribute to a great South African, a great Christian, a hero of our
revolution, someone who was blessed with those wonderful traits of
resoluteness, steadfastness, integrity and compassion, whose contribution
we will never forget. He was indeed the epitome of a true African.
[Applause.]

Mr T GODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the PAC joins the House in mourning the
passing away of Dr Beyers Naudé. We wish to pass our heartfelt condolences
and solidarity to his family, friends and comrades. He leaves a legacy of
sincere commitment to his country, and a genuine love for justice and
socioeconomic development.

Most of us had no choice regarding our participation in the liberation
struggle because of our material conditions. Dr Naudé could, like most of
his community, have chosen to live the sheltered life of white ignorance
and indifference to the anguished cries and suffering of the African
people. However, he took the noble road of struggle. He was a living
example of a classless society. He fully identified with and became a part
of the democratic majority.

His legacy is a challenge to white South Africans and a real test of their
commitment to social justice and the fundamental transformation of South
Africa in the interests of the majority. The reality is that, despite the
exemplary life of Dr Beyers Naudé, there is still a significant portion of
our white compatriots who have not shown commitment to the cause of the
majority. Is it perhaps not time, on the occasion of the mourning and the
celebration of Dr Naudé’s life and work, that a call is made to our white
compatriots and their public representatives to hear the voice of the
unemployed and marginalised and become part of the national agenda of
transformation?

Dr Naudé has made his indelible contribution to our country. May his
example be emulated. To him we say: go well, son of the soil; go well, son
of Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM extends its
condolences to the Naudé family on the passing away of Dr Beyers Naudé.
Words cannot adequately express the deep regret and sympathy that we feel.

For countless people Dr Beyers Naudé was a father, a spiritual beacon, a
comrade and a true leader. He will forever be remembered as an icon of the
people’s struggle. It is because of him and his efforts, together with
those of millions of South Africans, that we can celebrate our freedom
today. He still remains an inspiration to young men and women all over the
country. We salute his courage and will always celebrate and cherish his
memory and his contribution.

Dr Beyers Naudé was a pioneer in breaking away from the Broederbond and
denouncing apartheid. As we bid him farewell, we cannot help but notice
that the very political party that demonised him has now joined the ANC.
Beyers Naudé was not rewarded with high political rewards, but he must be
commended for playing a leading role in the political process that resulted
in the downfall of the architects of apartheid. Dr Beyers Naudé
demonstrated profound moral strength which recognised that the value of
each and every human being can never be less than or inferior to a
political ideology.

May Almighty God be with his family as they mourn this great loss. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the
family of Dr Naudé.

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.



               NEW IDENTITY, SYMBOL AND IMAGE OF KWAZULU-NATAL


                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev M S KHUMALO: Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:


  That the House –


     1) applauds the new identity, new symbol and new image for
        KwaZulu–Natal (KZN), captured by the new coat of arms which was
        unveiled last Friday;

     2) is encouraged by the strategic and mature leadership shown by the
        broad-based KZN government and legislature;

     3) trusts that this new identity is already imprinted in the hearts of
        the people of KZN;

     4) notes that peacemakers and peace lovers are excited with the new
        focus;

     5) notes that KZN is endowed with cultural and natural beauty; and

     6) wishes that the spirit of the new identity gives the poor, the
        unemployed and those infected and affected by HIV and Aids greater
        hope.

Agreed to.

                             MEMBERS’STATEMENTS

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before we come to members’ statements, we have with us
Councillor T Palane and his wife from KwaZulu-Natal. Thank you for joining
us in the House. [Applause.]

Before I go to the Order Paper, I am told that there is a technical
problem. The Order Paper today is dated 1 September instead of 7 September.
Everything else on the Order Paper is correct. The speakers’ lists and
everything else are correct. Someone probably wanted to type 7 and typed 1,
but that will be corrected. Members will be pardoned today for using this
Order Paper. We are trying by all means to be with the times, but today we
have this technical problem.

                       CITY OMBUDSPERSON FOR CAPE TOWN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M DIALI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the decision by
the City of Cape Town to set up an Office of the City Ombudsperson. This is
a welcome step, as it will contribute to improving service to the people of
the city. Access to public service by the people of the city is not a
privilege, but the right of all citizens. Putting people first is the
cornerstone of our service delivery to the people. We call on our people
fully to utilise the services rendered by this new office.

The ANC calls on our people to report all those public servants who ill-
treat them. People must continue to strengthen the ward committees and
other democratic structures for accountability. I thank you. [Applause.]


                               FLOOR-CROSSING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H ZILLE (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, floor-crossing is a feature of most
developed democracies, because it allows public representatives to cross
the floor on matters of principle in order to uphold the mandate from their
voters. In our country it is being used for different reasons to enable
members, primarily of the NNP, to abandon their voters’ mandate and
undertake a mass migration to the feeding troughs of power and patronage in
the ANC. [Interjections.]

The only good thing that can be said is that the remains of the NNP will
now cease to be a feature of our politics. [Interjections.] The serious
negative is that the way floor-crossing is managed here, over 14 days each
year, requiring a 10% minimum of any caucus, effectively clears the deck
for a one-party state. This is what it is intended to achieve, and it will
be a disaster for South Africa.

For this reason we are extremely gratified that so far 42 councillors have
resisted the lure of patronage politics, have decided to build the ranks of
a strong, principled and effective opposition, and are becoming part of the
DA’s team of over 1 020 councillors. Thank you. [Applause.]


                                 VIGILANTISM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, a very worrying situation seems
to be developing, where communities are taking the law into their own hands
to deal with alleged criminals by using their own illegal systems or ways.
Some of the methods used by communities in dealing with these alleged
criminals include stoning, beating and necklacing them as methods of
capital punishment. These forms of punishment are all reminiscent of the
1980s.

We need to find out why the people are taking the law into their own hands
instead of letting the criminal justice system deal with the matter in a
legal manner. Have these communities lost their faith in the criminal
justice system, or have our security forces lost touch with the communities
that they are meant to protect? These are just some of the questions that
we need to answer if we want to put a stop to these illegal justice systems
that seem to be developing.

We therefore urge the relevant authorities, as well as community leaders,
to work together in order to find the solution needed to address this
problem, and to restore people’s faith in the criminal justice system. I
thank you.


                       FLOOR – CROSSING BY DA MEMBERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B W KANNEMEYER (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, it is clear that members of
the DA have become disillusioned with the direction of that party. In the
Langeberg municipality, an ANC councillor made a sworn affidavit to the SA
Police Service about an offer of deputy mayorship, as well as R50 000 in
cash, by a representative of the DA. [Interjections.]

The DA also forced all their councillors in this municipality to sign
letters resigning from the council on the eve of the window period.
[Interjections.] When one of them refused to comply, he was called to a
disciplinary hearing, and he had to get court intervention to prevent the
DA from letting him exercise his constitutional right. [Interjections.]

In the Knysna municipality, the former DA mayor and the deputy mayor, who
was also the branch chairperson of the DA, have decided to leave their
party, because they believe that the DA has totally moved away from the
liberal values once held and defended by the PFP and the DP.

They also believe that a number of DA public representatives are
uncomfortable with the right-wing direction that the DA has taken, and that
has become the dominant force in the DA, making it impossible for the last
remaining patriots in the party to make a constructive contribution to our
country.

We call on the DA to respect the Constitution of this country and allow
their members, who are tired of the right-wing leadership of Theuns Botha
in this province, to leave the party and cross the floor, and to leave in
the same way that the hon Helen Zille left the provincial legislature to
get away from Theuns Botha. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                    BETTER SALARY INCREASES FOR TEACHERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM supports
teachers in their call for better salaries. Teachers have not received the
same sort of salaries and increases that have been awarded to other public
servants over the past few years. It is therefore our belief that teachers
must be viewed as a special case in the current wage negotiations between
government and the Public Service unions.

It is worth remembering that these are the people that we entrust with
nurturing future generations. Teachers are intimately involved in the
national effort to build a sustainable democracy and economy. We need to
pay teachers better to attract and retain the brightest and the best.

Some of the biggest obstacles to the growth and development of our country
is illiteracy and a lack of skills. We cannot hope to overcome these
obstacles with underpaid teachers. Therefore the UDM urges government to
completely restructure teacher compensation so as to effect a salary and
benefits package improvement of at least 7%, to bring teachers on par with
other public servants and acknowledge their importance to society as a
whole.

Aside from the special case of teachers, the overall principle of wage
increase moderation must continue to be applied in order to keep inflation
in check. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.

  JOHANNESBURG+2 CONFERENCE REPRESENTS RENEWED COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENTATION
                                OF WSSD GOALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C B JOHNSON (NNP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Johannesburg+2 Conference,
which was held last week, was a renewed commitment to the implementation of
the WSSD goals. Two years have passed since the Johannesburg Summit, and we
as South Africans need to ask ourselves what progress we have made in
implementing these goals.

The departments that participated at Johannesburg+2 should be commended for
their successes thus far. At our present rate of delivery with regard to
water, our government is not only on track to meet the targets, but also to
eradicate the existing backlog in infrastructure for water by 2008.

On housing delivery, the programme is well advanced, delivering
1,5 million houses thus far. On energy, we have diversified our energy
resources and we are exploring gas, wind, hydroelectric and solar power; we
are well within our target of reaching that.

We have also made great progress on the environmental front. That, to me,
Madam Deputy Speaker, shows us three very important things: Firstly, that
sustainable development can only be achieved if one looks at it
transversally and crossdepartmentally; secondly, that South Africa is well
on its way to meeting its WSSD targets; and thirdly, that this government
is delivering the goods. I thank you. [Applause.]


                    RENAMING OF STREETS IN POTCHEFSTROOM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Geagte Voorsitter, die VF Plus stel voor dat die
Parlement in Erfenismaand hom uitspreek en beleid formuleer oor die
geskiedenis van die verskillende gemeenskappe, sodat dorp- en straatname in
Suid-Afrika bewaar kan word.

Die VF Plus het nie beswaar as nuwe stadsrade nuwe ontwikkelinge of strate
vernoem nie. Die VF Plus het egter wel ernstige beswaar as historiese name
wat groot waarde vir sekere gemeenskappe het, verander word ter wille van
verandering.

In Potchefstroom stel die ANC-stadsraad tans voor dat straatname wat uit
die Voortrekkertyd en die Anglo-Boereoorlogtyd dateer, en wat vir die
Afrikaner-gemeenskap baie waarde het, gewysig moet word. In Potchefstroom
is aktiewe politici en omstrede persone in die verlede op ’n berekende
manier juis nie vernoem nie, omdat die geskiedenis geleer het dat sulke
name deur ’n volgende politieke groepering weer verander word. Hierdie
beleid word nou gewysig. Dit beteken dat al die nuwe name oor 10 jaar,
wanneer ’n nuwe politieke groepering soos byvoorbeeld die PAC, aan bewind
kom, weer gewysig sal moet word. [Tussenwerpsels.] Maak dit 12 jaar as jy
wil.

Behalwe vir die miljoene rande wat so ’n verandering vir die stadsraad en
die private sektor kos, wis dit ook ’n gedeelte van die stad se geskiedenis
uit. Die oorhaastige en onoordeelkundige verandering van historiese dorp-
en straatname in Suid-Afrika soos dit tans in Potchefstroom gedoen word, is
besig om steeds groter polarisering en verwydering tussen gemeenskappe te
veroorsaak wat tot niemand se voordeel is nie. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus proposes that
during Heritage Month Parliament should express itself and formulate a
policy on the history of the various communities, in order that town and
street names in South Africa can be retained.

The FF Plus has no objection if new town councils name new developments or
streets. However, the FF Plus has serious objections if historic names
which are of great value to certain communities are changed simply for the
sake of change.

At present the ANC town council in Potchefstroom is suggesting that street
names dating from the time of the Voortrekkers and the Anglo-Boer War, and
which are of great value to the Afrikaner community, should be changed. In
the past, streets in Potchefstroom were not named after active politicians
and controversial persons on purpose, because history had shown that such
names would be changed again by a subsequent political group. This policy
is now being changed. This means that in 10 years’ time, when a new
political group, for example the PAC, comes into power, all the names will
have to be changed again. [Interjections.] Make it 12 years if you want to.

Apart from the millions of rands that such a change costs the town council
and the private sector, it also eradicates a part of the city’s history.
The hasty and injudicious changing of historic town and street names in
South Africa, as is being done in Potchefstroom at present, is causing
greater polarisation and distance between communities, which is not to
anyone’s advantage.  I thank you.]


         ANC WELCOMES EFFORTS TO EASE PLIGHT OF POOR IN WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu M R SONTO (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, umbutho wesizwe, u-ANC, uyawamkela
umpoposho owenziwe nguMphathiswa weMicimbi yaManzi naMahlathi, uMphathiswa
uSonjica, ehambisana noSodolophu weSixeko saseKapa uNksz Nomaindiya
Mfeketo, wokuba baza kuphucula imeko yabantu bakuthi abahluphekileyo,
abahlala ezilokishini nasematyotyombeni.

Le nquleqhu yenzelwa ukuba iSixeko saseKapa silwazi uluntu lwaso
kwaneemfuno zalo. Kaloku lo masipala ubefudula ephantsi kolawulolwesandla
se-DA esingananze mntu namfuno zakhe.[Uwele-wele.] Siyothulela umnqwazi
inimba esike la maqobokazana ngexesha lezikhukhula neempuphuma kwezi veki
ziphelileyo, nezibangele ukuba uMphathiswa enze uphando ngongcoliseko
lwemifula, basinda abantu kwizifo ezosulelayo ngeli nyathelo. Unje ke
urhulumente we-ANC ukubakhathalela nokubanyamekela abantu. Ngxatsho ke
maqobokazana! Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] The ANC welcomes efforts to ease
the plight of the poor in the Western Cape. (Translation of Xhosa member’s
statement follows)

[Mr M R SONTO (ANC): Deputy speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement
tabled by the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, hon Minister Sonjica,
together with the Cape Town City Mayor, Nomaindiya Mfeketo, that they will
improve the lives of poor people living in townships and informal
settlements.

This effort is made in order for the City of Cape Town to know the needs of
its people. This municipality was previously under the management of the
Democratic Alliance that did not care about people and their needs.
[Interjections.] We take our hats off to these ladies for the compassionate
manner in which they dealt with an unfortunate disaster situation involving
floods that occurred during the past few weeks, which prompted the hon
Minister to do some research about the pollution of rivers, as a result of
which people were saved from contracting infectious diseases. The ANC-led
government takes care of its people. Well done, ladies! I thank you.
[Applause.] ]

         URGENT APPLICATION TO STOP PUBLICATION OF MAIL AND GUARDIAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, a manager in the
NCOP, an official, brought an unsuccessful urgent application in the
Pretoria High Court to stop the publication of the Mail and Guardian at
midnight last Thursday. That newspaper alleged that certain MPs had failed
to make proper disclosures in terms of the code of ethics.

The applicant stated that he was acting on the instructions of the Speaker,
the Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and Mr Andries Nel, ANC
Deputy Chief Whip.

It was not the interests of Parliament that were at stake: it was the
interests of Chairperson Kgoali, Chief Whip Goniwe and other MPs that
counted. Using the power of Parliament to protect themselves was an abuse
of office. These persons must personally pay the legal costs out of their
own pockets, and they must not expect the people of South Africa to fund
such a blatant abuse of power. [Applause.]


              INCREASE OF SEX WORKERS IN DURBAN AND CHATSWORTH


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Deputy Speaker, we are extremely worried about the
increase of sex workers in the Durban-Chatsworth area. It is an even bigger
concern that some of these sex workers are very young.

It has further been reported that some of these sex workers come from
affluent homes and turn to sex work for fun and extra spending money. We
cannot express how big a concern this is. Young girls are reportedly coming
to school with spare clothing and after attending a few classes, abscond to
perform sex work.

Drug money and poverty are among the reasons which make these ladies turn
to sex work. We call for earnest assistance from the government, the
community, schools and parents to stop and prevent the growth of this sex
work industry. This does not only kill the moral fibre of our community,
but also works towards the spread of HIV and Aids and other diseases.
Further, these young ladies need to be aware of realities and consequences.
There is so much potential for being more useful to the community than to
engage in sex work. Thank you.

                                BANK CHARGES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs R R JOEMAT (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the statement
of the Governor of the SA Reserve Bank on bank charges. This comes in the
wake of a report released by a task team commissioned by the National
Treasury and the SA Reserve Bank, which highlights the uncompetitive
behaviour of the banking sector.

More than half of the South African population does not participate in the
economy because they cannot afford the hefty bank charges levied by the
banking community to run savings accounts. This behaviour of the banks
makes savings by the South African poor only a dream that will never be
fulfilled. We must promote a culture of saving among the citizens of our
country and can ill-afford to have institutional mechanisms and rules that
discourage South Africans from saving their money. We need to remind
ourselves that when we save, we as individuals, families and the nation as
a whole, achieve bigger investment goals.

South Africans pay banks charges that far exceed those in several
countries, including, among others, Australia, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America and Canada, to cite a few examples. Our banking
sector is not at all competitive. Thank you. [Applause.]


                 DISMISSAL OF 13 SAFM SPECIALIST PRESENTERS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Madam Speaker, South Africans have read today
about the mass axing of 13 specialist presenters from the English public
broadcaster, SAFM. This situation came to my attention at the weekend. The
ineffectual and unfounded excuses given by the spokesperson of the SABC,
Paul Setsetse, about public service mandates, presumably giving the
corporation the excuse to wipe out the remnants of what was once the most
aspirational radio station in the country, just do not wash.

This country has to make up its mind what it expects from a public service
broadcaster. Are we looking for finely-honed programmes, meticulously
researched and informative to the nth degree, or are we to allow ourselves
to be fobbed off with the endless dumbing down to the level of the lowest
common denominator “Eddie-from-Ficksburg broadcasting phone-ins” now
proferred? The listeners are switching off in droves.

As a nation, we rejoice in the crafting of our diverse national languages.
Yet, somehow, any attempt to preserve the English language has now been
ranked right up there with the grossest of atrocities. When one hears that
Barry Ronge’s column in the Sunday Times magazine is now dumbed down as a
matter of course, it’s a reflection of a terrible twist this country has
taken, where it seems it has become an outrage for our citizens to dare
expect the best.

I know full well that if I ask the station manager of Ukhozi FM, Bhodloza
Nzimande, to dumb down the use of IsiZulu on his station, his reaction
would be unprintable. [Applause.]




                          CELEBRATION OF DIVERSITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, there are people from many
different parts of our country who all have different and unique
backgrounds and cultures. This diversity is what makes us such a unique and
special nation, and helps us forge our own identity. It is this diversity
that unifies and binds us together as a nation and makes us so proudly
South African.

The IFP believes that our country’s disparate voices and constituencies are
a source of pride and should be accommodated. This is the essence of
pluralism and of building one nation.

Traditional leadership is also part of our heritage and the social fibre of
the rural community. Our traditional leaders are the proud custodians of
traditional values and are an integral part of what binds us as a South
African nation - so are our languages, music, dance and rituals. We are all
proudly South African and should not only practise tolerance and diversity,
but we should actively embrace, appreciate and celebrate them. This is our
heritage.


       SOUTH AFRICAN ACTS SHINE AT INTERNATIONAL PREMIER ARTS FESTIVAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L ZITA (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, on the occasion of Heritage Month,
the ANC welcomes the contribution that South Africans, both individually
and collectively, make in various fields, especially in the field of arts
and culture.

Two South African groups, the Soweto Gospel Choir and Amajuba, represented
our country in the International Premier Arts Festival in Scotland. The
Edinburgh Festival, as it is known, is by far the largest gathering of this
kind in the world. The two South African groups dazzled the crowd in the
Scottish capital and outshone their counterparts from other countries who
took part in the festival.

There were 15 000 performances and the South Africans came out tops.
Amajuba and the Soweto Gospel Choir received top ratings from all the arts
critics from around the world who were present at the festival.

South Africans continue to earn respect and recognition from the
international community not because we impose ourselves, but because of our
excellent talent and contribution to the positive things that unite the
people of the world, acting with respect and humility. Thank you.
[Applause.]




               GOVERNMENT’S OFFER TO PUBLIC SERVICE EMPLOYEES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it is very
important for hon members to familiarise themselves with the offer that
Government has put forward in the Public Service Bargaining Council. The
comments that have been made with respect to the offer that relates to
educators, in fact, do not address the true status of the offer that is in
the chamber.

Firstly, it is important to state that the totality of the sum available is
over R20 billion, which is a significant amount of money put forward by
government; secondly, we must also note that there has been an improved
offer to the level of 6% that has been placed before the unions represented
in the bargaining chamber.

Finally, I would like to say that the particular concerns of educators with
respect to the matter of pay progression, which the hon member referred to,
that is, the improvement of the remuneration of these professionals, has
indeed been addressed by the provision of a sum of R500 million, thereby
ensuring that a percentage beyond the 6% currently on offer is indeed
provided by the state. The provision of a homeowner’s allowance further
improves the amount that government has made available.

I therefore think it is vitally important that hon members do acknowledge
that there is an offer, which we believe is a fair offer, in the bargaining
council and that indeed the concerns of educators are being addressed and
will continue to be addressed. I thought it important that we put this
before this House. Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: I thought the half-hour wasn’t up. There is still a member from the
DA who is ready, willing and able to make another statement. You asked for
ministerial responses without looking in this direction.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, I did look in that direction. I even had to cut
the ANC list, because the rule is that we should take 14 statements, and I
came to the end of the 14. There are members of the ANC who were also
willing to participate, but unfortunately they could not. So I actually did
look in that direction.

I think you can’t doubt the size of my eyes. I can’t miss that, but thank
you very much, hon member. The member will be ready for the next day we
have statements. [Interjections.]




                              FLOOR - CROSSING


                            (Minister’s Response)

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZOBUGCISA NENKCUBEKO: Sekela-Somlomo, enkosi kakhulu
ndiyabulela. Ndifuna nje ukuchaphazela indawo ebiphakanyiswe liQela
eliPhikisayo, i-DA, malunga nomba wokuwelela kwamanye amaqela. Ndifuna
ukubakhumbuza ukuba isigqibo sokuwelela kwamanye amaqela sasithathwe apha,
yile Palamente. Mabangayilibali loo nto.

Indawo yesibini, xa bejonge amanye amazwe babona umahluko. Awukho umahluko
phakathi koMzantsi Afrika namanye amazwe ngokubhekisele kwindlela ekuwelwa
ngayo ngumntu esuka kwelinye iqela esiya kwelinye. Ngaphezulu, elo
lilungelo elikuMgaqo-siseko walapha. Xa ubani efuna ukuzibandakanya nelinye
iqela angenjenjalo.

Mabangalibali ukuba bawuxhasa nabo lo mthetho. Akuzange kubekho ngxaki.
Savumelana apha sonke. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Translation of Xhosa
Minister’s follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS, CULTURE, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy
Speaker, thank you very much. I want to touch on a point raised by the
opposition party, the DA, in connection with floor crossing. I want to
remind them about a position taken by this House concerning floor crossing.
They should not forget that.

Secondly, when they look at other countries they see things differently.
There is no difference between South Africa and other countries in relation
to floor crossing. Furthermore, that right is stated in the Constitution of
this country. If a member wants to cross over he can do so.

They must not forget that they supported this piece of legislation. There
was no objection. We all agreed. Thank you. [Applause.] ]


                               HERITAGE MONTH


                                 (Statement)


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I wish to inform the House that by agreement
there will be no party responses to the statement, as parties will have an
opportunity to express their views during the debate scheduled for 16
September 2004.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker and hon
members. The Ministry of Arts and Culture, together with members of the
executive councils in the provinces that are responsible for arts and
culture, invites the nation to participate in Heritage Month celebrations
that will be taking place in this month, September, throughout the country.


The theme that has been adopted for three years is: “Celebrating our living
heritage”, in other words, what we live. For the purposes of this year,
which coincides with our tenth year of democracy, our theme is:
“Celebrating our living heritage in the tenth year of our democracy”.

Living heritage, like any other human activity, emanates from time
immemorial. It is a lived experience of the various communities. It is the
totality of their experiences: the manner in which they deal with birth,
coming of age, maturity, marriage, old age and death; the manner in which
they celebrate these stages of human development; the manner in which they
deal with poverty and destitution; how they build their economies; how they
create their stability; how they co-exist with other communities, as well
as their natural environment; how they narrate their stories; and how they
sing and dance.

This year a different approach to Heritage Month and Heritage Day
programmes for 2004 has been adopted. It was agreed to discontinue the
national event, so to speak, that is usually characterised by a big event
at the Union Buildings or any other venue.

The Department of Arts and Culture and provincial departments envisage a
decentralised Heritage Month and Heritage Day that will see the provinces,
municipalities and traditional leadership authorities playing a prominent
role in the roll-out strategy, so that Heritage Month and Heritage Day have
an impact at a community level, generating capacity to mobilise the South
African public around the concept of living heritage. The Department of
Arts and Culture and the provinces hope to use the theme as a springboard
to achieve a bigger vision of collecting, preserving and promoting our
living heritage.

In the first week, which is week one in which we are now, the subtheme is
music, dance and theatre. Music and dance programmes designed not only to
showcase music and dance performances, but also to link these to particular
stories, events, ceremonies or rituals will characterise this week. This
will also be an opportunity to demonstrate how music and dance performances
have evolved over time in a multicultural society and how various cultures
have mutually influenced one another – transculturation.

The Department of Arts and Culture is working with the Universities of
Venda, Zululand and Fort Hare in the collection and preservation of
indigenous music, dance and oral history. This week will present an
opportunity to showcase the work that this project has yielded.

In the next week, week two, the subtheme is indigenous or traditional
knowledge and practices. There is a tendency to exclusively associate
indigenous or traditional knowledge and practices to the African section of
our population. The production of food, medicines and ointments centuries
ago is completely different from how they are produced today.

This is a common phenomenon among all the population groups, and there is a
lot that we can share in terms of how our ancestors engaged in judicious
farming methods, how they made fire, how they dug for gold and diamonds,
how they conserved our environment, how they bred livestock, how they
played the roles of midwives, how they brought up their young ones, how
they used facials and traditional make-up, and so on.

In the third week, week three, the subtheme will be icons of South African
cultural heritage and their stories. This week will be dedicated to
profiling and interviewing individuals or discussing the achievements of
individuals who have excelled in various aspects of living heritage. We
have used the concept of icons in order to simplify the concept of living
human treasures, which is the Unesco definition of the same concept.

Icons are people who have contributed through solid action towards the
revitalisation of a cultural tradition that is at risk of disappearing
owing to either lack of means for safeguarding and protection, or to the
process of rapid change, urbanisation or acculturation. These are people
who have demonstrated their role as a means of affirming the cultural
expressions of the peoples and communities concerned, their importance as a
source of inspiration and as a means of bringing peoples and communities
closer together; and people who have provided proof of excellence in the
application of skills and techniques and have affirmed their value as
unique testimonies to living cultural traditions.

In the fourth week, the subtheme will be national dialogue on the role of
living heritage in moral regeneration, social cohesion, poverty
alleviation, nation-building, reconciliation and in forging a national
identity. We intend holding a national dialogue on the aforementioned
national imperatives. The main purpose is to simplify these imperatives for
the entire South African citizenry and, further, to discuss the manner in
which South Africa can actually realise these ideals.

For Heritage Day, 24 September, we will be dealing with restitution and the
return of cultural property to original owners. The former anti-apartheid
movement of the Netherlands, through the foundation for audiovisual
productions on Southern Africa, African Skies, plans to return the Dutch
anti-apartheid material to South Africa.

The anti-apartheid movement of the Netherlands has presented to the
Department of Arts and Culture a catalogue consisting of video footage and
productions. The catalogue consists of 189 hours of historically valuable
video footage and 15 edited productions about support for the struggle
against apartheid in the Netherlands and on the co-operation between the
Dutch anti-apartheid movement and the liberation movements of South Africa.


South Africa, in turn, intends to return to Namibia archival and library
material that has been kept in South Africa since after the First World War
when Namibia, then South West Africa, became a mandated territory of South
Africa.

Therefore on 24 September 2004, which is Heritage Day, the Department of
Arts and Culture is planning a handover ceremony that will witness
significant international reciprocal events in the form of the African
Skies project that will see the Dutch handing over anti-apartheid archival
material to the government of South Africa and, at the same time, the
government of South Africa will be handing over the Namibian historical
records stored in the archives of South Africa. These will be handed over
to the Namibian government. The ceremony, which will involve Ministers of
culture and the embassies, will take place at the National Cultural History
Museum, the African Window, in Pretoria, which forms part of the Northern
Flagship Institution.

We therefore call upon all members of Parliament, government departments,
nongovernmental organisations, community-based organisations, the private
sector and individual citizens to participate in the preservation and
popularisation of our living heritage. Thank you. [Applause.]








                       PETROLEUM PIPELINES LEVIES BILL


                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, the Bill before the House
today provides that the regulatory authority may impose levies on petroleum
transported in petroleum pipelines. The levies will be based on the volume
of petroleum transported and are intended to cover the costs incurred in
the exercise of oversight over the petroleum pipelines industry by the new
regulatory authority.

The pipeline network, which is used to transport crude oil and petroleum
products between the port of Durban, refineries, synthetic fuel producers
and inland areas, is of strategic importance to the economy. The economy
depends on the stable supply of liquid fuels and hence the ongoing
effective operation of the petroleum pipeline and storage infrastructure.

To date, the state has  managed  the  operation  of  much  of  the  pipeline
network. It has now become a possibility that the private sector may  become
active in  the  ownership  and  operation  of  petroleum  pipelines.  It  is
therefore  necessary  to  introduce  regulatory  measures  to   ensure   the
efficient operation of the pipeline  network  and  the  orderly  development
thereof.

The Petroleum Pipelines Act, Act 37 of 2003, provides for the establishment
of a regulatory authority as custodian and enforcer of the regulatory
framework for the petroleum pipelines industry. In terms of section 12(b)
of that Act, funding for the regulatory authority is derived, amongst other
things, from levies imposed under separate legislation. The Petroleum
Pipelines Levies Bill, 2003, seeks to achieve this aim.

The Bill also provides for the Minister of Minerals and Energy, with the
concurrence of the Minister of Finance, to approve or disapprove the
imposition or variation of levies and the determination of interest on
overdue levies.

I introduce the Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Bill referred to  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance  for  consideration  and
report, the committee to consult the Portfolio  Committee  on  Minerals  and
Energy.

             NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: AIR QUALITY BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Madam Deputy
Chairperson, I would like to take this opportunity to add my own voice to
those who have paid tribute today to the late Dr Beyers Naudé, a visionary
Afrikaner clergyman and political activist. Dr Naudé’s contribution to
South African nonracialism will stand as the beacon of his legacy to our
new democracy.

Imagine waking up on a Monday morning with a sense of real discomfort.
Imagine climbing out of bed, wondering why your chest is tight, your eyes
are burning, and your lungs are struggling for air. Imagine opening your
curtains and looking up into a morning sky, filled not with sunshine but
blanketed by a huge cloud of smoke. This was the reality that greeted
families in Durban South on the morning of 12 April this year.

Or imagine walking or driving down your street on a Sunday afternoon and
feeling a fine mist falling from the sky. Imagine your concern and
frustration when you realise that the mist is not a light drizzle, but is
instead a shower of oil rain settling on your home, your car and your
family. This was a reality on 4 July this year, when residents of Table
View in Cape Town were sprayed with crude oil as it fell to earth after an
accident at a nearby refinery.

Unacceptable concentrations of cancer-causing pollutants are being measured
in and around South Africa's industrial centres. Every winter our people
cough and choke from breathing a vile cocktail of airborne pollution that
remains trapped under the annual inversion layer in the sky. Every year our
country spends more than R4 billion on health problems related to air
pollution caused by the burning of fossil fuels. This list of shame goes on
and on.

We have a duty to end this intolerable situation and we have a
responsibility to act. Our Constitution guarantees every South African the
right to air that is not harmful to our health and wellbeing. We, as
government, must protect and defend this right, taking the necessary
legislative and enforcement steps to ensure that the air that we breathe is
fit to breathe.

The National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill is one of the most
important pieces of environmental legislation yet to serve before this
House. It links directly to our government's efforts to build a caring
society and to improve the lives of especially our poorest communities.

From the outset, though, I must stress that new laws do not make blue
skies. No matter how well a law is constructed, no matter how detailed, no
matter how cutting-edge, the passing of a law will not miraculously scrub
our skies of the pollution that threatens our health, and even the global
climate itself.

Our skies will turn blue only through the hard work and dedication of
committed South Africans, effectively and efficiently making use of the
tools provided by this new legislation. As a number of communities have
shown us over the past few months, every South African in every community
can be an air quality manager. We all have a critical role to play.

Before we turn to the specifics of this new air quality Bill, we should
perhaps reflect on the gaps and failures of our existing legislation.
Although these failures seem obvious when breathing the foul air in some
parts of South Africa, we should recall that the current Atmospheric
Pollution Prevention Act, Appa, was passed in 1965, decades before we knew
anything about global climate change, ozone depletion, or poisonous
persistent pollutants. Although the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act
may have been adequate to manage air quality in one-industry towns, it has
not kept pace with industrial development and is now hopelessly outdated.

The National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill represents a
quantum leap in air quality management legislation, especially when
compared to the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act. The Act provides no
standards, nor does it give real guidance about what we regard as air that
is fit to breathe. The result is that there is no level playing field for
industry and no targets for improvement.

In contrast, the new National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill
provides for the setting of standards, both for the quality of air that we
breathe, and for what may be released into that air. These standards will
provide the benchmark for air quality management in all South African
communities and will now be used to measure how effectively we are managing
our air.

Another major improvement is the fact that the Bill uses ambient air
quality, the air that we breathe, as its point of departure. As such,
government will now be able to set tighter emission standards in areas
where multiple emission sources are present. In contrast, the Atmopheric
Pollution Prevention Act looked only at each individual smokestack without
ever taking into account the combined impact of multiple emissions. This
gap was one of the factors that allowed the development of air pollution
hot spots around our country.

The National Environmental Management Act introduced the polluter-pays
principle as far back as 1998, and the National Environmental Management:
Air Quality Bill not only turns this into a reality with regard to air
pollution, it takes the principle to a new level. Not only does this Bill
provide for cost recovery, it also provides for both ambient and emission
monitoring by industry itself.

Furthermore, this Bill has teeth. Gone will be the days of the Atmospheric
Pollution Prevention Act, when the only offence was to operate a listed
activity without a licence. Under the Act the most severe penalty that
could be imposed for conviction on a first offence was a mere R500 fine or
up to six months’ imprisonment. For a second offence the fine limit was
raised to the still-paltry level of R2 000 or one year in prison. The
National Environment Management: Air Quality Bill provides stiff penalties
for noncompliance, with fines up to the maximum allowed by the Criminal
Procedures Act and jail sentences of up to 10 years.

The new Bill ensures that the punishment fits the crime - looking at the
seriousness of the offence, the financial gain from the commission of the
offence and the offender's contribution to overall air quality problems in
that specific area. The message is clear: polluters will no longer be able
to get away with the equivalent of a slap on the wrist; they will be
punished.

So what does this mean in practice? Simply put, polluters will no longer be
able to hide among other polluters and point fingers at one another when
ambient air is no longer fit to breathe. Ambient air quality monitoring and
air quality modelling, coupled with stack-emission monitoring, will quickly
identify the culprits. Once identified, the Bill provides various tools to
reduce emissions. Furthermore, minimum emission standards will provide a
far better baseline.

Just over a month ago I was joined by the full portfolio committee on a
site visit to the South Durban industrial basin. It was a valuable
experience, because it brought us face to face with people such as the
parents of Junaid Ally, Maria Sundram and Ivan Moses – parents of children
cursed with chronic asthma whose only offence was being born into families
living side by side with heavy industry.

I wish to repeat today the warning to some industries in our country,
especially to some of our refineries: It is past time to clean up your act.
If your equipment and plants are outdated, if your technology is unsafe,
recapitalise and replace now before it is too late. Don't wait for
accidents or incidents, because with our new air quality legislation you
will be held accountable.

This Bill is a product of partnership. We are forging blue-sky partnerships
to clean up our air. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
NGOs and communities involved for their dedication and commitment to the
development of this Bill and the finalisation of this process. The passion
demonstrated by the people of South Durban, Boipatong, Sasolburg, Secunda,
Richards Bay and, here in Cape Town, Table View, will remain a driving
force behind the effective implementation of this Bill. The blue skies of
our future, across South Africa, will bear testimony to their
determination.

We would also not have reached this point without the hard work and the
foresight of the past and present portfolio committees, whose members
enthusiastically involved themselves in lengthy presentations and technical
debates, and also in heated discussions. The new committee has even visited
pollution hot spots all over the country, seeing first-hand why this Bill
is both urgent and important.

I would like to pay tribute to both the former chairperson, the hon Gwen
Mahlangu, and the new chairperson, the hon Elizabeth Thabethe, as well as
every member of their committees. As we cross the last remaining hurdles in
the finalisation of this piece of legislation, we must ensure that the
partnerships forged in its development must continue. As we said during the
Budget Vote process earlier this year, our sons and daughters must no
longer grow up under the impression that brown and grey are the natural
colours of our South African skyline.

Net oor die implementering van hierdie wetgewing: hierdie wetgewing
verteenwoordig nie net ’n paradigmaverskuiwing in wetgewing oor
lugkwaliteitsbestuur nie, dit verander ook hoe ons die implementering
daarvan gaan bestuur.

Verby is die dae waar nasionale amptenare, ver weg gestasioneer van die
probleme, besluite neem wat die lewens van gemeenskappe wat hulle nog nooit
ontmoet het nie, sal raak. Verby ook is die dae van amptenare sonder die
nodige magte of kundigheid om nakoming en afdwinging van hierdie wetgewing
te verseker. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Concerning the implementation of this legislation: This legislation not
only represents a paradigm shift in legislation on air quality management,
it also changes how we will manage the implementation thereof.

Gone are the days when national officials, who were stationed far away from
the problems, took decisions that would affect the lives of communities
whom they had never met. Gone also are the days of officials without the
necessary powers or expertise to ensure compliance with and enforcement of
this legislation.]

Our department, together with its provincial and local partners, is gearing
up for implementation. In this implementation process, the technical
aspects of air quality governance will be backed up by what the Deputy
Minister refers to as the Green Scorpions - officials in all spheres of
government trained as dedicated environmental management inspectors.

Although the Bill already contains a list of initial ambient air quality
standards, a protocol for the setting of new standards has already been
drafted, and an initial round of standard setting will commence before the
end of this year. So, too, will the identification of hot spots for
prioritised action, the listing of activities requiring atmospheric
emission licences, and the listing of controlled emitters.

During the transition between Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act, the old
piece of legislation, and this new Bill, our department, together with
affected provinces and local authorities, will be reviewing the existing
Act permits of the problem polluters over the next six to eight months. I
hope they take note. Apart from heralding our new approach to air quality
management, this exercise will also be used to build hands-on expertise in
our provincial and local authorities.

In conclusion, legislation such as this National Environmental Management:
Air Quality Bill is the reason South Africa is regarded as a global leader
in environmental protection and sustainable development best practice. This
Bill embodies our commitment to improving the lives of our people and
strengthening the health of our shared future.

I can assure this House that this will not be the last time that we talk
about air quality. Indeed, with standards providing a measure for
performance, I’m committed to providing this House with up-to-date and
accurate information on our progress, and the general state of the air in
our country.

Let us together cast off the clouds, the fumes and the stench. Let us give
to our children the gift of clean skies, deep breaths and lasting health.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms E THABETHE: Madam House Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
hon members and invited guests present today, let me start by expressing
our condolences, as the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, on the sad loss to this country of our comrade and cleric, Dr
Christian Beyers Naudé.

One of the Afrikaner voices against apartheid, Oom Bey, as he was
affectionately known, sacrificed his family and freedom to stand against
the unpopular apartheid regime. He was a hero to our cause and nation. I
salute him for all his support and the contribution he made, which resulted
in the democracy whose 10 years we are celebrating today. May his soul rest
in peace! Hamba kahle, Oom Bey!

The introduction of this Bill signifies some of the major achievements of
this government. After only 10 years in power, it has already identified
the need for complying with international protocols and conventions that
regulate and prescribe international standards in relation to the National
Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill.

As outlined by the Minister just now, the discussion regarding the
framework of the Bill or, for that matter, the National Environmental
Management Act, Act 107 of 1998, must commence with an examination of the
various rights established in section 24 of the Bill of Rights, in the
Constitution.

Two primary and separate rights are entrenched, namely the right
established in section 24(a), that everyone has the right to an environment
that is not harmful to their health or wellbeing; and the right established
in section 24(b), that everyone has the right to have the environment
protected for the benefit of present and future generations, through
reasonable legislative and other measures that prevent pollution and
ecological degradation, promote conservation, and secure ecologically
sustainable development and use of natural resources, while promoting
justifiable economic and social development.

The environment is not an exclusive area of national legislative or
administrative competence. In this regard, it is important to note that
part of the schedules and sections that we refer to are also going to give
impact in terms of how the municipalities make or administer bylaws for the
effective administration of the matters that they have the right to
administer. To the extent set out in section 155(6)(a) and section 155(7)
of the Constitution, air pollution is, in terms of Part B of Schedule 4, an
area of concurrent national and provincial legislative competence.

As also outlined by the Minister, we will be dealing with the norms and
standards, frameworks and national policies that will then provide a way of
adhering to the standards, as outlined. Plainly, it is not only through the
national and provincial framework determination of standards and
subordinate regulatory structures that are enabled by the Bill that these
objectives may be achieved. As with any framework instrument that creates
and enables administrative and structures subordinate to it to perform, it
must enable a complex set of regulations to be made, and empower the
exercising of powers by various Ministers and MECs of the provinces to do
what is required, as well as by local government.

Before exercising powers contained in some of these particular clauses,
there is a vast area of consultation with the relevant Ministers if a
certain clause needs to be implemented. So we are happy that that
particular aspect will be looked at in terms of dealing with the broader
issues.

Clause 54 provides that before exercising such powers, the Minister or MEC
must give notice of the proposed exercise of the relevant power in the
Gazette, as well as give notice in one of the newspapers. That will make
sure that at least our public and communities are also taken on board, so
that they are not only thought about when the Bill is not working.

The Minister or MEC may, in appropriate circumstances, allow any interested
person or community to present oral representation or objections to the
Minister or MEC, or a person designated by the Minister or MEC. The
Minister or MEC must give due consideration to all representations or
objections received or presented before exercising the power concerned,
notwithstanding the fact that the board advises the Minister, and engages
in consultative processes and then concurs with the Minister or the MEC.

On concerns regarding the licensing of listed activities as provided for in
chapter 5, in terms of clause 21 of the Bill the Minister or MEC may
publish, by notice in the Gazette, a list of activities which result in
atmospheric emissions, and which the Minister or MEC reasonably believes
have or are likely to have a significant detrimental effect on the
environment, including health, social conditions, economic conditions,
ecological conditions or cultural heritage.

In clause 33(1) the Bill provides that metropolitan and district
municipalities are charged with implementing the atmospheric emissions
licensing system referred to it in clause 22 and must, for this purpose,
perform the function of a licensing authority as set out in this chapter
and other provisions. While this is inconsistent with the policy of
developing the power of local authorities, the practical question is
whether all metropolitan or district municipalities have the technical and
financial capacity to perform the functions. Indeed, at present, not all
have the skills and capacity to take on the tasks. However, we think that,
with the assistance of the department, they will be able to execute that
particular duty very well.

The application of clause 33(2) has the potential of causing difficulties
in the future. The law permits a delegation of the function of licensing
authority to other organs of state besides the provincial one. It may, for
example, be desirable that Johannesburg delegates its functions to Tshwane,
or for Northern Cape as a province, in order to consolidate its function,
to delegate some of the powers to the North West province - but only after
consultation and not just to impose those functions.

Other concerns were addressed by the department and some of the portfolio
committee members when we visited some of the hot spots. The result is that
this builds administrators. In addition to being experts in the
technologies and science to be applied, they will be required to be experts
in administrative, civil and criminal law. In South Africa we have the
required skills base available – at a cost. Unless there is a willingness
to provide sufficient financial resources to employ the requisite skills,
the objects sought to be achieved will fail.

Air quality, along with other environmental concerns, is a high strategic
priority. The future health and development of South Africa is indeed
dependent on the successful actualisation of the rights provided for in
clause 24.

I support the Bill as it stands, without further amendments. It is urgent
that the reforms introduced by it be put in place. The Bill establishes a
sound and implementable framework for the rational and constitutional
management of air quality, as contemplated in section 24(b) of the
Constitution.

The real work necessary for the implementation of the Bill only commences
once it is passed. It is then that the regulations, management plans,
frameworks and standards will require final formulation. We look forward to
participating in those processes with the department.

Lastly, I would like to thank the portfolio committee members, old and new,
that I found in the committee, and the Minister and Deputy Minister for
their co-operation. I would also like to thank the director-general, Dr
Crispian Olver; the head of the section, Joanne Yawitch; Mr Lukey, Mr
Mkhetheni and other staff members for explaining some of these difficult
and complex issues to us.

We also appreciate the House Chairperson’s approval of the budget of the
committee, though he was a bit reluctant to allow a larger delegation to go
to these hot spots. From today, however, you will be aware that that is
going to be a contributing factor in making sure that we do our oversight
function and that we have a consensus agreement in terms of agreeing to the
Bill. We hope to report back to this House soon.

I’m sure that in future you’ll be able to fund us for more oversight visits
so that legislation will be much more understandable and members will get a
better sense of the issues rather than to sit here in Cape Town and get
very nice presentations, but at the end we are not able to make sense of
what is being presented to us.

However, it was quite a useful trip. We hope that when we monitor the
implementation in terms of the reduction of pollution and emissions, we
will also get necessary assistance from the office of the House Chairperson
in the form of agreeing to give us more funds.

Batho ba heso re re, re lebohile haholo ho ba ka Foreistata le ba ka
Gauteng, mmoho le ba Kwazulu-Natal ba re neng re bua le bona. Ke tshepa
hore kajeno ba mametse mme, ba a utlwa hore molaotheho ona oo re neng re
tsamaya re bua ka ona, o tla qala ho sebetsa mme ditho tsa Ntlo ena di tla
tjhaella puo ya rona monwna mmoho le letona la rona esitana le motlatsi wa
hae, sepheo ele hore re tle re kgone ho sebetsa kaha molaotheho o a bolela
hore maphelo a batho a lokela ho hlokomelwa.

Jwale, jwalo ka ha re tseba hore mmuso ona wa rona wa ANC o leka ka hohle
hore o seke wa lebala batho mme, o ba hopole, hobane maphelo a bona re
tlameha ho a lokisa a dule a le hantle, re tle re tsebe hore ha re kena
mona re bua ka tsa molao, re dumellana le lona ha re le lebale. Jwale, ke
tshepa hore ka morao ho dilemo tse leshome feela re le pusong, melao eo re
e lokisang ke ya dilemo tse 40, tseo eleng kgale di fetistswe empa batho sa
di natse.

Jwale he, rona ka re mofuta wa mmuso o hlabollang maphelo a batho, re re
mamelang molaotheho ona, le o sebedise. Re sa tla kgutlela ho lona hape, re
sebedisane mmoho le lona. Ke a leboha. [Ditlatse.] (Translation of Sotho
paragraphs follows.)

[We say thank you very much to our people in the Free State, to those in
Gauteng and to those who are in KwaZulu-Natal whom we have spoken to. I
hope that they are listening today and that they can hear that this
Constitution that we used to go around talking about will begin to
function, and that the hon members of this House, the hon Minister and the
hon Deputy Minister will endorse what we said. The aim is to enable us to
function, as the Constitution outlines that the lives of the people must be
taken care of.

Now, we know that our ANC-led government is trying by all means not to
forget the people because we must mend people’s lives; when we come in here
and talk about issues of law, we agree with you and we do not forget you.
Now, after only 10 years of governance, we are amending 40-year-old laws
that were passed a long time ago and that were not given any attention.

As we are the kind of government that improves people’s lives, we ask you
to listen to this Constitution and make use of it. We will still get back
to you and work together with you. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, hon members, the National Environmental
Management: Air Quality Bill is long overdue. It is a welcome addition to
an already impressive list of environmental laws that have been promulgated
in recent years, and replaces the defunct Atmospheric Pollution Prevention
Act of 1965. It contributes, in part, to the increased realisation of the
right contained in section 24 of our Constitution, that being the right to
a clean environment.

There are a number of excellent provisions in this new law. Most notably
are the nationally set standards with opportunities for stricter provincial
and local standards, provision for both emission and ambient monitoring,
and extensive opportunities for public involvement in all administrative
decisions.

I do not wish to dwell too much on discussing these new provisions, as they
have already been well covered by the Minister and the hon portfolio
chairperson. I would rather concentrate on the implementation process. It
is important that expectations surrounding this Bill are well managed.
While this House and the citizens of this country, particularly those who
live in pollution hot spots, look forward to cleaner air, this will not
happen overnight.

It is important, therefore, that government remains in constant contact
with affected communities and emitters about the timeframes for
implementation. Pollution is an inevitable consequence of production. We
can never aim for totally pollutionfree production, although we can aim,
and should aim, to reduce pollution wherever possible, especially to levels
that are not harmful to human health and the environment at large.

It is a reality in South Africa that our biggest emitters are also
strategic players vital for the security of our economy. These include,
amongst others, the oil refineries and Eskom. While these companies
certainly do not have a right to jeopardise the health of South Africans,
the implementation of the National Environmental Management: Air Quality
Bill must be done so as not to place an overly burdensome responsibility on
these industries over too short a period.

During the establishment of the national framework for this legislation, it
is imperative that the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism work
closely with the Departments of Trade and Industry, Minerals and Energy and
Local Government. With an oil price that is already in excess of $40 per
barrel, government must be careful not to stress these industries to a
level where the costs of compliance are necessarily passed on to the
consumers, with the likely associated inflationary effects, or where
industry is forced to cut jobs.

The DA is in principle fully in favour of emitters paying the full social
cost of their production, and indeed for being accountable for emissions,
but government must move at a pace that allows for the appropriate
adjustment by business.

The provision for tighter emission standards and licensing by provincial
and local authorities is welcomed, especially as it allows for increased
local knowledge to inform important decisions. It will not be without its
problems, though, and I urge the Minister to pay particular attention to
the provisions for co-operative governance when it comes to the licensing
of an emitter such as Eskom.

Eskom is a strategic national grouping, which operates with a single
network. While it is understandable that a local authority issuing a permit
to a particular Eskom power plant will want to take into consideration the
needs of the local community, consideration will surely have to be given to
the fact that electricity is generated in a particular place and
subsequently transported, sometimes hundreds of kilometres, for consumption
in other areas.

Therefore, although a particularly high burden is placed on the generating
area, it is of strategic importance to the economy and sustainable
livelihoods of many other areas. Some mechanism needs to exist to create a
fairly standard licensing procedure for a company such as Eskom. The
creation of unlevel playing fields in particular economic sectors must be
monitored.

While I would like to reinforce the need for the local municipalities to
make decisions based on the needs and circumstances of their particular
areas, this is another area where co-operative governance between levels of
government is important. Fortunately the minimum standards are set at
national level, and the department must be commended on suggesting
standards that are well within the World Health Organisation guidelines.

With this in mind, tighter provincial and local standards remain an option
if necessary, but guidance should be sought by these authorities when
considering tighter measures, as the implementation, even at local level,
may have broader national consequences.

It is certainly not my intention to be soft on industry. Industry will have
a legal duty to comply and must ultimately face the consequences. If
prosecution is necessary, then that instrument must be used. Of course it
must be used as a last resort. This legislation, without even using the
courts, should encourage industry to find means to reduce their levels of
pollution. In fact, even without this legislation, many industries have
worked continuously to reduce emissions.

In Durban, Sapref has invested R480 million in environmental improvements,
and has successfully reduced its emissions by 45%. Much of these
improvements can be attributed to the tireless pressure of community
activists in the South Durban basin. However, it is also a reflection of
improved available technology.

Many industries find that the best available technology, despite requiring
an initial capital expenditure, in fact reduces expenses in the long run,
as production becomes more efficient. It is hoped that this legislation
will further encourage industries to reduce their emissions, even to levels
below which they are permitted for. However, for those industries that
ultimately cannot meet the requirements or are not prepared to spend the
necessary capital to improve their technology, or indeed intentionally
flout the law, prosecution must follow. If need be, such industries must
close down.

The department will no doubt seek to prosecute a few high-profile cases,
and so it should, as it will prove that the government is serious about
enforcing the law. The introduction of the Green Scorpions is a fine
achievement by the department. It is hoped that they will continuously
engage emitters during the implementation of the legislation to ascertain
whether they are in compliance or not.

Much of the success of this legislation revolves around the capacity of
local governments. Licensing, enforcement, monitoring and liaising with
communities and industry, all require significant resources, both financial
and human.

It is pleasing that government has secured some funding from Scandinavian
countries for capacity-building, but in order for the implementation to be
successful the necessary funds will have to be directed towards this
process. There have been some conflicting messages from the department with
regards to whether this legislation is ring-fenced or not. Indeed it should
be. Revenues generated from permitting must be used to pay for enforcement,
and not become just another revenue stream for local government.

Key to the success of this legislation is partnership between the various
stakeholders. There has been considerable mistrust between effective
communities and industry. This legislation will force stakeholders to come
together. While the debates may remain as heated as before, communities
will increasingly feel assured that the law is on their side.

I would like to commend the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
for conducting an extensive public participation process during the
drafting of this piece of legislation. Air pollution has proved to be a
justifiably emotive subject for many communities all over South Africa,
most notably for the communities of South Durban basin, Secunda, Sasolburg,
Boipatong, Richards Bay and Milnerton. Many have fought long-standing
battles with emitters and government, and most, at one time or another,
have felt that their voices were ignored.

It is pleasing that these communities have been able to make significant
inputs and, by all indications, most of their concerns with this
legislation have been dealt with. Equally, businesses must surely be
relieved that at least there is more certainty associated with the legal
environment framework within which they will be expected to operate within
the near future.

I have concentrated in my speech on the implementation of the Bill with
regards to industry. There are many other points of emissions, most notably
from vehicles. The department must give close attention to the transport
sector when it draws up the national framework. If we are meaningfully to
improve the quality of our air, the approach will have to be broad based.

In conclusion, the National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill has
the ability to create win-win situations for emitters and affected
communities if implemented with purpose and with the necessary financial
and human resources, and most importantly, if it is done at a pace that
allows stakeholders to fully understand the ramifications of the
legislation. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM:  Thank you,
Deputy Chairperson and hon members. I would like to thank the chairperson
of the portfolio committee, Comrade Elizabeth Thabethe, and all the members
of the parties that have supported this Bill. It is a privilege to
participate in the discussion on this Bill.

Firstly, I would like to say that air quality is not a technical issue that
no one apart from scientists can understand. People think air quality is
something very technical and that we cannot monitor it. We have all been
provided with very efficient air quality monitoring devices and have never
needed to be trained on how to use these devices. I am talking about our
noses. We know when air is not fit to breathe and we can tell the
difference between clean air and foul smells. We are all air quality
monitors, and we do not need to be technicians or academics. Now it is time
for us to become air quality managers, because we have the other part and
now we must advance and become managers.

The people of South Durban, Boipatong, Sasolburg, Secunda, Richards Bay,
Table View and many other places have shown us that you do not need to be a
scientist to know when the air that you are breathing is harmful to your
health and wellbeing. These people have been waiting for this Bill and have
actively involved themselves in ensuring that it will protect them and all
the people of South Africa.

Following the public hearings on the National Environmental Management: Air
Quality Bill, the department has met with all the groups who made
presentations to the portfolio committee in order to ensure that all South
Africans can make this legislation their own. The issue of ownership is
very important, because nothing would be sustainable if we are not owners.

This process has resulted in a number of important proposed amendments
which, I am convinced, will provide the means to properly deal with the air
pollution problems many of our people have to deal with every day of their
lives.

There are also links between this and the Constitution. The first one
relates to our constitutional right to breathe air that does not harm us.
Despite the arguments of the department that this Bill was inherently
linked to the Constitution, the public hearings made it clear that people
wanted to see a clear and unambiguous link between the Bill and their
constitutional right. To this end, this link has been fully established
through amendments to both the Bill's long title and objectives.

Furthermore, a preamble has been inserted to make it doubly clear that the
National Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill is there to protect our
health and wellbeing.

Another issue that has been widely debated in the press is the impression
that the Bill concentrates only on ambient air quality and does not make
mandatory provision for emission standards. This perception is challenged
by amendments that provide for mandatory minimum emission standards for all
listed activities. The amendments ensure a level playing field whilst
providing for stricter standards where these are required to protect and
enhance air quality.

A further concern raised during the public hearings was the issue of
timeframes. Even though it is difficult to set timeframes for things that
involve participatory processes, we have shown our commitment to clean air
by setting clear timeframes for publication of the National Air Quality
Management Framework, the road map for air quality management
implementation, over the next five years. We have also set clear turn-
around times for atmospheric emission licensing.

In its original form, there was a concern that the wording of the Bill
placed an unacceptable burden of proof on the state before it could act to
control specific activities or pollutants. As this was never the intention,
this wording has been changed to ensure that the Minister and MECs can take
immediate action as soon as they reasonably believe that action must be
taken.

Another important area of concern was around the transitional arrangements
in respect of current atmospheric emission authorisations. In reviewing
these arrangements, the department conceded that these were confusing and
has reworked these arrangements substantially to allow for a smooth and
trouble-free transition from the Atmospheric Pollution Prevention Act to
the new approach to air quality management.

All of these amendments I have described have been accepted, and extremely
well received in some cases, by the stakeholders who have involved
themselves in the amending process. However, one amendment appears to have
raised some concern. This amendment relates to the inclusion of a new
regulatory tool within the Bill known as controlled fuels. Why it has
caused concern is somewhat confusing and perhaps it is worth providing a
little more detail.

Throughout the development of the Bill, there have been calls for
regulations that will encourage cleaner production, that is, treating the
cause of the problem rather than just the symptom. Cleaner production is
encouraged when one takes a lifecycle approach to environmental management.
Such an approach is what motivated the inclusion of the control of the
dirty fuels component of the multipoint plan to clean up South Durban's
air.

During the portfolio committee's visit to South Durban, the question of how
dirty fuels are to be regulated under the Bill was raised. In this regard,
although it was recognised that the Bill could be used in various ways to
control the impact of dirty fuels, it was also recognised that there was no
single regulatory tool within the Bill to deal with this issue simply and
effectively. The inclusion of the controlled fuels provision closes this
regulatory gap in the Bill.

Unfortunately, it appears that some people believe that this provision will
encourage or legitimise the use of dirty fuels, but they will learn as time
goes by that it is not what they think it is.

Although this logic is somewhat confusing, I will clear up any confusion by
saying that this provision will be used to control, regulate and even
outlaw fuels that give rise to unacceptable pollution. Government will
never legitimise the poisoning of our people and our environment.

In conclusion, I again want to express our gratitude to all those South
Africans who have given up their time to engage in the development and
finalisation of this Bill. We will all be beneficiaries of your efforts.

I firmly believe that this Bill, together with its important amendments,
will begin to address a problem that has been plaguing us for a long time.
We all have a right to an environment that is not harmful to our health and
wellbeing. This means that we also have a right to clean air. At last we
are taking the first bold steps to ensure that this right is fulfilled.

LegalWise has a slogan that says, “don’t talk to me; talk to my lawyer”. We
are saying, “don’t talk to us; talk to the Bill that you, the citizens of
this country have made”. I thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, the ID believes that this is a revolutionary
piece of legislation and that it will, for the first time, introduce a
proper regulatory environment for air quality in South Africa. I am
saddened, however, that it took so long for Parliament to enact such a
piece of legislation.

During our study tour of pollution hotspots we were shown communities that
have, for many decades, been powerless to prevent pollution from
industries. This pollution is not just an environmental issue, but as we
vividly saw, a health issue as well. Many families have had to see their
children contracting leukaemia and crippling respiratory conditions. One
feels a certain amount of shame that justice was not delivered to these
families at an earlier stage of our democracy.

I also feel a sense of injustice that this piece of legislation is not
retrospective in its scope and that communities will not be able to use it
to claim liabilities from past polluters. These communities will now need
to resort to the legal realm to bring class action suits against those
companies which for many decades exceeded international emission standards.

This piece of legislation does, however, have a clause in it that obligates
government to perform health studies so that the precise causes and extent
of these health conditions can be documented. I would urge the Department
of Health to work closely with the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism to undertake such studies in the pollution hotspots of South
Africa. These health studies are vital for communities wanting to obtain
legal compensation.

I would also urge the department to use this legislation to strictly
enforce the new air standards and ensure that polluting industries comply.
What was clear to me on the study tour was that many industries only enact
measures when government forces them to do so.

The ID would also like to see strong action finally being taken against
companies that have a poor record of industrial safety. In the case of
Phoscor in Richards Bay, families and individuals have been left destitute
and incapacitated by accidents with very little by way of compensation
being paid to them. These companies must be made to understand that
negligence on their part will be severely dealt with, and the ID is
confident that the department has now been given the teeth to do precisely
that.

The ID supports this Bill.

Mnu M U KALAKO: Mam’uSekela-Sihlalo namalungu ePalamente, uMgaqo-siseko
uthi wonke umntu waseMzantsi Afrika unelungelo kwindalo, imvelo nempilo
engcono. Uqhuba uthi, siyile Ndlu yoWiso-mthetho kufuneka senze imithetho
eza kukhusela indalo ukuze izizukulwana ezilandelayo emva kwethu zikwazi
ukuxhamla kuyo.

Uthi ke, imithetho ekufuneka siyenzile apha yimithetho enxulumene
nokujongana nomoya ococekileyo, imilambo ecocekileyo, ulwandle kunye
nomhlaba ukuze sikwazi ukuba siphile ngaphandle kokuba sibe nezifo.

Uqhuba uthi, kufuneka sikhuthaze ukugcinwa kakuhle kwendalo, sizame
ukuqhuba inkqubo yophuhliso olukwaziyo ukulondoloza indalo ngaxeshanye
sizama ukukhulisa uqoqosho lwesizwe.

Umthetho esithe sawuqulunqa ke nesiza kuwuphumeza namhlanje ujonga zonke
ezi zinto. Siyazi ukuba umthetho omdala ka-1965 ubuthethelela kakhulu
oosomashishini ungabakhuseli abantu kwizifo neentsholongwane ezenziwa
lushishino. Urhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC ubone ukuba makaye ebantwini aye
kuva izimvo zabo malunga nalo Mthetho uYilwayo. Bathethile ke abantu
baseMzantsi Afrika bebonisana nathi malungu ePalamente ngawo.

Ngaphambili eMzantsi Afrika bekungekho zinto zikwaziyo ukubonisa
oosomashishini ubungakanani bongcoliseko lomoya onganyanyezelwa ukhutshwa
lushishino lwabo. Bekungekho nezinto ezithi zisinike amandla thina
baseburhulumenteni ukuze sikwazi ukugxininisa ukuba oosomashishini
bangawungcolisi umoya nemilambo, kungekho nantatho-nxaxheba ngabantu
abangqongwe yile mizi-mveliso ukuze bakwazi ukuncedisana nayo ukuqinisekisa
ukuba ayiwungcolisi umoya ophefumlwa ngabantu kwanamanzi aselwayo
ngokunjalo, kwaneemeko ekuhlaleni.

Icandelo 9 lalo Mthetho uYilwayo siwushukuxayo apha namhlanje limisela
umgangatho olawula ucoceko lomoya, kwanokuba iinkampani ezithi zenze
ukhiqizo zilwenza kangakanani na ukuze lungachaphazeli abantu.

Kwakhona, icandelo 10 liyavumelana neCandelo 9 lalo Mthetho uYilwayo, kuba
linika amaphondo amandla ukuze akwazi ukumisela imigangatho eza
kuqinisekisa ukuba abo bangcolisa indalo bayatshutshiswa. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M U KALAKO:  Deputy Chairperson and hon members, the Constitution
provides that the South African people has a right to the environment,
nature and a healthy life. It also provides that this House should pass
reasonable legislation that seeks to protect nature for the benefit of the
present and future generations. These legislative measures should prevent
pollution and ecological degradation of rivers, oceans and the soil in
general, so that we can live safely and be protected from diseases.

The Constitution further provides for the promotion of conservation, the
securing of ecologically sustainable development, and the use of natural
resources while promoting economic development.

The Bill that we shall be debating and eventually adopting today has
included all these matters. We know that the old Atmospheric Pollution
Prevention Act, No 45 of 1965 catered for the interests of business more
than it did for those of its ordinary citizens, and as a result many people
contracted diseases. The ANC-led government has seen it necessary to engage
the public and seek their views about this Bill. Therefore, the people of
South Africa have participated in discussions with members of Parliament
and tabled their views.

Previously South Africa did not have national standards to regulate stack
emissions by big businesses. The government did not have any authority over
the activities that amounted to air pollution by businesses and communities
living close to industrial areas did not have platforms they could use to
voice their opinions with regard to activities that pollute the air they
breathe and the water they drink in their areas.

Section 9 of the Bill introduces a certain standard that is going to
administer air pollution and regulate and measure stack emissions by
businesses so that people’s wellbeing is secure and protected.

Section 10 of the Bill agrees with Section 9 in that it provides provinces
with authority that would enable them to establish national standards for
ambient air quality, as well as to ensure that those that continue with
their dumping and air pollution activities are prosecuted.]

Equally, the Bill does not only regulate stack emissions. The new licensing
system will also take into account atmospheric emissions, as outlined in
clause 40 of the Bill.

When we undertook our tour of the hotspot areas, the cry from many
communities affected by air pollution was the need to penalise polluters.
This cry is answered in clause 52, where it says, “Those who break the law
will be fined or imprisoned up to 10 years.”

Phaya ekuhlaleni, ezilokishini zethu, abantu kufuneka bazi ukuba lo Mthetho
uYilwayo ujoliswe nakubo. Kufuneka bawuhloniphe kuba abo bangcolisayo baza
kohlwaywa ngokwalo Mthetho uYilwayo. Abantu baseMzantsi Afrika bayazi ukuba
ngalo Mthetho uYilwayo u-ANC ufezekisa iimfuno neminqweno yabo.
Njengombutho onenkathalo ngobomi babantu nempilo yabo, njengoko usitsho
kumqulu wawo wokugaya iivoti, i-ANC ithi kubantu baseMzantsi Afrika: Nanko
ke umthetho wenu. Impumelelo yawo ixhomekeke ekubambisaneni kwenu
norhulumente. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[People in our communities must know that this Bill is meant for them. This
Bill provides that those who do not adhere to the rule shall be prosecuted.
South African people know that with this Bill the ANC has fulfilled their
needs and wants. As an organisation that cares for the lives and well-being
of its people, an objective captured in its election manifesto, the ANC
presents the Bill to them and says: There is your Bill. Its success is
dependent upon your cooperation with the government. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson and hon members, the portfolio committee had
the privilege to visit some of the air pollution hotspots around the
country, because we wanted to establish first-hand from the communities
what problems they were experiencing with air pollution.

An estimated 20 million to 30 million South Africans regularly inhale smoke
from burning coal or burning wood. This is not only because of industry,
but many of these South Africans also have to burn coal in their homes.

Added to this problem are further emissions of hydrocarbons, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide through traffic emissions,
mining and various other industries. The impact of this is twofold.
Firstly, there is the impact on the environment and, secondly, on the
health of the people living in this country.

With regard to the impact on the environment, atmospheric pollution leads
to ozone depletion and acid rain, which then leads to acidification of our
soil and water, to global warming and to climate change, which then has a
detrimental effect on agriculture and the production of food.

The second important impact relates to the effect on human health. It is
exactly because air pollution affects people’s health that pollution and
the prevention of pollution is in essence, at its very core, a human rights
issue. That is why communities expect government to do something about it.

Communities expect government to protect their constitutional right to an
environment that is not detrimental to their health, and this government
has shown that it is committed to building a caring society.

In an essay written on air quality, the National Association for Clean Air
writes that effective air pollution can sometimes be direct and acute or,
as we’ve seen on the visit to the hotspots and as we’ve heard from various
communities, more often the effective air pollution is less obvious and
more long-term, making it difficult to identify and to prove who exactly
was responsible for the damage.

Air pollution can also cause acute and chronic lung diseases, and research
in the UK and Australia has shown very strong links between children living
near refineries, airports and major roads and children suffering from
cancer.

Up to now the outdated legislation has prevented effective environmental
governance and strict compliance monitoring. In short, in order to build
the caring society that this government is committed to, government has a
duty to prevent air pollution, but without proper legislation, its hands
are tied.

This new Bill is therefore very important. It will set, amongst other
things, norms and standards for air quality monitoring and management, as
well as compliance and enforcement provisions. This, in turn, will reduce
the risk to human health and will promote pollution prevention and cleaner
production.

However, we cannot leave it to government alone to take on the issue of air
quality. It is going to take a proper partnership between government, the
various spheres of government, civil society through the NGOs, and industry
to make the legislation work. That partnership is an integral part of the
new Bill. The new Bill aims to provide increased opportunities for public
involvement and public participation in the protection of air quality, and
further aims to ensure that the public has access to relevant and
meaningful information about air pollution.

To conclude, I recently read a quote - unfortunately I can’t remember who
it was attributed to - that reflected what I thought showed the attitude
that we should have towards the environment. The quote said that we do not
only inherit the earth from our ancestors, we also borrow it from our
children. I think that the National Environmental Management: Air Quality
Bill underpins that thinking, and it commits government to striving to
ensure that we do just that, namely that we build a caring society and, at
all times, maintain a clean and safe environment, not only for us, but also
for generations to come. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairman, firstly, I would like to congratulate the Minister
on this legislation. It’s one of several pieces of legislation that he has
brought. He has been enthusiastic and committed and I congratulate him and
his department for the excellent work that he has brought us thus far.

The air is everyone’s responsibility and it is no one’s responsibility. The
Minister will find that it is also the last unchartered frontier, because
it is also unchartered as a legal frontier. As many test cases will be
fought, he will find that we are breaking new ground in this regard, and I
would suggest that he begins to build the expertise of the department as
rapidly as possible.

The Bill confers authority to establish ambient air standards on which
emission control requirements will be based and delineates licensing
procedures. That’s what the Bill does. The explanatory memorandum says it
marks a turning point for pollution and waste governance in South Africa.
Of course we are enthusiastic, but this is only a turning point, it’s only
a beginning. In a certain sense, although a huge amount of work has gone
into this, the easy part has been done, because polluters will pollute
unless stopped by tough and uncompromising regulatory action. That’s the
international experience.

I am not concerned about new generating capacity, Minister, because if you
put up a new power station, nobody is going to finance it unless you comply
with international norms and standards. You will not get the money for it.
You will find that all new machines comply. The issue is existing capacity,
and remember we are only adding 1% per annum to the productive capacity of
the country. The problem is the other 99%. What you are dealing with,
Minister, in your lifetime and the lifetime of this Parliament, is
basically a retrofit problem: How do we deal with what we already have, not
with what we are going to get?

Many of the existing coal-fired power stations, existing industrial
boilers, existing hospital and other incinerators, existing old diesel bus
fleets that are serious polluters are going to be with us for another 20 or
30 years. The problem is a retrofit challenge. The worst pollutants aren’t
those that one can see, such as the black smoke from domestic fires, which
is not very pleasant, but it’s the invisible toxic pollutants and emissions
that you can’t see, which come out of high-temperature ovens, power
stations, boilers, incinerators, engines, and dioxins that come out of
hospital incinerators, particulates that come out of the back of buses and
nitrogen oxide that you can’t see, but which are the real problems and are
difficult things to deal with.

You may be interested to know that international opinion, which I consulted
on this, said that they didn’t see a market emerging in South Africa for
some time. They have been through it before. The argument from polluters
always is, “It’s going to drive up costs. Our competitors don’t do it. How
can you put the cost on us? How are we going to export?” The truth,
Minister, is that the most successful economies of the world have the
highest clean air standards and the most stringent requirements. Even
developing countries such as South Korea and Taiwan have introduced
stringent requirements.

I think, Minister, your difficulty is going to be to get the public on your
side. I think they are on your side now; keep them there and educate them.
Also, our Constitution provides challenges for you. With its three tiers of
government it creates compliance and alignment problems. One of the biggest
challenges for you and for us will be to align those tiers of government
and get them pointing in the same direction.

The second biggest challenge, in my view, is to stop special pleading for
delay and exemption. Anti-pollution measures deferred, Minister, is
pollution allowed. International experience has shown that there will be
constant requests for deferral and phasing. Firstly, they will say, “We
can’t do it now, but we will do it in five years’ time,” and in five years’
time they will say, “Now we have to phase it in over the next 15 years.”
You will find that you get nowhere fast. Very often cold turkey is the way
forward.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr K D S DURR: We wish the Minister well and we support the legislation.

Mr W D SPIES: Chair, in a free market governments sometimes have to
intervene in order to protect marginalised people and communities from
those who wield the economic power. This principle is well accepted in our
country. At the other end of the scale are some assumptions which are also
generally approved, but which contain much less wisdom. One of those is the
assumption that nature will be able to deal with pollution.

Nature indeed has a mind-boggling ability to deal with pollutants. They are
destroyed by the sun, de-armed by micro-organisms and simply diluted into
the earth’s multiple systems. However, that also has a limit. Simply too
much carbon has been burned over the past 200 years. Carbon exists in a
never-ending cycle on and around the earth. Long ago, the earth had so much
carbon dioxide in the air that humans would not have survived the high
temperatures and moisture which evaporated into the atmosphere.
Nevertheless, huge forests extracted carbon from the air until completely
new circumstances prevailed in which humans could survive.

In South Africa, huge efforts are made to uplift marginalised African
communities, and yet there is one big marginalised community whose voice is
hardly ever heard, despite the fact that they might outnumber all the other
communities in the country – this is the community of future generations.
They have to live in the world that we are creating today.

Ecology and economy are two sides of the same coin. The present economic
dispensation envisages an increasingly centralised energy-intensive global
system. The flip side of this coin is a suffering environment without any
chance of long-term sustainability. Much of what is actually needed can be
found in the republican tradition: that all decisions are made at the
lowest possible community level. This should lead to an economic system of
localism, with the flip side of a well-cared-for environment which is
recognised as a gift from God to be delivered to our children.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr W D SPIES: The FF Plus supports the Bill in as far as it would lead to a
cleaner environment, but we do so reservedly because a good fine-tuning law
might just entrench the current dispensation.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order!

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF notes that the Atmospheric
Pollution Prevention Act of 1965 has been, to date, the only law managing
air pollution in South Africa. We further acknowledge that, with the
development of our country, better definition and greater sources of air
pollution, this Bill is outdated. In view of this, we welcome the National
Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill, which brings legislation in
line with the present and fulfils the requirements of the management of air
pollution in South Africa.

We fully support the aims that this Bill serves to achieve and find the
involvement of both local and provincial spheres very promising in ensuring
that air quality standards are met throughout South Africa.

The provisions, offences and penalties in this Bill regarding any misuse
and abuse of our air quality are definitely a deterrent and people will now
be more cautious. In light of this, we call for local and provincial
authorities to be given the resources to carry out proper management of
polluting industries. Further, we request industries to give annual reports
on pollutants they have been dispersing in the air, as is done
internationally.

It is known that most areas affected by pollution from industries are poor
and we need to address this with seriousness. These industries should not
be allowed in areas neighbouring residential areas. This has serious health
threats for our country. Pollution is a serious problem in South Africa,
especially in areas such as KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga and many other
provinces.

This Bill promises efficient provisions to improve our air quality, stop or
avoid air pollution and manage a healthy air supply for South Africans. Our
children and adults have suffered enough from diseases caused by air
pollution.

The MF therefore supports the National Environmental Management: Air
Quality Bill. Thank you very much.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson, it’s quite sad to note that the hon Spies
decided to put some qualifications to his support for this particular Bill.
I am not going to fight with him; I just want to say that I am sorry that
he could not be with us on the oversight tour. Every party, except Mr Spies
and the ACDP who were not there, enjoyed quite a good experience on that
trip, interacting with industry as well as with the community.

For close to 40 years, South Africa, in its drive for industrialisation,
particularly in the minerals and energy sector, has allowed our environment
to be systematically polluted. The purpose of these projects was to improve
the collective circumstances of the people suffering as a result of the
disadvantages of this pollution.

Secondly, these projects were also established to fight economic sanctions
against South Africa. What complicated matters more, was the forced
removals and destruction of community life which arose from political
policies deliberately enforced through violent means.

New townships were built close to these projects, or projects were brought
closer to the townships. Over the years, pollution has progressively
worsened, resulting in some people being forced to leave their beloved
areas. Members of the communities surrounding these plants have started to
suffer from all sorts of illnesses, such as kidney diseases, cancers, sinus
diseases, respiratory problems, as well as asthma.

Strangely, when comparing the white suburbs and the black townships, the
problems in the townships are, of course, worse than in the other suburbs.
No wonder someone in the opposition could ask: Why this Bill now only after
10 years? It was certainly not my friend hon Morgan, nor was it hon
Greyling. It was somebody else – I will not mention his name now, because
he is not here. However, while this is a legitimate question to ask, one
also needs to ask: What did those who were in power all these years do over
the past 40 years to fight the pollution in these particular industries in
order to bring about a better life for our people?

We strongly believe this Bill could not have come at a better time. The
Constitution clearly states that our people must enjoy a clean and safe
environment.

Let’s all give praise to the communities of Boipatong, Sasolburg, Secunda,
Table View and other areas who gallantly fought companies such as Iscor,
Sasol, Caltex and the mines for polluting the air.

Reports we got from these communities on our visits were that huge
conglomerates, such as the ones we mentioned, were never really interested
in their problems. Workers at these particular plants also complained about
the safety standards of companies in these industries that left much to be
desired.

Verlede week was daar ’n verskriklike groot ontploffing by Sasol in Secunda
– die tweede in twee maande – waarin sewe mense gesterf het en meer as 100
beseer is. Ons pleidooi is aan die groot maatskappye, in die besonder groot
maatskappye soos Sasol. Ons hoop dat hulle die ondersoek na daardie ongeluk
so vinnig as moontlik sal afhandel, sodat die feite op die tafel kan kom en
onnodige gissings en bewerings hokgeslaan kan word.

Namens ons portefeuljekomitee, en ek is seker ook namens die Parlement, wil
ons graag ons diepste meegevoel betuig met die families van die oorledenes
en beseerdes. Ons dink aan u in hierdie tyd van u beproewing. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Last week there was a terrible huge explosion at Sasol in Secunda – the
second in two months – in which seven people died and more than 100 were
injured. Our plea is to the larger companies, in particular companies such
as Sasol. We hope they will complete the investigation into that accidents
as soon as possible, so that the facts can come to light and unnecessary
speculations and allegations can be eliminated.

On behalf of our portfolio committee, and I am also on behalf of
Parliament, we would like to express our deepest sympathy with the families
of those who died or were injured. We are thinking of you at this time of
your tribulation.]

Our people’s cries for cleaner air and a safer environment have justified
the repeal of the outdated law. The introduction of this new National
Environmental Management: Air Quality Bill is going to reform the law
regulating air quality in order to protect and enhance the quality of air
in the Republic, taking into account the need for sustainable development
and providing for national norms and standards regulating air quality
monitoring, management and control by all spheres of government in terms of
specific air quality measures.

I must say - and I concur with hon Greyling - this is quite a revolutionary
piece of legislation that we are about to vote into law. It speaks of norms
and standards for quality and control of emissions from point to nonpoint
sources, air quality monitoring, air quality management, planning and air
quality information management. It provides for public participation in the
protection and enhancement of air quality, public access to information,
the reduction of discharges likely to impair our air quality, and the
promotion of efficient and effective air quality management.

Do you know what this means? It means a healthier and cleaner lifestyle
and, of course, a longer life. I visited Sweden recently and the average
age of a person living in Sweden is 79 years, unlike in South Africa where
our beloved elderly live a much shorter life. Now, this Bill seeks to
change all this.

We further appeal to the Department of Provincial and Local Government to
speed up the process of the electrification of the townships, so that the
whole question of making these imbawulas [braziers] can stop and people can
have access to electricity and electrical heaters, in order to assist in
cutting down on these polluted areas.

Lastly, our communities can now look forward to going directly to
municipalities where a licensed emission control officer will ensure that
all the affected communities will be able to have their problems and
concerns taken on board so that they can be resolved. Not only will they
have an active say in the determination of the air quality, but they will
also actively participate in making those kinds of decisions.

In supporting this National Environment Management: Air Quality Bill, I
want to thank in particular the MEC and the Gauteng Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Environment. They were very impressive and
assured us that they were ready and waiting to implement this Bill.

We also want to thank the communities. It was extremely humbling that for
the first time, in my experience at least, we went to communities that not
only complained about not having jobs, but also complained about clean air
and health problems. I think that is something that really struck a number
of us on our visits to these particular areas. I want to take my hat off to
these particular people who say, “We want to have a healthy society and a
better and safe South Africa.”

Finally, Minister, please allow me now to steal just a bit … Where is the
Minister? Oh. Please allow me just to steal a bit of your show – of course
it is done in a comradely manner. I just need to say, as chairperson of the
Western Cape caucus of the National Assembly, I wish to congratulate our
premier and the Western Cape cabinet on their 100-day achievement. Let me
mention some of these achievements.

In this period they have opened four new police stations, they have
arrested drug lords, they are exceeding their target of providing child
grants to 96 000 people …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Mr Olifant, please take
your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: The hon member has made a
very good speech about a particular piece of legislation. However, I don’t
believe that the Rules of Parliament allow for him to do what he is doing
at present, and I ask you to rule accordingly.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): You are correct, Mr Ellis. Mr
Olifant, will you keep to the present topic.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Mr Chairperson, I am effectively contributing to the
environment. I missed the hon Ellis - I wanted to hit him, but he was lucky
to sneak in here. I just need to say again - allow me, Mr Ellis -
congratulations, Premier Rasool and your team, on a job well done in the
Western Cape. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Thank you, Chairperson.
I would really like to thank Mr Ellis. It is the first time in human memory
that the DA has objected to somebody trying to steal my show. Thank you, Mr
Ellis. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

I would like to thank all the parties for their support for this
legislation and all the hon members for their excellent contributions. I
would like to thank the hon chairperson for the way in which she has led
this process and convinced the committee to take an active interest in
legislation before them so that the role of the committee is not limited to
only oversight, but is that of really leading the process.

I would also like to commend the hon Deputy Minister. She is the political
champion of the multipoint plan in the Durban South basin that I referred
to, and she played a pioneering role in ensuring that this issue continued
to be on the agenda of government, and also that it moved up that agenda.

The hon Minister has led by example and they have put a framework in place
in Durban South. Although it was voluntary, it provided the basis and the
framework for what we are now legislating. It has moved from being a
voluntary framework to one where we set concrete measurable targets that we
will now be able to enforce. I would like to commend the hon Deputy
Minister for that role.

A number of hon members – Johnson, Morgan and Greyling – referred to the
health dimension of what we are now doing, that it is a human rights issue.
That is true. Those of you who went on the visit will be able to testify
that doctors came forward and alerted members of Parliament to what was
happening in their specific areas with regard to children and communities
staying in those areas. So, it is not simply about creating a framework
that sounds nice, but it has that very important health and human rights
dimension.

The hon member Morgan referred to the fact that we will have to manage
expectations and that this legislation will have a lead time. We will not
be able to change the situation overnight. We are now putting in place a
framework. We must now make sure that we really move into the realm of
concrete targets that we will be able to enforce over time. We must also
make sure that we provide clarity and information to the public with regard
to those frameworks.
With regard to the revenue streams and how we are going to fund this, the
department has proposed an annual permit fee in the legislation in order to
provide a revenue stream for local government on this air quality
management. The legal advice that we have received is that this was a money
Bill matter and the director-general has therefore asked the National
Treasury separately to process a section 77 Bill – a so-called money Bill.
We have not yet had a response to this, although we do not see it as
problematic. The only financial provision in the current Bill is for a once-
off application fee which will only cover the cost of the administrative
processing.

In conclusion, I believe that this legislation proves how a department and
senior public servants who understand the issues can really assist us in
creating a tool to improve the lives of people. Therefore, I would like to
thank the director-general Dr Olver, Joanne Yawitch, Peter Lukey and many
others of our senior public servants who understand the power of government
in using the tools at its disposal to make a real difference, senior public
servants who understand that legislation can be used positively to change
the lives of people. Thank you to all parties for their support.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.




             THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN PRESERVING BIODIVERSITY


                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs J CHALMERS: Chairperson, Minister, comrades and colleagues, of the many
challenges that have taxed those of us holding public office during the
past decade, and in particular as members of Parliament, the one that
arguable has been the most arduous and is what being an MP is really all
about, has been to put in place legislation that can really make a
difference to the citizens of our country. It has been difficult, of
course, because we have a duty to ensure that it improves the quality of
people’s lives and we must also attempt to ensure sustainability for that
improvement.

However, in addition to that, ideally it should also enrich the material
that makes up the very fabric of our country so that the various elements -
physical, cultural and spiritual - can fulfil their inherent potential,
which is truly a monumental challenge. Then, of course, the laws, together
with the attending regulations, must by all means attempt to be realistic
and affordable and not amount to a wish list that looks great on paper, but
is unenforceable in the tough outside world.

One of the challenges confronting our globe, and increasingly becoming
centre stage internationally, is the fact that the natural resources of our
planet, that have for so long been taken for granted, are rapidly being
depleted. Some of them are disappearing even before we can really
understand their role and value in the chain of life. This is a sad and
sorry situation indeed.

We are inclined to take for granted the extraordinary diversity of our
flora and fauna. We do so at our peril. Each and every one of the plants
and animal species that we see in our everyday lives is a link in a greater
chain. Take one out and inevitable there is a domino effect, which often
goes unnoticed until it is too late to do anything about it.

A scary example can be seen in East Africa where Lake Victoria, the largest
tropical lake in the world, supports Africa’s most important inland
fishery. However, the lake has experienced massive changes in its ecology
due to intensified fishing, increased human population and the introduction
of five new species of fish. In 1959 the colonialists introduced the Nile
perch as a sport fish in Lake Victoria and now more than half of the lake’s
native fish population has been eliminated. You may say that as long as
there are still fish there it is okay, but it does not work like that.
Nature has a way of hitting back when its natural balance is disturbed,
with new diseases appearing and the introduced species not having the
natural resistance developed over centuries by the indigenous species.

Here in our own country a battle for survival is taking place, with fair
numbers of our bird and animal species either critically or marginally
endangered. It will be a sad day indeed if our children’s children have to
look in books on natural history to see what our magnificent cheetah or the
wattled crane looked like.

However, the good news is that, as I have already stated, all over the
world governments are sitting up and taking note of the fact that we can no
longer plunge headlong along the path to the eventual destruction of the
very resources that provide us with the means to survive.

In 1987 the United Nations Environment Programme, UNEP, convened a number
of experts’ meetings that led to the negotiations and adoption of the
Convention on Biological Diversity. In June 1992, at the Rio Earth Summit,
heads of state and governments of more than 150 countries signed on to the
CBD. There are now 188 parties which have taken on the legal commitments of
the Convention on Biodiversity, making it the most widely supported
international environmental agreement.

In two weeks’ time the Interparliamentary Union will be holding its 111th
Assembly in Geneva. It is very significant that one of the three subject
items on the agenda for the meeting is, and I quote, “the role of
parliaments in preserving biodiversity”. This discussion will take place in
the committee that focuses on sustainable development, finance and trade.
It is very interesting that there is a clear acknowledgement that
biodiversity, which is of course the variety of all living organisms -
animals, plants and micro-organisms - that inhabit the various biomes and
ecosystems of the planet, is critical, not only to our capacity to develop
sustainably, but also to create stable economies and healthy trade
environments.

In South Africa the issue of environmental justice was an integral part of
the anti-apartheid struggle, with the liberation movement giving it a clear
place on the struggle agenda. We know that environmental degradation has
always most seriously affected the poorer sections of our population, both
in terms of loss of natural resources, as well as pollution and its impact
on human health.

Just as appropriate legislation plays a critical role in managing and
protecting the natural resources of a country, so skewed, discriminatory
laws, as they existed in South Africa pre-1994, had a devastating impact on
the land, and of course its people, leading to deforestation, soil erosion
and loss of biodiversity on a massive scale. Clearly, by the time 1994 came
around, a huge amount of restorative justice had to happen.

As Constitutional Court Judge Albie Sachs said, when we say “mayibuye, i-
Afrika”, we are calling for the return of legal title, but also for the
restoration of the land, the forest and the atmosphere. The greening of our
country is basic to its healing, and so in 1996 we got a new Constitution
and, critically, section 24 in the Bill of Rights, which is the
environmental clause underpinning all future legislation. The challenges
that faced legislators who got to work drafting new environmental
legislation were huge. Of course, it was the same for all other sectors as
well. The democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution were
paramount, as well as equity, transparency, access to information,
accountability and participation.

At the same time many of the key principles and objectives of the new
environmental policy were committed to reflecting global concerns of
sustainability. It meant constantly coming back to the Bill of Rights and,
above all, section 24, to ensure compatibility with it and, crucially, to
ensure an environment that was not harmful to the health and wellbeing of
our citizens, and one that could be protected for the benefit of our
present and future generations. This was a tall order indeed, given the
fracturing of our society and land after 40 years of discriminatory rule.

Looking back at what has been achieved after 10 years of democratic
government, it is no exaggeration to say that the framework of environment
legislation now in place represents some of the most progressive and
visionary policies and laws to be found internationally. The Natural
Environmental Management Act passed in 1998 gave effect to section 24 of
the Constitution and is regarded as framework legislation, containing as a
key principle the requirement that environmental management must place
people and their needs at the forefront of its concern.

Following on that foundation Act have been the Environment Conservation
Act, Acts covering biodiversity and protected areas, the Marine Living
Resources Act and amendments to the various pieces of legislation. These
last amendments are crucially important, given that inevitably, when
groundbreaking legislation is put in place and begins to become a part of
the fabric of society, gaps are perceived and subsequent strengthening of
certain aspects of the laws has to take place.

We have also played a role in the formation of the cross-frontier parks,
which is so crucial to preserving biodiversity across the boundaries of
Southern African states.

While processing legislation is a crucial function of Parliament, other
responsibilities also play a considerable part in our work. For those of us
in the environmental portfolio committee it has been an exciting
experience, and here I am referring particularly to our biodiversity
responsibilities. As we have participated in the huge World Summit on
Sustainable Development conference, hosted so successfully by South Africa
in 2002, we have become familiar with what is happening in the botanical
world of the botanical institutes such as Kirstenbosch and other botanical
gardens.

We have also grown to understand the vital role being played by the Working
for Water campaign to remove alien vegetation and to protect our own
biodiversity heritage. We have attempted to grasp the complexities of our
marine resources and the risks of fishing out that vital asset, and we have
gotten a handle on the many challenges and threats to our biodiversity
riches. Not least of our adventures has been going on wilderness trails and
experiencing first-hand the magic of sleeping under the stars and taking a
shift to keep the campfire burning.

Lastly, our Constitution states that everyone has the right to have the
environment protected for the benefit of present and future generations
through reasonable legislative and other measures, but the challenge is
that much more remains to be done. It is our duty and responsibility, as
public representatives who have been granted the power to consider and pass
the appropriate legislation, to make that written right a reality. It is
our responsibility to do our utmost to ensure that that happens, so that in
10, 20 or 100 years’ time our unique biodiversity heritage is still there
for future generations to marvel at and enjoy. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Chair, hon members, South Africa’s obligations to the
Convention on Biological Diversity will be a major test of this country’s
political will, as indeed it will be for all countries that are signatories
to this convention.

The DA welcomes the newly promulgated Biodiversity Act. It is a fine piece
of legislation that provides the necessary legal framework for the
protection of our impressive biodiversity and joins many other crucial
pieces of legislation, especially the National Environmental Management
Act. Parliament can be proud of itself.

Our country is blessed with one of the highest number of endemic plant and
animal species on this planet. South Africa is home to almost 10% of the
world’s known bird, fish and plant species, and over 6% of the world’s
mammal and reptile species. However, this natural wealth is threatened. Our
development is placing increasing demands on biodiversity.

There are worrying murmurings emanating from government, reinforced at last
week’s follow-up to the Johannesburg Summit, that biodiversity must be used
to alleviate poverty. This is particularly short-sighted. A partnership
between people and the environment is necessary and, indeed, the
participatory management provisions included in recent pieces of
environmental legislation are in line with the current best practices in
world conservation. Communities, particularly those living in and around
parks, have a right to a sustainable living from these areas, but we must
be acutely aware of the carrying capacity of our land and seas.

The primary value of biodiversity is not poverty alleviation. Biodiversity
has a value in itself. It is natural capital, and in South Africa we have
not even begun to acknowledge this. Our environment provides valuable
essential services for free, whether as a means to ameliorate our pollution
– at least up to a point – or as a sink for our carbon emissions, or as a
factor in our climate stability, or as an ongoing source of knowledge in
scientific fields.

If we as a country fail to capture such economic values, it will create a
distortion which, as noted by esteemed environmental economists David
Pierce and Dominique Moran, will continue to tilt the playing field with
the odds stacked against conversation and in favour of the economic
activities that destroy biological resources. We cannot afford to treat our
natural capital as free, unlimited and inconsequential.

The loss of biodiversity may occur as part of a purposeful decision taken
by society to use its natural resources on the basis of trade-offs if
deemed beneficial, or it may be inadvertent, such as when the consequences
of policies on biodiversity either were not foreseen or not properly
assessed. An example of an inadvertent loss could result from the proposed
construction of the N2 toll road through Pondoland, one of South Africa’s
own biodiversity hot spots.

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism insists that the road
will only affect 0,36% of the centre of endomism. Of course this may be a
very accurate assessment of the direct effect of the road, but it gives
little consideration to the secondary impacts. The road – at least in its
current planned route – would provide increased access to these pristine
areas, possibly leading to uncontrolled and unsustainable harvesting of
biodiversity.

The purposeful loss of biodiversity will happen if dune mining, for
instance, along the Pondoland coast goes ahead. Although on the basis of
trade-offs, this is hardly likely to be beneficial in the long run.

The creation of jobs is critically important in this depressed area, but
when mining is likely to create only a few hundred direct and indirect jobs
for a decade or two at the expense of a pristine stretch of biodiversity,
the economics have to be wrong.

Despite our Parliament passing a laudable Biodiversity Act, it is in the
actual implementation of the Biodiversity Act that its ultimate worth will
be proven. Here, Parliament plays an important oversight role.

My concern is that the government is at the moment paying mere lip service
to biodiversity. We all know that economic growth is an imperative in this
country, and this growth needs to be in the region of 6% per annum in order
to make a real impact on the growing unemployment figure, but this needs to
be a sustainable growth. Development requires difficult choices. That is a
given. However, if we do not give genuine consideration to environmental
concerns, we are at risk of degrading our environment to a level at which
it can actually accentuate poverty, not alleviate it.

The creation of jobs is important, but this must be done by means of good
development. The temptation, of course, is that jobs may easily be able to
be created through bad development as well. If we are serious about
minimising biodiversity loss, then the EIA process must remain central in
development planning.

While the department finalises its plans to streamline the EIA process for
reasons that are mostly justifiable, the use of strategic environmental
assessments should be instituted to ascertain the tolerance of environments
to development. Individual developments underpinned by EIAs will often have
a minimal effect on biodiversity loss, but it is the additive and
cumulative effects of development that need to be closely monitored.

I’d like to encourage the Minister to seriously consider a more widespread
use of strategic environmental assessments and, indeed, for him to
encourage his colleagues in Cabinet also to use these assessments for all
policies and programmes that may have direct or indirect effects on our
environment. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Mr Chairman, the role of parliaments in preserving
biodiversity is particularly pertinent to this House, as our country is
host to one of the most remarkable and fragile ecosystems in the world.

We have unequalled flora and fauna. Indeed, the Cape Floral Kingdom is the
most diverse in the world. It is possible, if you live in KwaZulu-Natal, to
see the big five in the morning and whales in the Indian Ocean in the
afternoon. What a spectacular place and country we have.

We also face the added challenge of promoting sustainable development
whilst, at the same time, uplifting the lives of the previously
disadvantaged. From time to time these objectives may seem to come into
conflict. The House will recall, for instance, the controversial debate a
few years back about mining at the St Lucia dunes, the second highest in
the world, which threw these imperatives into sharp focus.

The protection of biodiversity has far-reaching consequences for all
aspects of public policy, and requires an intersectoral approach. As
Parliament passes budgets and laws, it is incumbent upon us to ensure that
protecting biodiversity and promoting sustainable diversity are given the
political priority they merit.

In two weeks’ time the issue of the role of parliaments in preserving
biodiversity will be tabled at the Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union in Geneva, Switzerland. I believe that in view of the burden of
responsibility of representing the South African Parliament, it is vital
that our representatives who will attend this meeting have a clear mandate
from this House of what is expected of them. I think this is particularly
important when one considers the broad range of issues and the scientific
intricacies that relate to biodiversity.

I therefore request that this House not only debate this issue, but that
from our deliberations clear and crisp mandates are drawn up to ensure that
this House’s views are heard. The IFP believes that it is imperative that
the mandates we draw up make public practical recommendations and
directives, rather than be laden with heavy jargon and long rhetoric. I
thank you, Mr Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The next speaker will be the hon L
W Greyling. We’ll give you a minute to get to the podium, but your speaking
time remains one minute.

Mr L W GREYLING: I’ve just been elevated to the ministerial position by
Minister Van Schalkwyk, so I feel I deserve another minute!

Biodiversity is being destroyed at a rapid rate, and we are currently in
the sixth-grade extinction period of the planet. This extinction is mainly
related to the impacts of humans, such as climate change, habitat loss and
the introduction of invasive alien species.

South Africa has a large responsibility in this regard. We are the third
richest country in the world when it comes to biodiversity. Unfortunately,
our record in protecting this biodiversity has not always been exemplary.
We are one of the world’s largest polluters of greenhouse gases, and it is
therefore essential that we become the prime leader in the development of
renewable energy.

Although we have formulated biodiversity strategies throughout the country,
we sometimes choose to ignore them in our development plans. In this
regard, it is inconceivable that this government has proposed running a
four-lane highway through one of the richest biodiversity hotspots in the
world. The Pondoland area has over 250 species which are not found anywhere
else in the world, and they are used by many of the local inhabitants for
traditional medicines.

South Africa is also rolling out genetically modified organisms without
properly assessing the damage that can be done to our rich biodiversity. As
parliamentarians we urgently need to revise the GMO Act to ensure that
proper environmental protection is in place.

Biodiversity does not only have intrinsic value, but economic value as
well. Most of the world’s medicines are derived from diverse species. These
species are found mainly in developing countries, and it is important that
they derive an economic benefit from them. It is also vitally important
that communities, particularly in South Africa, derive a direct economic
benefit from the protection and sustainable utilisation of biodiversity. We
must rectify the tragic historical legacy of conservation meaning
exclusion.

This government has already started to address this issue.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member! Even your
extended time has expired. [Laughter.]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, hon members, the new Biodiversity Act has been
signed into law and, if I am correct, came into effect on 1 September. This
sets up a system to protect and control the use of South Africa’s rare and
endangered species and to protect different bioregions.

Biodiversity or, as others would say, biological diversity, describes the
very extraordinary diversity of animal, plant and insect species that
exists on earth. Each species has a very different and a very distinct
genetic make-up, which allows for it to cope with factors such as food
supply, habitat, climate and defence.

In short, diversity of species is necessary for ecological stability. In
other words, if the range of biological diversity is in any way reduced, it
will directly weaken and threaten existing ecosystems. Today 24% of our
mammals and 12% of our bird species are in danger of becoming extinct and,
given this situation, it is important to take adequate steps and measures
to prevent biodiversity loss within the context of a global framework.

For this reason one of the goals set at the WSSD was significantly to
reduce biodiversity loss by 2010, and governments have a particular role to
play. Governments must do their utmost to sensitise society about the
importance of preserving and protecting biodiversity.

In order to do this a number of steps have been taken internationally, such
as the adoption of the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the Rio Earth Summit
and the adoption of the Convention on Biological Diversity in 1992. The
thinking and the idea behind the convention is that natural resources are
indeed limited and that, whilst they can be scientifically and
technologically used to the benefit of humanity, it is absolutely
imperative that they are used in a sustainable way and preserved for future
generations.

Parliaments across the globe therefore have a legislative and a moral duty
to make biodiversity a priority, something that the South African
Parliament has clearly done by enacting the Biodiversity Act. However, what
must still be done on a global scale is that parliaments around the world
must encourage projects aimed at the conservation and sustainable use of
biological diversity. They must encourage close examination of the world’s
flora and fauna, and investigate how many species can be classified and
where they exist. Obviously, adequate funding for these projects remains
and will remain a global challenge.

The loss of biodiversity is one of the greatest environmental threats
facing us today and therefore it is going to take continuous commitment to
protect biodiversity internationally, and it is of fundamental importance.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K D S DURR: Chairman, it is essential that in addressing biodiversity we
understand that biodiversity, biotechnology and biosafety are closely
linked interdependently and that they need to be dealt with together in an
integrated manner.

May I start by saying that one of the greatest assets of Africa is its
biodiversity and, funnily enough, it is one of the few benefits of
underdevelopment, that there is a relatively undamaged. For example, the Po
River is a sewer and our rivers are not.

Minister, one of the current assaults on African biodiversity is a product
of biotechnology, namely genetically modified organisms. We must protect
biodiversity, but research shows that, for example, GM pollen travels up to
26 km and can last up to 16 years. Studies in the US and UK have shown that
birds such as the skylark would face extinction in a GM environment.

Rapeseed oil researchers in the UK have found that crossbreeding between GM
crops and their wild relatives continued for up to three miles from the
nearest field, with some 3 200 hybrids being created every year along
rivers, and 17 000 in arable areas.

Is this what we want to unleash upon our pristine fynbos, Minister? Is this
what we want, for US corporations in their clamour to move up the food
chain, to patent our food source in a new form of food colonialism? Is that
what we want to happen? Are we doing any environmental impact assessments?
The answer is no, we are doing desktop assessments of a variety without
public participation. We need to correct the situation, Minister.

Even in the wine industry, the French have just banned talk of GM wine. We
need to do the same quickly.

Minister, can we not place a moratorium on these GMOs, or at least declare
the Western Cape a GM-free area, like Austria and many other countries of
the world and regions have done?

I recommend, firstly, that we stop all trade in GMOs until the Cartagena
Protocol has been implemented; secondly, that in terms of article 23(2) of
the protocol, we consult the public in our decision-making; thirdly, that
in implementing and redrafting the GMO Act, this Parliament in South Africa
complies with and implements the recommendations of the African Union
summit and use the African model law; and fourthly, that the government
should put in place a strict liability and redress regime to ensure that
biotech companies act in a responsible and cautious manner.

This is a new form of food colonialism. You know, Minister, Nigeria used to
be a wonderful producer of food. Then came the discovery of oil. They used
the petrodollars to buy cheap subsidised food and they smashed their
agriculture.

Now GMOs, which are banned from almost every large market of the world, are
finding their way into South Africa. They see us as the soft underbelly for
entry of these products into Africa, and we have not done the research,
Minister. Now you have the law on your side. I request you please to use
it. We will support you. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we are discussing this subject suitably in
Heritage month. We as government have to realise that our responsibility
extends beyond the people of South Africa. We are often so preoccupied with
the social development of our people that we neglect our environment.
However, it is the state of our environment that supports the wellbeing of
our people.

We have seen illegal trading of animals in the form of poaching, as well as
other natural resources that serve as delicacies here and abroad. We have a
responsibility towards biodiversity, and we need to protect and fulfil this
responsibility. Parliament has the tools to introduce powerful legislation
to guard biodiversity and protect our natural environment.

The MF calls for a system to validate the use of our natural environment
and animals as a means of survival, and not for luxury. Furthermore, it is
the beauty of South Africa and our people that make South Africa such a
popular tourist destination. By ensuring its preservation, we are securing
the future of South Africa’s biodiversity, which is a great insurance
policy to fighting poverty. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, one of the goals set
out by the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg in 2002
was to plan measures aimed at protecting biodiversity to prevent animal and
plant species from becoming extinct.

The world’s parliaments have a crucial role to play in this regard as they
make and pass laws and budgets. Through public policy and legislation,
biodiversity protection should become a priority as a political objective.
As public representatives of the people’s will and makers of policies and
legislation, parliamentarians and members are crucial and should play the
most important role when it comes to matters and issues of biodiversity and
protection.

Comrade Minister, you and I and all living species are alive today because
of biodiversity. The natural environment provides the basic conditions
without which humanity could not survive. Biodiversity is a resource upon
which families, communities, nations and future generations depend. It is a
link between organisms, binding each into an interdependent community or
ecosystem in which all living creatures have their place and home. It is
the web of life.

In die lig van bogenoemde moet parlemente deur middel van effektiewe
gunswerwing en inligtingverspreiding poog om die steun van opiniemakers te
verkry en die algemene publiek oor plaaslike projekte in te lig. Nasionale
inligtingsveldtogte om die belangrikheid en die insiggewendheid van die
ekosisteem te populariseer, moet georganiseer word om die dringendheid
daarvan uit te wys ten einde te verseker dat biodiversiteit beskerm word.
Beskermde gebiede soos nasionale parke speel ’n groot rol in en dra by tot
die bevordering van biodiversiteit.(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[In the light of the above, parliaments should try, through effective
lobbying and dissemination of information, to obtain the support of opinion-
makers and to inform the general public of local projects. National
information campaigns to popularise the importance of the ecosystem and to
promote insight, should be organised to point out the urgency thereof in
order to ensure that biodiversity is protected. Protected areas like
national parks, for example, play an important role in the promotion of
biodiversity.]
Parliaments should also ensure compatibility between biodiversity and
protection, and enhance road infrastructure and tourism development.

The conservation of biodiversity also plays a big role in the promotion of
tourism. In South Africa, protected areas such as the Kruger National Park
and world heritage sites such as Robben Island, the St Lucia Wetland Park
and the recently declared Cape Floral Kingdom are very well known and count
amongst the most popular and most visited tourism attractions in the
country.

Funding should also be reflected in the national budgets, to express the
importance of biodiversity to conservation, in the form of financial
pledges. Multinational organisations should be requested to fund specific
projects. Development assistance loans granted by industrialised countries
should be based on the criteria of fostering and conserving biodiversity.
More funds should be mobilised from civil society and the private sector to
the work of biodiversity protection.

Beyond its national borders, Parliament should organise parliamentary
conferences on biodiversity within the context of the Interparliamentary
Union and regional interparliamentary organisations, so as to compare
experiences and exchange information.

Parliament should encourage other countries to ratify international
agreements on biodiversity such as the Convention on Biological Diversity,
the UN Convention to Combat Desertification and the Convention on the
Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.

In hierdie verband verdien Suid-Afrika ook ’n pluimpie vir sy leidende rol
in en bydrae tot die beskerming van biodiversiteit oor grense heen met
ander lande. Suid-Afrika het met Mosambiek en Zimbabwe, en ook met Botswana
en Mosambiek, ooreenkomste aangegaan om gesamentlik die parke van daardie
lande te beskerm. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In this regard South Africa also deserves a pat on the back for its
leading role in and contribution to the protection of biodiversity beyond
our borders with other countries. South Africa has entered into agreements
with Mozambique and Zimbabwe and also with Botswana and Mozambique to
protect the parks of those countries collectively.]

The ANC-led Government enacted important legislation, which ensures fair
access to resources, transparency, environmental justice and participation
of all interested and affected parties in environmental governance. The
National Environmental Management Act gives effect to the environmental
right of section 24 of the Constitution. A key principle is that
environmental management must place people and their needs at the forefront
of its concern. The Biodiversity Act passed this year sets out mechanisms
for managing and conserving biodiversity, protecting species and
ecosystems.

Other important Acts are the National Environmental Management: Protected
Areas Act and the Living Marime Resources Act of 1998.

Omgewingswetgewing beskerm nie net die biodiversiteit nie, maar verskaf ook
werk deur “werk-vir-water”-projekte, soos die uitroei van uitheemse plante,
veral in riviere. Opleidings- en bewusmakingsprojekte word ook jaarliks in
ons land toegepas. Vandag is reeds die einde van Boomplantingsweek wat
jaarliks die eerste week in September plaasvind. Ander belangrike jaarlikse
omgewingsaktiwiteite is Omgewingsdag en Nasionale Marieneweek.

Suid-Afrika is naas Brasilië en Taiwan die land met die derde grootste
biodiversiteit ter wêreld. Dit is dus baie belangrik dat ons in Suid-Afrika
’n leidende rol moet speel om te verseker dat ons te alle tye die leiding
neem en die trant voortsit. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Environmental legislation does not only protect the biodiversity, it also
provides work through the “working for water” projects, such as the
eradication of alien vegetation, especially in rivers. Training and
awareness projects are also implemented in our country annually. Today is
already the end of Arbor Week that takes place annually during the first
week of September. Other important annual environmental activities are
Environment Day and National Marine Week.

South Africa is, after Brazil and Taiwan, the country with the third
largest biodiversity in the world. It is therefore very important that we
in South Africa play a leading role to ensure that we take the lead and
continue this trend at all times. Thank you.]  [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Thank you, Chairperson.
I would like to thank all hon members for their participation in this
debate. A number of members made the point that Parliament as an
institution has a vital role to play in protecting our right to
biodiversity.

However, I also believe that individual members of Parliament have a very
crucial role to play. In this regard I can refer to some members of
Parliament who have approached me recently, such as the hon member
Chalmers, who pressurised us about the issue of a botanical garden for the
Eastern Cape, and she is not letting up on that pressure.

The hon member Durr alerted me to the fact that there is a very important
farm on the West Coast, Elandsfontein, that should have been incorporated
into the West Coast National Park. It is a very important part of the
unique renosterveld. We took immediate action because of his lobbying. I
would like to thank individual members for assisting us in giving attention
to issues that we should be giving attention to.

This is a wide-ranging issue and a wide-ranging debate. Let me just touch
on some issues. First of all, hon member Moss referred to Sanbi. The SA
National Biodiversity Institute builds on and brings together existing
capacity in the National Botanical Institute, MCM, the Global Diversity
Information Facility, amongst others, into a new centre of research,
knowledge and policy support.

It was formally established on 1 September, in terms of the Biodiversity
Act. The President signed that last week. It is the single most important
institutional development in terms of building our country’s capacity to
manage biodiversity. Adverts for a new board, which will reflect the
different views and interests that need to make up Sanbi, will be placed in
newspapers this coming weekend.

I would also like to inform members that because of the new national
character it is being moved from Kirstenbosch to Pretoria. A new head
office is being built and it will be opened in November 2004 as part of the
formal launch of Sanbi.

The hon member Durr raised the issue of GMOs. Colleagues will be aware that
until now this matter has been entirely regulated in terms of the GMO Act,
administered by the Department of Agriculture.
The Biodiversity Act, approved by Parliament, introduced two new provisions
which give our department a formal role for the first time. Firstly, Sanbi
is obliged to assess the impact of GMOs on the environment and biodiversity
- that is the issue that the hon member raised – and to report to the
Minister in this regard. I would like to undertake here that those reports
will be made public and will also be provided to Parliament.

Secondly, the Minister can require particular applications to the GMO
council to be submitted to a full environmental impact assessment. In this
regard, I have already instructed the department to prepare guidelines for
which applications will require EIAs and to gear up for the implementation
of that provision.

Maybe I should also refer to the issue of transfrontier parks. That is a
very important part of ensuring biodiversity in our region. We had a
meeting recently with some of the other SADC ministers to make sure that we
speed up this process of transfrontier parks. We believe that we can speed
up that process.

Later this year we will continue to drop a further 20 km of fence between
Mozambique and ourselves. We have a meeting scheduled in Mozambique for 1
and 2 November, to make sure that we also start addressing the issue of the
Lubombo spatial development initiative. I hope that we will come back to
Parliament with good news, and I would also like to invite hon member
Thabethe and the committee to take an active interest in the issue of the
transfrontier parks; it is good for the region as a whole.

Members may also have taken note that we have declared four marine
protected areas recently, bringing 18% of our coastline under protection
for the first time. A week or two ago we announced a very important step in
enlarging and consolidating our national parks by adding another 66 000 ha
to our national parks.

These are all the steps that we are taking and we are doing that with the
support of Parliament as an institution, and also many individual members
who share an active interest in this issue. Thank you for a good debate.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

House adjourned at 17:14.
                                 __________


                         THURSDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal Commission
     (FFC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 159-2004].

2.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Sector Education
     and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 42-2004].

3.    The Minister of Defence

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 - Department of Defence for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements of Vote 22 - Defence for 2003-2004 [RP 137-2004].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 103-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
         and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 82-2004].

5.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Artscape for 2003-2004,
         including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National English Literary
         Museum for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
         Institutions for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 139-2004].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
         Foundation of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         109-2004].


                          FRIDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     The Fifth Economic and Social Rights Report of the South African Human
     Rights Commission for 2002-2003.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
         Resources Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 112-
         2004].


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language Museum
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                          MONDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Securities Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
              in Government Gazette No 26684 of 18 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         7 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


     (a)    Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
         and the Government of the Republic of Rwanda on the Waiver of Visa
         Requirements for holders of Diplomatic and Official/Service
         Passports, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     (b)    Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the
         Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
         Rwanda, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

2.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Student Financial Aid
     Scheme (NSFAS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 172-2004].


                          TUESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         7 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

              NOTE:
              The Portfolio Committee on Finance has been instructed by the
              Speaker in terms of National Assembly Rule 249(3)(c) to
              consult the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator (NNR)
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 113-2004].

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust for
         2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
         Town for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 104-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker and Ncome
         Museums for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORTS:

1.    Insert No 1 from ATC0907e

2.    Insert No 2 from ATC0907e

3.    Insert No 3 from ATC0907e

4.    Insert No 4 from ATC0907e

5.    Insert No 5 from ATC0907e

6.    Insert No 6 from ATC0907e

7.    Insert No 7 from ATC0907e

8.    Insert No 8 from ATC0907e

9.    Insert No 9 from ATC0907e

10.   Insert No 10 from ATC0907e

11.   Insert No 11 from ATC0907e

12.   Insert No 12 from ATC0907e

13.   Insert No 13 from ATC0907e

14.   Insert No 14 from ATC0907e

15.   Insert No 15 from ATC0907e


