---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-09-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                          INSTALLATION OF NEW MACE


                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, before we proceed with other business, I
have the pleasure to announce that the new Mace was handed over to the
Secretary to Parliament on Friday, 10 September 2004, and was unveiled to
members this morning. The old Mace, which has been in use since 1963, but
which did not reflect the identity of this House as envisaged in the
Constitution, will now form part of the heritage of Parliament and will be
put on display.

We shall now proceed with the formal removal of the old Mace, and the
introduction of the new Mace as the symbol of authority of this House. I
will now, therefore, suspend the sitting. Members are requested to remain
seated while the procession led by the Serjeant-at-arms, and consisting of
myself, the Deputy Speaker and the House Chairpersons, attend to the
removal of the old Mace and the installation of the new one in this
Chamber. The bells will be rung shortly for the resumption of business,
when the procession with the Serjeant-at-arms bearing the new Mace will
enter the Chamber from the front entrance.

BUSINESS SUSPENDED AT 14:05 AND RESUMED AT 14:10.

The SPEAKER: Please be seated, hon members. Hon members, this new Mace,
aptly called the People’s Mace, is dedicated to the people of South Africa.
It is the commitment of this House to serve the people with integrity. The
Mace symbolises a new season for this Parliament and our democracy, a
Parliament in which all the people of South Africa, in our diversity, are
called upon to participate and take ownership of our democracy.

The new Mace of the National Assembly is the product of a wide public
participation process. It even involved our children, represented by the
children of the St Cyprian’s School here in Cape Town, whose artworks are
engraved on the drum of this Mace.

This is a modern Mace that emphasises the desire of this nation to advance
in all areas of development. Yet it does not neglect the rich culture and
traditions of the past. Indeed, this is a Mace of which all the people of
South Africa can be proud, and we take this opportunity to invite the
public to come and view a replica, which will remain in exhibition outside
the Chamber. As Speaker of the National Assembly, I dedicate this new Mace
to the people of South Africa, who have honoured us by electing us to serve
them. Thank you. [Applause.]

I now afford parties an opportunity to comment on the historic installation
of the new mace. Of course, parties are not compelled to make any comments,
but should they wish to do so, they now have the opportunity.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The
installation ceremony of the new Mace for the National Assembly represents
yet another milestone in the consolidation of our democracy. The
transformation of Parliament and the introduction of new symbols that
reflect our shared vision of a better life are critical elements in the
transformation of our national consciousness.

Ukutyhilwa koluphawu lalePalamente namhlanje lulonye olubonisa imbali
ebaluleke kakhulu yokuqina koRhulumente wothatho-nxaxheba ngabantu bonke,
nokuthi zimpawu ezinje ngezi ezithi zibonise ukuguquka kwesimo sengqondo
yesizwe ngokupheleleyo. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The unveiling of the symbol of this Parliament today is one of those that
show a very critical history of a government committed to public
participation by all, and signs of this nature show transformation of the
state of mind of the nation fully.]

Madam Speaker, the significance of this occasion becomes overwhelming in
the light of the celebrations of our first decade of freedom.

Yenzeka kanye ngexesha apho, sibhiyozela iminyaka elishumi yenkululeko. [It
happens at a time when we are celebrating ten years of democracy.]

In a sense, this auspicious occasion heralds the inauguration of the Pan-
African Parliament.

Nokuthi, yenzeka kanye ngexesha apho iPalamente ye Afrika yonke
izakuhlangana kwelilizwe lakowethu ngomhla we 14 Ku September 2004. [It
also happens at a time when the Pan-African Parliament as a whole is going
to meet in this country of mine on 14 September 2004.]

The House congratulates the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Secretary to
Parliament, the staff, the public and all those who have contributed to
making this launch the success it is. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, I am going to be very brief and simply
say that Azapo celebrates with all of you. The installation of the new
Mace, which symbolises the cutting of the umbilical cord with the past,
demonstrates our new path to true independence for our country. [Applause.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Speaker, the DA gladly participates in the joyful
celebration surrounding the new Mace. It is both a symbol of Parliament and
a symbol of the inclusion of all our people in our democratic Parliament.

While it is a symbol of authority, it is not authoritarian. It tells us
that Parliament has been elected to represent the people, to pass the laws
and to hold the executive to account.

We have taken 10 years to consider the introduction of this new symbol of
authority and leadership. No one can say that we rushed into changing the
old for the sake of the new. We have taken time to consider and then to
have designs made, and accepted a beautiful symbol which is worthy of the
third democratic Parliament, and of the people of South Africa. [Applause.]
Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The MF also joins in embracing the
new Mace. I think it is appropriate that this Mace is unveiled during
Heritage Month, and that we install our new Mace today. A close look at the
Mace will tell you that it is truly a rainbow Mace.

I also want to express our sincere thanks to the designers for their input,
and to our former Speaker who was also very instrumental in the whole
process and very anxious to have this Mace here. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mnr L W GREYLING: Mev die Speaker, dit is gepas dat die nuwe ampstaf in
hierdie besondere jaar, waarin ons die eerste 10 jaar van demokrasie vier,
in gebruik geneem word.

Ons wil die vertroue uitspreek dat die ampstaf werklik ’n simbool sal wees
wat die aspirasies en verwagtinge van alle Suid-Afrikaners sal weerspieël,
en dat dit ons ook daagliks sal herinner aan die belangrike funksionele rol
wat die Parlement en die Speaker van die Parlement ingevolge die Grondwet
vervul.

Die samestelling van die ampstaf is ook esteties tipies
Suid-Afrikaans, en ons glo dat alle Suid-Afrikaners trots sal wees daarop.
Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Speaker, it is fitting that in this special year,
when we are celebrating the first 10 years of democracy, the new Mace
should be introduced.

We wish to express our confidence that the Mace will be a symbol that truly
reflects the hopes and aspirations of all South Africans, and that it will
remind us daily of the important function and role that Parliament and the
Speaker of Parliament fulfil in accordance with the Constitution.

The Mace is typically South African in its aesthetic composition, and we
believe that all South Africans will be proud of it. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are witnessing here
today is the true meaning of the concept of transformation. Sometimes
transformation is wrongly defined as the jettisoning of the old and
bringing in the totally new. Represented on our Mace are our languages, our
past and, in fact, our culture, which in the recent past was denigrated
even by our Christian brethren, who pronounced that it was better to be a
slave in a Western culture than to be free in a savage culture, the African
culture.

As the IFP, we have always believed in the importance of different cultures
as building blocks for a new South Africa. This is what is represented by
this Mace in front of us, which we accept as the new symbol of this House.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, the ACDP acknowledges the enormous effort
invested in the careful choice and detail that has gone into the making of
the new parliamentary Mace. This Mace, designed to reflect the history,
traditions, diversity and languages of South Africa, reveals different
facets of our Africanness.

It is a beautiful work of art, which celebrates the country’s natural
beauty, its people, its plant and animal life, and its rich mineral
resources. It also proudly displays a gold book that represents the
Constitution of our country. Sadly, it is remiss in one thing only, and
that is that it ignores one major aspect of South African life, the
Almighty God, which the majority of South Africans serve, the Creator of
the universe and everything in it, Jesus Christ who deserves all honour and
glory. [Interjections.]

Apart from this unfortunate omission, the Mace has been beautifully crafted
and the ACDP congratulates everyone involved. We commit ourselves to
serving the people of South Africa with passion and integrity. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Mev die Speaker, die enigste iets wat vasstaan en seker is
in die politiek en die staatkunde is dat niks onveranderd bly nie, en dat
verandering ’n gegewe is wat van tyd tot tyd plaasvind.

Daarom is dit ook gepas dat ons ’n geleentheid het soos vandag waar daar
weer ’n verandering kom. Die vorige ampstaf het ’n baie lang en
tradisieryke geskiedenis gehad, maar dit is ook so dat ’n groot deel van sy
ontstaan en sy wortels uit ons koloniale geskiedenis kom. Daarom is dit
gepas dat ons vandag ’n totaal nuwe benadering en nuwe tradisie volg wat
vereenselwig kan word met ons werklikheid dat ons almal deel is van Afrika.

Die VF Plus is daarom bly dat ons vandag hierdie stap kan neem en dat ons
ook oplossings sal soek wat gepas is en in lyn is met ons tradisies in
Afrika. Die Parlement, sê ons Grondwet, verteenwoordig die mense van Suid-
Afrika. Hierdie ampstaf is daarom vir ons ’n simbool daarvan dat hierdie
Plek ’n liggaam met gesag is en die plek is waar al die standpunte van al
die mense van Suid-Afrika verteenwoordig sal word. Baie dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Madam Speaker, the only thing that is certain in politics
and statesmanship is that nothing remains the same, and that change
inevitably takes place from time to time.

For that reason it is also appropriate for us to have an occasion such as
this one today, when change is taking place again. The previous Mace had a
very long history rich in tradition, but it is also true that a large part
of its origin and its roots come from our colonial history. Therefore it is
appropriate that we follow a totally new approach and establish a new
tradition today that can be associated with our reality, that we are all
part of Africa.

For that reason the FF Plus is glad that we can take this step today and
that we shall also be seeking solutions that are appropriate and in line
with our traditions in Africa. Parliament, according to our Constitution,
represents the people of South Africa. Therefore this Mace is symbolic of
the fact that this Place is a body with authority and is the place where
all the standpoints of all the people of South Africa will be represented.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker, we believe that there is a time to come,
and a time to go. There is a time for new things to come, while old ones
make room for them. And therefore, we in the UCDP wish to join all other
people, members in this House, and South Africans at large, in
congratulating the people and the committee that has been working on this
since last year, mainly for the fact that all these things are products
that come out of our own soil.

We therefore also express our pleasure and happiness with the installation
of the new Mace. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs P DE LILLE: Madam Speaker, there must be some people that are turning
in their graves right now. I think the lesson in this today is that you
cannot stop transformation or change. We certainly welcome the new Mace. We
hope, too, that the new Mace will be a symbol of building bridges between
the old and the new.

Yes, there were some very bad things in the past, but there were also some
good things. We need to take some of these good things and build the future
with them.

We are certainly pleased today to see that such a lot of gold is leaving
this House. I hope it is going to be kept safely somewhere where somebody
cannot steal it. It must be protected for future generations. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Madam Speaker, the old Mace was a terrible eyesore to the PAC.
[Laughter.] We therefore join the House in welcoming and applauding the new
Mace. It represents a break with the past, the heralding of a new era and a
pointer to the future. It is a reclamation of our heritage and a
consolidation of our democracy.

However, we want to emphasise that we hope that the transformation will not
end at the level of the Mace, but that we shall undertake far more
fundamental transformation in respect of this very Parliament than we have
done thus far. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, the UDM also joins in the celebration of
the installation of the new Mace, and we welcome this very heartily. Thank
you. [Applause.]


                MOTION OF CONDOLENCE FOR RAY ALEXANDER-SIMONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

That the House -


  (1) notes with a deep sense of sorrow the untimely death of Ray Alexander-
       Simons, who passed away on the evening of 12 September 2004 at the
       age of 89;


     2) recalls -

          a) the heroic role Ray Alexander-Simons played in the struggle
             for the realisation of workers’ rights, nonracialism,
             nonsexism and a united and democratic South Africa;

          b) that, together with other stalwarts of the struggle for the
             emancipation of women, including heroines like Helen Joseph,
             Lilian Ngoyi and Florence Mkhize, she was a founder member of
             the Federation of South African Women of which she was the
             first national secretary;

          c) that she joined the South African Communist Party in 1929 and
             was the general secretary of the Food and Canning Workers’
             Union up until she was banned from trade union work in 1953;

          d) that in 1954 Africans in the Western Cape elected her to
             Parliament, but she could not take up her seat as an Act of
             Parliament was passed to prevent her from doing so; and

          e) that in 1965 she went into exile and was based in Zambia where
             she continued working for national liberation until the
             unbanning of liberation movements in 1990;

     3) acknowledges that Ray Alexander-Simons bequeathed to our country and
        people a proud legacy of unwavering commitment to democracy and
        social justice for all humanity; and

     4) conveys its deep-felt condolences to her family and loved ones.

I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, the DA fully supports the motion before the
House. This has indeed been a sad period for South Africa as several
stalwarts of the struggle against apartheid have passed away recently.

Ray Alexander-Simons certainly established her place in history. Her fight
for a nonsexist, nonracial, united and democratic South Africa is
legendary. It brought her great hardships in life and forced her to leave
South Africa in order to enable her to continue her struggle for a new and
better South Africa.

It was indeed fitting that she was able to live the last years of her life
in the country that she loved and for which she had fought so hard. The DA
offers sincere condolences to her family and friends. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo neNdlu ehloniphekile, sisukuma nokwesekela
isiphakamiso esibekwe uSoswebhu oMkhulu esimaqondana nokushona
kukadadewethu, u-Anti, ugogo, u-Ray Simons. Kuyaziwa ukuthi emzabalazweni
wabasebenzi ubeneqhaza elikhulu alibambileyo kwaze kwafika kulesi sikhathi
esikusona manje.

Kuyaziwa futhi ukuthi uwulwele kakhulu umzabalazo engabuki bala esebenzisa
ubuhlakani bakhe elekelelwa ubuhlakani bomyeni wakhe osewadlula emhlabeni.
Sicela ukuthi nabakubo, amadlozi akhe, nomyeni wakhe sengathi bangambheka
baphinde bamhlangabeze lapho bekhona. Sengathi umphefumulo wakhe ungalala
ngokuthula. Siyathokoza. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)


[Mr V B NDLOVU: Chairperson and honourable House, we stand up to support
the motion put forward by the Chief Whip, which is about the passing away
of our sister, aunt and grandmother Ray Simons. It is well known that she
played a big role in the struggle of the workers, until the present time.


It is also known that she fought for liberation, ignoring the colour bar,
using her wit, and assisted by the shrewdness of her late husband. We pray
that her family, her ancestors and her husband would look after her and
meet her wherever they are. May her soul rest in peace. We thank you.]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, the PAC salutes the revolutionary spirit, zeal,
fortitude and courage of the late Ray Simons. We wish to point out to the
House that we hope that her example will continually guide us so that, as
public representatives, we don’t become too comfortable in our seats in
Parliament and discard the constituencies out there that we represent.
Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chair. The MF also associates itself with the
motion in extending its deepest regret and condolences on the loss of an
outstanding woman, a stalwart, Ray Alexander-Simons. This trade unionist
and SA Communist Party champion contributed greatly to the working class
and women of South Africa. Born in 1913, Simons lived with us through our
history and, with us, made history.

To her bereaved family and friends, we send our deepest condolences. Ms
Simons, we thank you and cherish you deeply. May you rest in peace. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Thank you, Mr Chair. The UCDP would like to express its
condolences to the bereaved. We would like to say that we are thankful for
the life of Mrs Ray Alexander-Simons. She allowed her life to be invaded by
the larger destinies of mankind. Her disposition throughout her life was
one of selflessness. We say: Rest in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: The ID agrees with the sentiments expressed in the House
today. Ray Alexander-Simons was a true hero of the struggle for liberation
in South Africa.

I had the pleasure of meeting Ray Alexander-Simons about eight years ago. I
found her at the age of 80 still poring over a computer, working on and
engaging in issues of workers’ liberation. I salute her for the tireless
work she put in.

It was not only Ray Alexander-Simons who contributed greatly to the
struggle for liberation in South Africa, but the entire Simons family. Mary
Simons was my lecturer, and I express my deepest condolences to her and to
the rest of the Simons family. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vho P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Mudzulaphanda wa Nndu, rine vha Azapo ri khou lilisa
muta wa Vho Ray Alexander-Simons. Sa mulwela mbofholowo ri ri vho siya zwe
vha sika. Vha tshimbile zwavhudi nahone vha ye u dzula na vhanwe vho tuwaho
tshifhingani tsho fhelaho vhane vha nga Vho Tambo na Vho Biko. Ri ri kha
vha tshimbile zwavhudi vha yo dzula na vhenevho. Ndo livhuwa. [U vhanda
zwanda.] (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: House Chairperson, as Azapo we send our condolences
to the family of Ray Alexander-Simons. She left behind what she initiated
as a freedom fighter. She must rest in peace. In addition, she must be with
those who have left us previously, such as Mr Tambo and Mr Biko. We say:
Rest in peace with them. I thank you. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the UDM would also like
to pass on its condolences to the bereaved family. We really feel that she
made a meaningful contribution towards what we have achieved. We hope, as
we sometimes believe, that wherever she is, she will still make a
contribution in her own way towards the future. We know that when a person
has passed away, sometimes we think it is the end. But some of us believe
that there will still be contact with those who have left us, and we are
very grateful.
Re leboga ka mokgwa wo a šomilego ka gona. Ke mosadi wa basadi. [We
appreciate how she carried this out. She is an ideal woman.]

We are where we are because of some of her contributions.

Re lebogile kudu. [We thank her very much.] [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mnr die Voorsitter, die VF Plus vereenselwig hom graag met
die mosie van roubeklag vir Ray Alexander-Simons wat vanmiddag voor die
Huis dien. Ons vereenselwig ons met die sentimente uitgespreek en wil ons
opregte meelewing en meegevoel betuig met die ANC wat ’n kameraad verloor
het, maar ook spesifiek met die familie wat agterbly en wat in hierdie tyd
hartseer is. Mag hulle vertroosting vind in hierdie moeilike tyd wat vir
hulle voorlê. Baie dankie. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Mr Chairman, the FF Plus would like to identify itself
with the motion of condolence for Ray Alexander-Simons that has been put to
the House this afternoon. We identify ourselves with the sentiments
expressed and would like to express our sincere sympathy and condolences
with the ANC who has lost a comrade, but also specifically with the family
who remain behind and are grieving during this time. May they find comfort
during this difficult time ahead. Thank you very much. [Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairman, the ACDP joins the House in conveying our sincere
condolences to the family and friends of Ray Alexander-Simons. It is our
sincere hope that they have the assurance and confidence that she has gone
to be with her Maker, and we pray that they will experience the peace of
Jesus Christ at this time.

We acknowledge the high esteem in which Ray is held in terms of the role
she played in the struggle for workers’ rights, nonracialism, nonsexism and
a united and democratic South Africa. We commend her for her commitment to
democracy and social justice - a worthy cause. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, to say that Ray Alexander-
Simons was a great person is an understatement. I want to associate myself
with those who say that, in her, South Africa has lost one of its most
remarkable daughters.

Born in 1913 in Latvia, she started participating in Marxist study-class
circles at a very early age. As a result, she developed a consciousness of
the world and life around her, of which children of her age were totally
oblivious.

There is a story of her being asked to speak at the launch of a Jewish
university in 1926. In her speech, she made the remark that any university
anywhere should be celebrated as it was like a candle in terms of how it
brought understanding to people. She illustrated this by saying “whether it
is in Jerusalem or Timbuktu”.

The story goes on to say that her Zionist teacher came to her afterwards
very angry, and said to her: “How dare you compare Jerusalem with Timbuktu?
Do you know where Timbuktu is?” She said, “Yes, I know. It’s in Africa – in
central Africa.” She was 13 at the time, but she was already so clear in
her mind about the fact that it did not matter where you were, but that you
were a human being. In fact, she was a true citizen of the world throughout
her life. [Applause.]

In 1929, when she was 15, her mother, fearing that Ray was likely to be
arrested, since a colleague of hers of the same age group had been
arrested, packed up and sent her to South Africa where her mother had two
sisters. That’s when she arrived here. She immediately involved herself in
some very serious organisational work here in Cape Town, organising trade
unions and organising for the SA Communist Party.

I wish to quote briefly – in her own words - how she captured a certain
part of her life:

  In 1953 I received a very severe banning order. Despite this, I carried
  on working, helping and organising. I also stood for Parliament in 1954,
  but when the election results were declared and I went to Parliament, the
  Special Branch pushed me off the steps. Then I sued them for violence
  against me, and the money they paid me out paid the cost of the election
  campaign. I worked and I carried on. Then I got busy doing research for
  our book Class and Colour that came out in 1968.

So she carries on in this particular interview.

Ray Simons also had a very keen sense of humour. When she tells the story
of the years immediately after she arrived in South Africa, she refers to
her boyfriend that she had left behind in Latvia, called Edgar. She said
that they had, as she was preparing to go, a discussion that was based on
the five-year plan of the then Soviet Union. The idea was that within that
five-year period Edgar would come and visit her here in South Africa. And
then she would immediately say: “Of course, he didn’t, but that’s another
story.”

Of course, we know that the rest of the story is that she got married to
Jack Simons, who was a true companion and a comrade to her throughout their
lives, and together they left and went to Lusaka, briefly to England and
then back to Lusaka, where they lived and worked among our people. They
were the first whites to be active members of the ANC, even though a
decision was to be taken formally years later for white membership to be
recognised within the ranks of the ANC.

Comrade Ray was really a good person who put her all into each and every
task that she was given. She worked as rigorously as a woman activist as
she did as an organiser of workers and as she did for the Communist Party.
I believe that there is a lesson here for all of us, as South Africans who
remain behind: we should learn from that attitude of diligence and indeed
follow in the footsteps that say “Vuk’uzenzele, Mzantsi Afrika.”
[Vukuzenzele, South Africa.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.


                            MOTION ON ORDER PAPER




                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We now come to Motions on the
Order Paper. I have been informed that the Minister for the Public Service
and Administration will not be making a statement today, and therefore the
motion on the Order Paper in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party and the statement by the Minister fall away.


                   REPORT BY MINISTER OF HOUSING COMMENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz Z A KOTA (ANC): Sihlalo, ndiziva ndivuya kakhulu kwaye ndiyincoma
ingxelo enikwe nguMphathiswa wezeZindlu, uQabane uLindiwe Sisulu, kwikomiti
yezezindlu. Kucaca mhlophe ukuba ngokwakhiwa kwezindlu, iyagwetywa indlala
yaye wonke ubani owamkela ngaphantsi kwama-R3 500 unelungelo lokufumana
inkxaso-mali ezeleyo kurhulumente. Abantu abamkela phakathi kwama-R3 500
nama-R7 000 baza kunikwa uchatha ngurhulumente.

Sicela wonke ubani athathe inxaxheba ekwakhiweni kwezindlu; omdala
nomncinci. Eli lilima elifuna wonke ubani alamkele ngezandla
ezingenamkhinkqi. Onke amalungu ePalamente ayacelwa ukuba ancedise
urhulumente ekwakheni izindlu, ngakumbi kwindawo yamatyotyombe axhage uhola
u-N2 kunye nezo zise-District Six. Sithi halala, kulwakhiwo lwezindlu,
halala! Phambili ANC, phambili! Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
Xhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms Z A KOTA (ANC ): Chairperson, I am very happy to commend the report
submitted by the Minister of Housing, Comrade Lindiwe Sisulu, to the
Housing Committee. It is very clear that by building houses, poverty is
indeed being alleviated, and everybody earning less than R3 500 have a
right to receive a full subsidy from the government. People earning between
R3 500 and R7 000 would be given a portion by the government.

We ask everybody, old and young, to participate in the building of houses.
This is a challenge which everybody needs to welcome with dedication. All
members of Parliament are requested to assist the government in building
houses, especially for informal settlements along the N2 Freeway and those
in District Six. We say, well done! To the building of houses, well done!
Forward ANC! Forward! Thank you. [Applause.]]


                  TWO FORMER FINANCE MECs IN CONFLICT WITH


                        PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT





                            (Member’s Statement)


Ms R TALJAARD (DA): Chairperson, two former Finance MECs have failed to
uphold the tight standards set in the Public Finance Management Act, with
Deputy Finance Minister Jabu Moleketi allegedly acting illegally in
awarding a tender to Infotek Services, in breach of the PFMA. This House
expresses its dismay at the new Deputy Minister of Finance’s so-called
slip, as he appears not to take the provisions of sections 17 and 22 of the
PMFA seriously, and calls on him to explain his actions.

Similarly, former Eastern Cape Finance MEC Enoch Godongwana has allegedly
been sacked for considerable provincial overspending. [Interjections.] Mr
Godongwana must account for his tenure as MEC, and Finance Minister Mr
Trevor Manuel must inform this House why he downplayed the provincial
finance management problems in a recent parliamentary response.

These actions set a bad precedent for accounting officers across the public
sector that must adhere to the PFMA in handling taxpayers’ money. Unless
action is taken, the actions of the former MECs will contribute to a
culture of impunity in public finance management and jeopardise the PMFA.
All the role-players and political office bearers responsible for financial
management shoulder a specific responsibility not only to uphold the PFMA,
but, quite crucially, to lead by example in this regard. [Applause.]


                 ATTACKS ON JUDGES AND MAGISTRATES CONDEMNED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Thank you, Chair. Various incidents countrywide have
been reported of judges and magistrates who have been attacked or
threatened by criminals trying to intimidate them. According to a member of
the National Union of Prosecutors of South Africa, some of the types of
crimes of which prosecutors have been victims include being forced off the
road, being shot at, as well as being stabbed and threatened. Some of these
attacks have occurred in their homes, as well as in the courts.

These people work in a high-risk environment, and sometimes deal with very
sensitive cases. They should therefore be afforded the necessary protection
to ensure that they are able to perform their duties to the best of their
abilities, without fearing for their lives or having outside elements
trying to influence their decisions.

We cannot allow this type of situation to escalate and become a common
occurrence. Our judges and magistrates must not been seen by criminals as
easy targets because of their lack of protection or inadequate security in
our courts.

The relevant authorities and stakeholders should work together in order to
find a solution to this problem. I thank you. [Applause.]


                      NATIONAL WATER RESOURCE STRATEGY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C C SEPTEMBER (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The adoption of the
National Water Resource Strategy by the Cabinet on 1 September 2004 places
South Africa in a position to reach one of the first targets in the
Johannesburg Plan of Action adopted at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable
Development, namely to develop national water resource management.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, as the custodian of national
water resources, through this strategy, can now ensure that our water
resources are used to meet the needs of our people in an equitable way and
in pursuit of sustainable socio-economic transformation.

The ANC welcomes the adoption of the National Water Resource Strategy and
is confident that by harnessing our water resources, we will continue our
drive against inequality, poverty and deprivation. I thank you. [Applause.]


                         PREDATORY BANKING PRACTICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M STEPHENS (UDM): Thank you, Chair. The UDM is dismayed at the latest
attempt by the big four South African banks to extend their collusive
practices to the banking market for the poor. Their plan to introduce a so-
called low-cost bank account is nothing but a ruse to extend their
predatory banking practices also to the poor.

We wonder what happened to the basic business of banking in South Africa.
Banks are supposed to make profits from investing deposits, not levying
charges. Banks seem to have forgotten that customers are doing them a
favour by depositing their money with them, and not the other way around.

The basic banking product offered by every bank must be an ordinary savings
account at zero cost to the depositor. This is available in all Western
countries with banking infrastructures such as ours. Even free private
cheque accounts are offered in most countries.

In South Africa, free savings accounts were the norm, until banks
discovered the wonderful facility of charging fees. Their exuberant pursuit
of profit through bank charges has excluded millions of South Africans from
the banking system, with disastrous results for private savings, the
accumulation of wealth by the underprivileged and capital accumulation in
the economy as a whole. It is time to change. South Africans are entitled
to at least the same banking facilities as are enjoyed in other countries.
We demand a basic interest-bearing, cost-free savings account for all South
Africans. Thank you. [Applause.]


                           PLIGHT OF AIDS ORPHANS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S SIMMONS (NNP): Voorsitter, die verhaal van die 15-jarige Swelile wat
aan die hoof van ’n huishouding staan en na sy twee jonger broers moet
omsien, is die lot van duisende vigs-wesies in Suid-Afrika. Verskeie
probleme staar vigs-wesies elke dag probleme in die gesig, soos ’n gebrek
aan opvoeding, inkomste en toegang tot gesondheidsorg. Daarom verwelkom die
Nuwe NP die skenking van sowat R234 miljoen wat deur USAid aan Suid-Afrika
geskenk is en wat vir, onder andere, MIV/vigs aangewend sal word.

Die NNP wil ’n beroep doen op die regering dat ’n deel van dié skenking
gebruik sal word om die lot van vigs-wesies te verlig.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr S SIMMONS (NNP): Chairperson, the story of the fifteen-year-old Swelile
who heads a household and has to take care of his two younger brothers, is
the plight of thousands of Aids orphans in South Africa. Aids orphans face
various problems every day, such as a lack of education, income and access
to health care. The NNP therefore welcomes the donation of R234 million
that was donated to South Africa by USAid and that will be utilised,
amongst others, for HIV/Aids.

The NNP wants to appeal to the government that a part of this donation will
be used to relieve the plight of Aids orphans.]

It is time we threw these children a lifeline, because they are the most
vulnerable of our communities and need all the support they can get. We
have to give them hope for the future. Thank you.

              FF PLUS WINS BY-ELECTION IN MFULENI MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (VF Plus): Voorsitter, sowat drie weke gelede het die DA ’n
pamflet vir die munisipale tussenverkiesing in Wyk 9 in Mfuleni versprei
waarin hulle onder andere die volgende sê:


  Slegs die DA is groot en sterk genoeg om die ANC te  pak.  Die  DA   weet
  onderhandelings met die ANC mors net tyd. Die ANC verstaan net  die  taal
  van mag. Die DA is ’n groot en sterk party wat die ANC kan pak en wen. En
  die VF Plus is te klein en sag om ’n verskil te maak.

Dit is dus vir my aangenaam om met die Huis te deel dat die VF Plus nie te
klein was om in Wyk 9 van die Mfuleni-munisipaliteit ’n verskil te maak
nie. Die VF Plus het op 25 Augustus daarin geslaag om in dié wyk ’n DA-
meerderheid van meer as 3000 stemme te omskep in ’n wins vir die VF Plus.

Ons party het sy stemmetal sedert die algemene verkiesing in 2000 met meer
as tien maal vergroot en dié uitslag verteenwoordig ’n swaai van 45% weg
van die DA af. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES (FF Plus): Chairperson, about three weeks ago the DA
distributed a pamphlet for the municipal by-election in Ward 9, in Mfuleni,
in which they said, amongst other things, the following:

      Slegs die DA is groot en sterk genoeg om die ANC te pak. Die DA weet
      onderhandelings met die ANC mors net tyd. Die ANC verstaan net die
      taal van mag. Die DA is ‘n groot en sterk party wat die ANC kan pak en
      wen. En die VF Plus is te klein en sag om ‘n verskil te maak.


It is therefore my pleasure to share with the House the fact that the FF
Plus was not too small to make a difference in Ward 9 of the Mfuleni
municipality. On 25 August the FF Plus succeeded in transforming a DA
majority of more than 3 000 votes into a gain for the FF Plus.

Our party has increased its number of votes more than tenfold since the
general elections of 2000, and this result represents a swing of 45% away
from the DA.]

We have succeeded in proving the DA wrong by beating both the DA and the
ANC in this crucial by-election. We trust that we will also prove the DA
wrong about their view of our strategy of being an opposition party that
talks to the government of the day. I thank you.


          JOINT VENTURE BETWEEN BUSINESS AGAINST CRIME AND NATIONAL


                             INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S ABRAM (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the joint venture between
Business Against Crime, BAC, and the National Intelligence Agency, NIA, to
fight crime. The two institutions have signed a two-year agreement. The
accord will, from time to time, be reviewed and joint initiatives
identified.

For the third time in succession, South Africans have given the ANC a
mandate to govern this country. Our mandate is based on a people’s
contract. The recent accord is another brick in the building of the
contract. The participation of our communities will give life to the accord
through structures such as the community policing forums. Their
revitalisation is therefore crucial. We call on our people to support this
initiative for the betterment of our society. This is a people’s contract
to fight crime. Thank you, Sir. [Applause.]

                LACK OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN PUBLIC SECTOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Voorsitter, die openbare en plaaslike finansiële
bestuurswette bepaal dat deursigtigheid ten opsigte van finansiële bestuur
aan die orde van die dag moet wees. In ’n amptelike verslag, soos voorgelê
deur die Nasionale Tesourie aan die Parlement se Staande Komitee oor
Openbare Rekening, is dit duidelik dat net 60% van die nasionale
departemente kwartaallikse ouditverslae voorlê. Net 57% van die nasionale
departemente bestee geld volgens hul kontantvloeiprojeksies, en net 66% van
die nasionale departemente hou gereeld inligtingsessies tussen die bestuur
en ondergeskiktes insake finansiële bestuursaangeleenthede. Dit laat
onwillekeurig die vraag ontstaan wat van die ANC se onderneming van skoon
en doeltreffende openbare administrasie geword het.

By munisipaliteite gaan dit nog erger. Die Gaugtengse Komitee oor Openbare
Rekenings sê dat verskeie munisipaliteite net funksioneer met behulp van
oortrokke rekenings en sentrale hulp. Indien die provinsie nie ingryp nie,
sal baie plaaslike owerhede nie as lopende ondernemings kan voortbestaan
nie.

Die DA sê dat die kiesers daar buite die reg het om in opstand te kom omdat
hulle belastinggeld deur die regerende party se swak en ondoeltreffende
administrasie verkwis en roekeloos bestee word. Dit is hoog tyd dat die
Minister van Finansies vir ons aandui wat hy omtrent hierdie voortslepende
finansiële bestuursagteruitgang in die openbare sektor gaan doen. Dankie.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)
[Dr S M VAN DYK (DA): Chairperson, public and local financial management
laws stipulate that transparency with regard to financial management should
be the order of the day. From an official report, as submitted by the
National Treasury to Parliament’s Standing Committee on Public Accounts, it
is clear that only 60% of national departments submit quarterly audit
reports. Only 57% of national departments spend money according to their
cash flow projections, and only 66% of national departments conduct
information sessions between management and subordinates with regard to
financial management matters on a regular basis. This automatically gives
rise to the question as to what happened to the ANC’s undertaking of clean
and efficient public administration.

It is even worse in municipalities. The Gauteng Committee on Public
Accounts states that several municipalities only function with the
assistance of overdrafts and central aid. If the province does not
intervene, many local authorities will not be able to survive as going
concerns.

The DA says that the electorate out there has the right to protest because
their tax money is squandered and spent in a reckless way by the governing
party’s poor and inefficient administration. It is high time that the
Minister of Finance indicates to us what he is going to do about this
persistent deterioration in financial management in the public sector.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

                     HISTORY OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE PAC


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr S E M PHEKO (PAC): Chairman, apartheid and colonial historians stretched
every muscle to deny the history of the African people in this country, or
to distort it. According to them, the history of our country began in 1652;
before then there was no history.

These settler historians and their supporters went to the ridiculous extent
of writing that the African country was empty land when the whites arrived
here. This, of course, was false, but the objective was to destroy the
history of the African people so that colonial and foreign interests could
be protected at the expense of the Africans.

This kind of history seems to be repeating itself. There is a concerted
effort to destroy and distort the history of the PAC, with the view to
falsifying the political history of this country. There is a new form of
apartheid that is reluctant to give recognition to all heroes and heroines
of our national struggle, regardless of their political affiliation.

History is for posterity, not for political propaganda. History must be
recorded objectively, truthfully and professionally. Izwe lethu! [Our
country!] [Applause.]

                              TRANSFER OF LAND


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms J E SOSIBO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC commends the sugarcane industry
on their initiative to transfer 78 000 hectares of farmland to black
owners. This industry has committed itself to transferring at least 30% of
the industry to black ownership by the year 2014.

This is a far-sighted and positive contribution to efforts aimed at
transforming the agricultural sector in our country. It is indeed
refreshing to encounter an industry that is proactive in addressing the
land question in our country. The meaningful participation of the larger
section of our population in the economy is one of the important
imperatives that we must achieve in order to give true meaning to freedom
and nonracialism.

We call on other economic actors within and outside the agricultural
industry to emulate this shining example by the sugarcane growers. The ANC
calls on all economic sectors to join the people’s contract to ensure that
all our country’s people share in the country’s wealth, in the knowledge
that such efforts are part of consolidating our democracy. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                      PROTECTION OF JUDICIAL OFFICIALS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S M CAMERER (DA): Chairperson, the DA welcomes the move by Cabinet to
protect judicial officers, prosecutors and other public officials. It is
long overdue, but better late than never. We hope that there will be
adequate follow-through to put measures in place as soon as possible.

The DA has repeatedly pointed out in Parliament that the country’s
beleaguered prosecutors and judicial officers are not sufficiently
protected from the criminals they deal with in terms of the Department of
Justice’s own security arrangements. It has been estimated that 2 000 more
security personnel are needed at a cost of some R500 million to secure
them, but a mere R45 million has been allocated this time around.

We’ll be asking for a full parliamentary debate on inadequate court
security as a matter of national concern. The long list of attacks in the
past year includes a prosecutor stabbed by a poison-bearing syringe in
court; another forced off the road by a gang trying to steal a docket;
another terrorised by a gang at home; a woman magistrate stabbed in the
head by a knife-wielding prisoner in Worcester; a woman magistrate attacked
by an accused in the Roodepoort Magistrates’ Court and a woman prosecutor
attacked by an accused in the Bellville Court toilets. Very often, women
court officials bear the brunt of these attacks.
Hopefully, the new police unit will go some way towards addressing the
situation. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

                                 BRAIN DRAIN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Mr Chairperson, the migration of skilled
professionals, especially in the health sector, from South Africa is well
documented and has been a concern for some time now. It is therefore very
worrying that the situation does not seem to be improving. However, we now
have an undertaking from the Minister of Health that she has secured a
guarantee from the British health Minister that regulations allowing
recruitment from developing countries must be made tighter.

It was reported recently that South Africa is one of the leading suppliers
of doctors to developed countries. There are over 11 000 South African
doctors registered in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada and New
Zealand. Last year alone, of the doctors who joined the British medical
register, 9 282 were UK graduates, while
3 334 graduates were trained in South Africa. So, for every three British
doctors registered in the UK, there was one doctor who was trained in South
Africa.

A leading medical journal estimates that it costs about R500 000 to train
one doctor. Considering the number of doctors that we are losing, this is a
very costly affair – both financially and in terms of human resources -
which we cannot afford. This situation is of particular concern in the
light of the critical shortages of staff that we are facing in our public
health sector. I thank you, Chairperson.

                        AWARDS TO SOUTH AFRICAN FILM

                            (Member’s statement)

Mr K M KHUMALO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC salutes the scriptwriters, the
actors and the producers of the film called Yesterday which is currently
being screened. We also salute actress Leleti Khumalo and many of the best
South Africans. The film has made headlines. It was awarded the inaugural
Human Rights Film Award. Two other South African films, Zulu Love Letter
and Yizo Yizo 3, also made their mark at the festival.

The Venice Film Festival has unlocked doors for many South African artists
and has enabled a local production to be viewed by international audiences.
Film critics from all over the world who attended the screening of the film
were impressed with the quality of work and the refreshing approach of the
South African artists. As we speak, the film is on its way to the Toronto
Film Festival, where it is expected to make waves.

The ANC will continue to support the work of the artists, and we
congratulate the SA Film Foundation on their sterling work.

We wish to thank the following people and say that we are very happy with
and proud of Darrel James Roodt and Anant Singh, Sanjiv Singh, Kenneth
Khambula and, most of all, Leleti Khumalo. And on that note we say:
Malibongwe! [Praise be to women!]

                        SECURITY OF JUDICIAL OFFICERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
Chairperson, I thank the hon Camerer and Vezi for their comments around the
security of judicial officers. This is obviously a very serious issue, and
one that we have to take seriously and try to find apposite responses to.

Now, as you are aware, for some time now we have been trying to develop a
much more integrated and holistic policy around this matter, around all
security matters in our courts, as well as on the issue of the security of
judicial officers. But while we are developing that policy, we have not sat
back and done nothing. As you are aware, we have undertaken a whole lot of
programmes and projects to respond to some issues immediately. You’ve
mentioned one of them.

We have taken a decision to create a unit of the SA Police that will guard
and give security, particularly to key points, which will include courts.
And hopefully that will happen and increase as we go ahead.

Secondly, as you are also aware, we have a policy in place that, if there
are individual threats against certain judicial officers, and they are
brought to our attention, the security forces do a full security evaluation
of that person and then, if necessary, we put security measures in place.
That happened particularly, with regard to the Pagad cases, where the
magistrates and judges doing those cases were given specific protection.

Then you also know that, particularly through the interventions of
Parliament’s Justice committee, we’ve been able to increase the budget
around security matters significantly. In many courts of our country, we
have now been able to install more security measures – not enough and not
in all of them, but it’s a step forward.

Of course, there are also broader issues. The one that the Judicial Office
has raised with us is that they want us to install an alarm system in each
judge’s home, because apparently that was done under the apartheid
government. So we are considering that as well, to see what can be done in
that regard.

I do note, though, a very, very serious comment that was made in the
newspapers, which I find quite astounding, namely that there are some
magistrates that have alleged that they feel under such pressure that they
give judgments that are contrary to what they would have given in a given
case. I find it completely astounding that someone can sit on the Bench and
say that they feel so pressurised by someone or something, that they give a
judgment not in line with their conscience and what the facts of the case
demand.

I find that completely astounding and I must say that no one has ever
brought that to anyone’s attention; no one has ever told us that they are
under that kind of pressure when they are giving judgments. I find that a
very unfortunate comment made by those persons.

I would actually like them to come out publicly and tell us who they are,
who these judges and magistrates are who feel that they are under such
pressure. We’ll then try and deal with it and give them the necessary
protection. [Time expired.]


               CO-OPERATION OF AGENCIES IN FIGHT AGAINST CRIME


                            (Minister’s Response)
The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Thank you very much. There are a
number of patriotic South Africans out there who are assisting the law-
enforcement agencies of the country to deal with matters of crime. Business
Against Crime is one organisation that, for quite some years now, has been
assisting in this regard, not only in terms of the work that the police do,
but right through the integrated justice system. They have assisted us with
resources to ensure that our courts are able to work effectively, and so
on.

But there are others who, as I have said, are patriotic and have come
forward to give us both time and energy in order for us to fulfil our
function of providing peace and stability in South Africa. They include the
various religious formations in the country.

I want to appeal – this is an appeal I have extended in this House over
time - to all of us who are part and parcel of this vehicle fighting
against crime to unite our efforts and, therefore, ensure that we succeed
in what we are trying to do, which is to create conditions of peace and
stability in South Africa.

We, as public representatives of our people, ought to be at the head and
part of the vanguard as we participate in our crime prevention strategy.
So, we want to commend those organisations that we are already working with
in this respect. Thank you.

      RETENTION OF HEALTH PROFESSIONALS BY SOUTH AFRICAN HEALTH SECTOR

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, thank
you very much. I would just like to engage with the point that was raised
about the health sector and the seepage of health workers, in particular
medical doctors. I want to say, yes, we welcome that kind of input. But
there is a need for this House to come to grips with the overall human
resources development plan that the Minister of Health is putting on the
table to look at the issue of both recruitment and retention of health
professionals, in particular medical doctors, within the health system.

Having stated that, I think it is necessary also to put on the table the
fact that this particular round of wage negotiations does take that
particular aspect into account. As a matter of fact, we have put aside 1,3%
of the wage bill for job creation in particular. Out of that amount, there
is a sum of R400 million, over the next three years, that has been set
aside specifically for the health sector in order to ensure that we recruit
more medical professionals.

In addition to that, we have set aside R750 million for this financial year
to address the issue of scarce skills in that sector, as well as setting
additional amounts of money aside for rural allowances.
I felt that it was necessary to raise this, because as political parties
with a limited understanding of the whole issue of the wage package on the
table at this point in time, we tend to overlook the fact that we are
addressing major and complex problems that we confront when it comes to the
issue of personnel within the Public Service. So I feel that as we try to
deal with specific issues, we must note that that is within a broader
framework. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

      NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT: PROTECTED AREAS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.


                           ELECTORAL COMMISSIONERS



   (Consideration of nominations for appointment in terms of section 6 of
                       Electoral Commission Act, 1996)


There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, the DA supports the appointment of the
commissioners and wishes them well both for their terms of office and in
the major task ahead of them, namely the local government elections.

In supporting the nominations, the DA would like to place on record that
one of the elected commissioners indicated that he would not want to serve
on the commission beyond the local government elections. While he will, no
doubt, bring invaluable skills, expertise and continuity to the task at
hand, it is unfortunate that the portfolio committee did not consider this
candidate’s nomination more carefully, because 18 months down the line we
will have to nominate another commissioner to replace him.

However, now that the immediate crisis is over, the DA hopes that the
Department of Home Affairs will apply its mind more seriously to reviewing
the legislation, and refrain from short-term crisis interventions like the
urgent amendment to the Electoral Commission Act. Such interventions can
impact on the independent functioning of the electoral commissioners. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chair, we in the ACDP also have reservations regarding that
particular nomination. Whilst we appreciate the need for continuity and are
mindful of the particular nominee’s vast skills in government and legal
drafting, he indicated that he would not want to serve on the commission
“much beyond the next local government elections”.

The tenure of the commission is seven years. This is an important
consideration that should have been borne in mind when the decision
regarding suitable commissioners was taken. As has been pointed out, we
will have to go through a full nomination process in terms of the Act when
the commissioner resigns from the commission after the next local
government elections, as he has indicated. However, that having been said,
the ACDP will support the portfolio committee’s nominations for the
electoral commissioners. I thank you.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, firstly, I want to take this opportunity to
congratulate the task team on coming up with wonderful candidates; and,
secondly, I want to congratulate those who are now appointed commissioners
and the public on the role it has played.

One thing that we tried to avoid was to begin to politicise much of the
work that is done by these commissioners. I think they are doing wonderful
work. Even when we dealt with these issues in the portfolio committee, we
made it very clear that we would not want to engage in a debate that would
begin to question the work that is done by these commissioners.

Nevertheless, I think there is nothing wrong with the point that has been
raised about one of the commissioners who said that he would not want to
serve beyond the local government elections. The fact is that for the sake
of continuity, I think it’s proper that we have to have these people,
because when we have the local government elections, it will be good to
have people with experience at the same time. But that does not really do
away with the work that these people will have to do.

Obviously, the issue is that the commissioner should be allowed to do his
work. All of us, if need be, will have to come back and appoint another
commissioner, and there is nothing wrong with us doing that. As long as we
have this Parliament, we will keep on doing that. On that note, I thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Question put: That the nominations for the appointment of the following
candidates as Electoral Commissioners be approved:


  Bam, B; Mpumlwana, N F T; Tselane, T, and Van der Merwe, F.

     AYES-267: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya,  S
     E; Asmal, A K; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O;  Bekker,  H  J;  Benjamin,  J;
     Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B ; Bici, J; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M;
     Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Botha, C-S; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M;
     Camerer, S M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers,  J;  Chang,  E  S;  Chauke,  H  P;
     Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota,  F  I;  Combrinck,  J  J;  Dambuza,  B  N;
     Davidson, I O; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; De Lille,  P;  Diale,  L  N;
     Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dipico, E M; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M;
     Doman, W P; Dudley, C; Durr, K D S; Ellis, M J; Erwin, A; Farrow, S  B;
     Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Gabela, L S;  Gcwabaza,
     N E ; George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gibson, D H M; Gololo, C L;  Goniwe,  M
     T; Green, L M; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M ; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N  B;
     Hajaig, F; Hangana, N E; Harding,  A  ;  Hendrickse,  P;  Hogan,  B  A;
     Holomisa, B H; Huang, S; Jacobus, L  ;  Jeffery,  J  H;  Joemat,  R  R;
     Johnson, M; Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kalyan, S V;  Kasienyane,  O  R;
     Kati, Z J; Kganyago, N M; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K;  Khumalo,  K  M;
     Khumalo, M S; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C;
     Koornhof, G W; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L  T;  Lekgoro,  M  M  S;
     Lekota, M G P; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E
     J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli, A N ; Maake, J J; Mabe, L  L;  Mabena,  D  C;
     Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madasa, Z L; Madlala-Routledge,  N  C;  Magau,  K  R;
     Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G  L;  Mahlawe,  N  M;
     Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Maloney,  L;
     Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S;
     Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R;
     Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masithela, N H; Mathibela, N F; Matlala,  M
     H; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mentor,  M  P;
     Meshoe, K R J; Mfundisi, IS; Mgabadeli, H C; Minnie, K J; Mlangeni,  A;
     Mnandi, P N; Mngomezulu, G P; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L
     J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga,  M
     R; Mokoena, A D; Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O  E;
     Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B  G;  Moss,  L  N;
     Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka,  H  M;  Mpontshane,  A  M;
     Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;  Mufamadi,  F  S;
     Mulder, C P; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V B; Ndou, R  S;  Ndzanga,  R  A;
     Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;  Ngcengwane,  N
     D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L;
     Nhleko, N P ; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A  A;  Nkuna,
     C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R; Ntuli, B M;  Ntuli,
     S B; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nzimande, L P  M;  Olifant,  D  A  A;
     Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G;  Phala,  M
     J; Phungula, J P; Pule, B E ; Rabie, P J; Radebe, B  A;  Radebe,  J  T;
     Rajbally,  S;  Ramakaba-Lesiea,  M  M;  Ramgobin,  M;  Ramodibe,  D  M;
     Ramphele, T D H;  Rasmeni,  S  M;  Saloojee,  E;  Sayedali-Shah,  M  R;
     Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Sefularo, M; Semple, J A;  Seremane,  W
     J; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B;  Sibuyana,  M  W;  Sigcau,  Sylvia  N;
     Simmons, S; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Skosana,  M  B;  Smith,  P  F;
     Smith , V G; Solo, B M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E;  Sotyu,  M
     M; Spies, W D; Stephens, M; Steyn, A C; Surty, M E; Swart, P S;  Swart,
     S N; Taljaard, R; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias,  T  V;  Tolo,  L  J;
     Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van
     der Merwe, S C; van der Walt, D; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi, T E; Vundisa,
     S S; Wang, Y; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M ; Xolo,  E
     T; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z ; Zulu, N E.


Question agreed to.

Nominations accordingly approved in accordance with section 6(2)(c)  of  the
Electoral Commission Act, 1996.


                UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION AGAINST CORRUPTION


  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

Mr B MTHEMBU: Chairperson, hon members, the General Assembly of the United
Nations, in its resolution 55/61 of December 2000, recognised that an
effective international legal instrument against corruption that was
independent of the UN Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime was
desirable. It was then decided to establish an ad hoc committee for the
negotiation of such an instrument. Over 120 states participated in the open-
ended ad hoc committee. The ad hoc committee completed its work in 2003. On
31 October 2003, the General Assembly adopted the resultant convention
unanimously.

To demonstrate their commitment to making the convention a reality,
governments were urged to participate in a high-level political signing
conference, which was held in Merida, Mexico in 2003. At that conference,
the Minister of Public Service and Administration signed the UN Convention
Against Corruption on behalf of the South African government.

However, for the convention to be operational, it is imperative, in terms
of Article 67 of the convention, for all participating states to ratify it
before 9 December 2005. As of August 2003, 105 states have signed the
convention, and two states have ratified it.

The significance of the UN Convention Against Corruption is that it seeks
to strengthen international co-operation in preventing and combating the
transfer of funds of illicit origin and promoting ways and means to prevent
it happening. Secondly, it seeks to develop the measures necessary to
ensure that those working in financial institutions contribute to the
prevention of the transfer of funds of illicit origin. Thirdly, it seeks to
establish criteria for determining the appropriate countries to which funds
should be returned and the appropriate procedures for such return.

The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration, having
considered an in-depth comparative analysis of the provisions of the UN
Convention Against Corruption within the South African framework, came to
the following conclusion: Firstly, our legal framework is not only
compliant with the provisions of the convention, but also goes beyond its
requirements. Secondly, the South African government will be able to
implement it without extra costs.
The committee therefore recommends that the House, in terms of section 231
of the Constitution, approve the convention. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

United Nations Convention against Corruption approved.

  BROAD-BASED BLACK ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT AS A TOOL TO BRING GREATER NUMBERS
                OF SOUTH AFRICANS INTO THE MAINSTREAM ECONOMY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Dr E NKEM-ABONTA: Chairperson, anyone would know by now that black economic
empowerment is only benefiting a handful of men, and immensely at that. As
a tiny, but politically well-connected, rapacious black elite engages in
legal plunder, carting away millions by the day, millions of hapless black
people, still unemployed and destitute, watch bemused.

All they get is the promise that it will trickle down. It will not trickle
down. The BEE Act does not contain any provisions that make broad-based
empowerment ineluctable, nor do any of the empowerment charters for that
matter. Thus, implementation has focused overly on asset ownership by a
very few rich black men. It should, instead, focus on stimulating
employment and enhancing black small-business development.

Clearly, policy interventions are required to make BEE benefits spread
beyond the small circle of men, referred to by the Minister of Minerals and
Energy as “the gentlemen of empowerment”. We should take deliberate
measures to truly empower and uplift millions of our disadvantaged black
people. We should help them start and successfully manage their own small
businesses. We should help them by stimulating job creation. How? We should
extend the BEE strategy to ensure that benefits are spread broadly.

Accordingly, the DA proposes extensions along the following six policy
instruments spelt out in the DTI’s BEE strategy: legislation, regulation
through scorecards, the restructuring of state-owned enterprises,
preferential procurement by government, a BEE advisory council, and
partnerships and charters. Specifically, the DA proposes that, firstly,
government undertake a legislative review with the view to granting tax
incentives and reducing payroll taxes - tax incentives for businesses that
employ unemployed persons and for those that run learnership programmes.

Secondly, scorecard regulations should explicitly rule out any empowerment
equity deals with black billionaires and millionaires, as well as re-
empowerment of well-off beneficiaries who are certainly capable of fending
for themselves. Instead, the scorecards should assign substantial weights
to employee-share and community-enterprise ownership schemes.

Thirdly, government should accelerate the privatisation of state-owned
enterprises and sell their shares to a broad base of black people.
Fourthly, government procurement policies should reward large businesses
that partner with black-owned small enterprises and set a time limit beyond
which a benefiting black businessperson would cease to benefit from
preferential procurement in order that another needy black businessperson
may benefit.

Fifthly, government should appoint foreign investors and non-ANC members of
unimpeachable integrity to the BEE advisory council to guard against
cronyism. Sixthly, industry charters should set targets for the development
of large small-business linkages. In addition, the DA proposes that
government adopt the special exemption certificates, or Spex certificate
programme.

Originally proposed by the Free Market Foundation, Spex would allow a
person who has been unemployed for six months or longer to apply and
receive a special exemption certificate. The certificate would grant the
holder exemption from all labour legislation for a period of two years. It
would also protect any employer, who hires the holder, from prosecution
under our labour laws. [Interjections.]

By freeing the long-term unemployed to enter any form of employment
agreement they wish, Spex empowers them, greatly enhancing their chances of
securing employment. Note that for Spex to work, it is not necessary to
change our labour laws, although doing so would greatly multiply the
benefits, nor would Spex weaken the job security of existing employees.
And, by making small businesses less averse to employing low-skill persons,
small businesses that rely on low-skill labour could mushroom, firing
growth.

Surely such a programme, along with the BEE reform measures proposed, would
bring down the unemployment rates rapidly and dramatically, accelerate the
economic growth rate and thus truly empower the masses of our people? Thank
you, fellow hon members. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy Speaker, I want to thank
Mr Nkem-Abonta for his bright ideas, but I do think that millions of black
people who are suffering and who are poor where he comes from do need him.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.] And I do think that he should not have run
away; he should have worked very hard to ensure that the whole of Africa
was empowered. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: The hon Deputy Minister made a statement there which is quite
clearly an example of xenophobia. [Interjections.] The country of origin of
the hon member who has just spoken is of no consequence. We are all equal
members of this House, whether that Deputy Minister likes it or not.
[Interjections.] We have had rulings before about personal references to
racial and other origins, and I ask you to tell the Deputy Minister to mend
her ways. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will need to be advised there, because I listened to
her and she never mentioned any country of origin. She referred to where
the hon member came from. I thought that where he comes from is Cape Town.
[Interjections.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I beg your pardon? [Applause.]

Hon Deputy Minister, will you please continue.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker, it is not clear to me
what your ruling was. Did you say you are reserving your ruling …

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I’m not reserving any ruling. I’m said that I did
not heard her mention any country of origin. I’m under the impression that
the hon member is a South African, and I thought that what the hon Deputy
Minister was therefore saying was that South Africans need him and the
whole of Africa. But if there is another interpretation of that, which is
not what she said, we can then study the Hansard and come back and make a
ruling.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I ask you to study
the Hansard, and not allow disingenuous explanations like that.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, thank you. I
think the racist right-wing DA are the ones that are racist. The hon member
stood here to talk about black men and the black masses. He did not mention
the white millionaires and billionaires that enriched themselves by
stealing our mineral wealth in this country … [Applause] … and by
developing rich white cartels that are continuing even today to loot our
diamonds and take them to London, that are continuing today to monopolise
the mining industry.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, I would like you to concentrate
more on black economic empowerment. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This
is all about black economic empowerment. Most African mining countries have
suffered from what is sometimes called the resource curse of the paradox of
plenty. In one way or another, African countries have suffered for their
resources.

You would recall the story of conflict diamonds. Many countries, such as
Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are
tragically beset with this terrible paradox – that of enormous mineral
wealth and devastating civil conflict. And we know very well who is selling
the guns, who is making money out of all these conflicts.

South Africa did not come through the curse unscathed. I would venture to
say that the whole apartheid policy was about an inability, or
unwillingness, to share the spoils of our plentiful resources. In many
cases, the exploiters of the same resources were unwilling to put a penny
back into the communities in which they were mining.

How else can I explain that one of the poorest communities in South Africa
today is adjacent to Kimberley, one of the mining areas that produced some
of the finest diamonds in the world. One of the biggest diamonds, that was
sent as a present to the Queen of England, came from this country.

We are saddled with ghost towns that simply died when the mining companies
pulled out. We are saddled with billions of rands worth of environmental
liabilities, mines that have nobody today to claim them. And it is the
department, this government, that has to pay to rehabilitate those mines,
that has to pay to ensure that the sick, who have been poisoned and have
asbestosis and so on, are well cared for. It is these liabilities, in terms
of which companies just upped and left unsightly and sometimes contaminated
dumps, which we now have to rehabilitate.

Because of migrant labour laws, countless families were destabilised. Men
would leave their homes and be expected to live in inhumane conditions in
hostels that were provided by the mining companies. Because of being
separated from their families for periods of up to one year, some took
wives, some turned to prostitutes. Also, with the advent of HIV/Aids, the
mineworkers were the first victims. In fact, at the XV International Aids
Conference in Bangkok in July this year, the UN Aids director said that the
spread of HIV and Aids in East and Southern Africa was mainly due to the
unjust migrant labour system in those countries.
However, it has been said that there is nothing inevitable about the
resource curse. While facing this challenge of the plenty, if handled well,
the mining sector can become a powerful contributor to the development of
our country.

In avoiding the negative consequences I have already mentioned, the current
government, when it came to power in April 1994, soon realised that the
existing Minerals Act of 1991 was inadequate for serving the future needs
of our country. The new government therefore decided that a thorough review
of South Africa’s mineral legislation was needed, and the rationale for
this review was based on the following main criteria.

Firstly, the majority of the population had been excluded from ownership
and from participation in management for some hundred years before
democracy finally became a reality in 1994.

Secondly, it was important for government to take the opportunity to revise
and formulate a new mineral and mining policy that would be in line with
new global trends and practices. Finally, the new policy had to be
realigned with new policy developments that had taken place in other
sectors as well, for example environment, labour, water affairs and the new
Growth, Employment and Redistribution strategy, Gear.

No blacks in the past were allowed to own mines by law, you would remember.
Even the Minerals Act of 1991, which was supposed to be more progressive,
did not repeal the Mining Rights Act of 1967. It did not address the fact
that blacks were only employed as labourers, housed in single-sex hostels,
and only allowed to visit their families once a year. It was only in the
mid-1980s that the first group of black professionals was employed on the
mines, but they were subjected to the Group Areas Act and there were areas
that they were not allowed, by their white counterparts, to participate in
and go into. Women were allowed to work as professionals in the sector, but
at that time there were no ablution facilities underground demarcated for
women.

With regard to broad-based socio-economic empowerment in the mining sector,
the rationale for this policy is as follows. The mining industry applied
apartheid principles with no rights for blacks and women. They supported a
system that displaced people and separated families, and actually broke
down families in some cases. They made unsustainable settlements that left
the residents poorer after the mining was finished. They took on able-
bodied men and employed them for 20 years, yet these men remained unskilled
after all those years. They housed men in single-sex quarters that
encouraged sex-related diseases, including HIV and Aids.

The broad-based socio-economic empowerment charter’s goal is to create an
industry that will proudly reflect the promise of a nonracial, nonsexist
South Africa, with the shared vision of a globally competitive mining
industry that draws on the human and financial resources of all of South
Africa’s people, and that will offer real benefits to all South Africans.

The broad-based black economic empowerment programme is aimed at ensuring
that empowerment reflects the transformation of South Africa, the
transformation of the mining industry and also the transformation of the
mineral landscape into what we have envisaged. It also ensures that
meaningful and sustainable change in the ownership profile and equity of
the mining sector become a reality, that there is improvement in the racial
and gender composition and also that there is the provision of training and
skills in the sector. In addition, it improves delivery in terms of
employment equity on the mines.

The programme establishes development strategies with a special focus on
host communities and major labour-sending areas. It encourages urban
renewal in order to avoid ghost towns. The programme also encourages
beneficiation, that is the production of mineral-based higher-value goods
and job creation. And, we shall fight to ensure that our diamonds are no
longer looted and taken to London, to Belgium – and that they are cut and
polished here so that we can create thousands of jobs out of that industry.
[Applause.]

Regarding the pillars of broad-based economic empowerment, whilst in the
past mineworkers remained unskilled despite having worked for 20 years, in
terms of the new policy the mining industries and government have agreed
that they will pledge and facilitate the training of workers. In reality
this means that unskilled workers that start working today can get into an
Abet programme; they can get qualifications through the MQA, which is our
Seta, and learnerships; they can get drilling certificates; and a miner can
become a shift boss. There is absolutely nothing stopping him from climbing
up the ranks to become a mine manager. You would remember that this was how
some of our white managers of today got to their positions.
With regards to employment equity, the mining industry started to employ
black professionals in the mid-1980s. There were lots of young
professionals who thought that by joining the industry they could have good
careers. Unfortunately, this was not to be. The ceiling was that of senior
geologist at best, a low-paying job on the mines.

Our charter ensures that there will be no ceiling for black people with the
ability to move up. We have made sure that we are looking at participation
at management levels. Now, if the cronies want to use these opportunities,
they can, but they still have to have the relevant qualifications.

Regarding mine communities and rural development, unsustainable settlements
left mine-hosting communities, like Galeshewe, Welkom and others, very
poor. Rural areas, which depended on migrant labour, like the Transkei,
Limpopo, the deep rural KwaZulu-Natal, were devastated when mineworkers
stopped working owing to ill health or retrenchment.

The charter ensures that areas that supported the mining industry and
provided able-bodied men should not die because these men are now suffering
from typhus, TB or HIV/Aids. That is why we are insisting that these
communities should be looked after, and we have worked with the mining
industry to set up major agricultural projects in these areas. We are also
looking into tourism as far as job opportunities and job creation go. Thank
you, Madam Speaker. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, for the record let me  mention  that  the
IFP supports empowerment as a tool amongst other tools. However simple  that
may seem, it is difficult to agree on  measures  for  impact.  The  IFP  has
never questioned the necessity of black empowerment or the  good  intentions
of the government.

According to the Congress of Business  and  Economics,  the  BEE  debate  is
raising many anxieties and misconceptions, and fear of the unknown  is  also
creeping in among members of the organisation. Whether the  perceptions  are
real or unreal, at the end of the day, they do raise concerns.

The IFP advocates the creation of a strong middle-class in order  to  bridge
the gap. We also advocate that  bigger  businesses  assist  small  ones.  As
pointed out, we support  the  BEE  as  a  strategy  aimed  at  substantially
increasing black participation at all levels in  the  economy.  However,  we
lament the fact that up to now, the concern has been that a black  elite  is
being established. It is, however, debatable whether this can be avoided  in
a capitalist situation.

Owing to the time at my disposal, I cannot now go into  detail  in  defining
concepts like “black company” “black-powered  company”,  “black  women-owned
enterprise”, “community or black-based enterprise”,  and   “a  co-operative”
or “collective”, etc.

Given our economic legacy of monopoly and capitalism of the hegemony of  big
business,  the  cycle  of  exploitation  is  almost  impossible  to   break.
According to Business Day, black business has  on  occasion  criticised  the
Act for not being prescriptive. It has been condemned by white  business  as
another law being introduced, on top of numerous other laws,  that  business
has to adhere to.

From the positive side, allow me to quote the Managing  Director  of  Growth
Africa in Business Day of 9 September 2004.


      Notwithstanding all the misfortunes that have discredited empowerment,
      it is our duty as the South African business community to  learn  from
      these expensive lessons and find solutions  to  give  impetus  to  the
      intentions of empowerment policy makers.


It should, however, be borne in mind that even the  road  to  hell  is  also
paved with good intentions. It all  starts  with  our  motives,  intent  and
attitude when approaching the empowerment challenge. The choice is ours.

As the IFP is the moral opposition, allow me  to  quote  Dr  Xolela  Mangcu,
executive director of the Steve Biko Foundation:
  The founders of modern economics saw the economy as a  reflection  of  the
  social institutions and values of society. For a long time, the  preferred
  term was the moral economy of nations. It is only much later that the term
  “political economy” came into currency.


Corrupt institutional networks will produce corrupt economic  practices.  If
the political framework that we inherited rewards those who are  politically
connected, then those individuals will dominate the scene.

The fact that there may  be  shortcomings  does  not  persuade  the  IFP  to
condemn BEE. If we did that we would then be throwing the baby out with  the
bathwater. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, unfortunately BEE  has,
in the eyes of many, become associated with the high  profile  big  business
deals of the black nouveau riche. Although these deals  employ  millions  of
rands, they empower only the already  powerful  elite.  They  do  little  or
nothing for the millions  of  South  Africans  languishing  in  poverty  and
unemployment.

Real BEE takes place at grassroots  level.  This  is  the  level  of  Khula,
Ntsika, Nemec  and  the  National  Empowerment  Fund.  While  much  improved
delivery has yet to be achieved, such  initiatives  will  prove  to  be  the
vehicles that transport great numbers of South Africans into the  mainstream
economy.
Black economic empowerment not only empowers the  previously  disadvantaged,
it will lift the  whole  South  African  economy  and  realise  the  awesome
productive potential of this nation. A rise in tide lifts all boats. To  the
new liberal trickle-down enthusiasts we say, empower the poor  directly  and
everybody benefits. Benefits rise through the economy, they do  not  trickle
down. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, the focus of the  BEE  debate  has  been
around deal-making and incorporating previously  disadvantaged  institutions
into shareholding structures, hoping that those at  the  lower  end  of  the
scale will benefit.

This  narrow  perspective  has  seen  few  benefits  and  only  leading  BEE
personalities have benefited largely. As a basis, giving  the  unemployed  a
decent sustainable job is the most basic  form  of  empowerment.  Few  black
South Africans have money of their own to buy  into  such  equities.  Almost
every empowerment deal has been built on debt.

The banks  made  arrangements  for  these  capitalists  without  capital  by
setting up SBVs and issuing shares with a  life  of  three  to  five  years.
These shares are pledged as a security for loans  used  to  buy  them.  This
means that SBVs depend for their success on continually rising share  prices
and moderate interest rates.

In terms of the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme,  jobs  created  through
labour and job creation strategies amount to  6  500  across  nine  sectors.
Since the Growth and Development Summit Agreement in 2003,  a  total  of  69
000 trainees have been through learnerships against a target set  of  almost
73 000. The target was missed by 5%, with  the  biggest  shortfalls  in  the
public service and defence Setas. By 2004, 666  learnership  programmes  had
been registered with the Department of Labour.

Broad-based BEE  means  bringing  SMMEs  into  the  empowerment  arena,  and
government  agencies  are  responsible  for  providing  financial   support.
However,  the  dismal  performance  by  Ntsika,  largely  due  to   internal
structural and capacity failures,  has  crippled  government’s  attempts  to
support SMMEs.

Khula’s record is  equally  unimpressive.  Its  problems  relate  mainly  to
poorly targeted products,  inefficient  managerial  systems  and  inadequate
mentoring to businesses. At  another  level,  government  has  also  largely
failed to provide enough tenders to SMMEs, and  the  pitfalls  in  SMMEs  in
this arena, I think, justify another debate.

The recent announcement by DTI that Ntsika will merge  with  the  Nemecs  to
form government’s new small business SBDA is another  evolution  of  how  to
adequately support SMMEs and broad-based  BEE.  The  NEF  ought  to  be  the
flagship for spreading economic ownership to PDIs.
Facilitating BEE savings and  improving  accessibility  to  finance  by  BEE
groups  ought  to  be  its  major  drivers,  yet  it  is  too  embroiled  in
mismanagement charges. As a result, we only see mega deals being done  by  a
few prominent black businessmen driven by charter  processes  in  particular
sectors. If this current trend continues, we will concentrate  wealth  in  a
few black hands, thereby  defeating  the  objectives  of  this  legislation.
[Time expired.]

Adv Z L MADASA: For the BEE strategy to be truly  successful,  it  must  not
only create new black business, but must also address the  major  challenges
facing our country, namely poverty and unemployment. We must  remember  that
not  all  black  people  are  potential  businesspersons.   Black   economic
empowerment must not just exist on paper, but in reality as well.

True BEE must address the real needs of  the  economy,  namely  quality  and
relevant  education  for  all  black  children,  and  proper  training   and
equipping of workers in order to enable  them  to  participate  in  the  new
economy that is driven by technology and information.

The recent revelation by surveys that most black matriculants,  compared  to
other races, are not getting employed is a cause for concern. There will  be
no BEE in future if black students are not getting quality education.

The new leadership of the ANC Youth League should  focus  its  attention  on
youth, education and training matters, and stop being rude to black  leaders
who  are  in  business.  The  ANC  must  make   those   young   men   focus.
[Interjections.]

Government departments must also do their part to promote  BEE.  Departments
must pay black business on  time  for  procured  services.  Many  businesses
close down because departments pay them very late.

Many upcoming black businesses need training  on  financial  management  and
support. Many upcoming black businesses take loans from the banks  to  cover
overheads based on security of tenders, but late payments by departments  in
particular is undermining  these  difficult  endeavours  by  these  upcoming
black businesses.

So, I call  upon  government  departments  to  devise  an  interdepartmental
strategy to ensure early payment for services procured from BEE  businesses.
That is one of the ways  that  will  ensure  sustainable  black  businesses.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A D MARTINS: Hon Deputy Chairperson and esteemed hon members, South
Africa’s history of systematic discrimination against the majority of the
population and the looting and stripping of their asset base requires
special measures to address the historical legacy of apartheid economic
policies and of apartheid educational policies, which have placed black
people at a fundamental disadvantage.

Broad-based black economic empowerment provides a historic bridge between
the past of a deeply divided society characterised by exploitation, strife,
conflict and injustice and a future founded on the recognition of the
economic potential and development of all South Africans. Broad-based black
economic empowerment, therefore, properly conceived, is a process aimed at
community empowerment in both urban and rural areas, redressing the
imbalances in the ownership and control of South Africa’s economic
resources by increasing black - that is, African, Coloured and Indian -
participation at all levels of the economy.

Hence broad-based BEE focuses not only on business ownership and equity,
but also on human resource development, skills development and
participation in management. As such, broad-based BEE aims to further
promote entrepreneurship and to provide market and business access and
opportunities to black enterprises.

The financing of black, small and emerging entrepreneurs and access to
skills by these entrepreneurs is thus strategically important for the
economy in general, and BEE in particular.

Broad-based black economic empowerment will thus not have the desired
effect if it does not include a credible financing component, and effective
skills development programmes. Historically, South African financial
institutions have been characterised by a systematic failure to meet the
needs of low-income communities, including petit bourgeois black business.

Commercial banks have had a low level of outreach and service provision in
poor rural areas and small towns. Even where there are banks, they are
mostly clustered in towns that only partially serve the rural areas.

Against this background, it is clear that we have to ensure that adequate
financing of broad-based BEE takes place within the parameters of the
existing macroeconomic and microeconomic reform strategies.

Broad-based black economic empowerment is then about increasing the numbers
of black people who assume the risk to use their material and intellectual
resources, not only for purposes of immediate consumption, but also to
create additional wealth through the productive investment of these
resources.

To date, greater numbers of black people are becoming professionals,
managers and technicians. Laws have been passed and funds made available
for black people to own businesses as one aspect of broad-based BEE.

Broad-based black economic empowerment remains a pivotal element of
government policy. Accordingly, government has allocated R1 billion rand
for BEE during the current fiscal year, and R10 billion is provided for the
next five years.

The governments’ vision is supported by, amongst others, the following six
strategic thrusts: firstly, promoting entrepreneurship vigorously;
secondly, unlocking potential through a better business environment and
promoting more competitive small businesses; thirdly, creating an enabling
environment for small enterprises which reduces the disparities between
urban and rural businesses and which is conducive to entrepreneurship;
fourthly, promoting the development of economically sustainable small,
medium and micro enterprises that will significantly contribute to South
Africa’s general economic growth; fifthly, increasing the number and
variety of small, medium and micro enterprises operating in the formal
economy; and, sixthly, increasing the competitiveness of small enterprises
so that they are better able to take advantage of opportunities emerging in
local, district, provincial, national and international markets.

As with other development programmes, the broad-based BEE process also
focuses on the challenge of the empowerment of women, people with
disabilities and the youth. At the core of the government’s response to all
these challenges is the struggle against poverty and underdevelopment,
which is underpinned by the ANC’s peoples contract to create work and fight
poverty.

Continued and determined government intervention, in conjunction with
private investment from the patriotic South African bourgeois, will
hopefully assist the underdeveloped economic sector to create the
environment where private enterprise will seek economic opportunities which
will increase employment and incomes. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chair, the FF Plus believes that the concept of
empowerment defined and measured along racial lines serves no purpose but
to further divide the population. Our economy is highly centralised and
dominated by a few individuals who are often driven in their decision-
making by only one goal, namely, profit.

In their drive for profit, the interests of the people and the environment
of the local communities within which these enterprises function are often
neglected.  To substitute these few individuals who happen to be white with
a few other individuals who happen to be black will not solve the current
problem of wealth being concentrated in hands of only a handful of people.

The FF Plus therefore supports the ideal of the empowerment of local
communities as opposed to the empowerment of racial groups. For communities
to become empowered economically, they should also be empowered politically
to ensure that decisions are taken at the lowest possible level.

A centralised economic dispensation cannot be rectified while the political
dispensation remains even more centralised. By empowering local
communities, we can once again allow the brightest people in all of these
communities to build new business on new ideas in a way that serves their
people and the environment.

Let us take on this challenge, or else we might just realise that
redistribution of wealth had led to nothing more than a redistribution of
poverty. I thank you.

Mr N T GODI: Thank you, Chairperson. The fact that we are having this
debate 10 years down the line is in itself a measure of the extent to which
we have not been able to make any progress in terms of the democratisation
of the economic environment for the African people.

Change cannot only be at the political superstructure whilst the economic
base is left intact. It is important to note that when we attained our
liberation in 1994, we inherited one of the most unequal societies in the
world in terms of ownership and consumption patterns, where we indeed had a
two-nation setup: one white, rich and in position as employers, and the
other African, poor and in position as employees.

The response of the majority to the challenges facing our country has been
to make the necessary space, the necessary compromises to ensure that we
are able to move forward. But, the requisite response from those who owned
capital, especially from the white community, has thus far been not to give
an inch unless they are forced to.

The exemplification of the resistance to change is such that despite the
fact that we have the Employment Equity Act, up to now, 99% of the
employers are not complying with that Act. Even with the one per cent that
has complied in terms of plans to transform the workplace, we find that it
is only on procedural matters and not on substantive aspects.

We know that about 80% of the managerial posts in the country are still in
the hands of whites, and it is just inconceivable that we can say that
beyond these 10 years Africans will continue to be garden boys and maids
and developed as servants of the white community.

When we attained our liberation in 1994, there was a strong lobby for a
minimalist state with the belief that the focus on economic growth will
lead to a trickle-down effect. But, 10 years down the line, we know it has
only lead to a trickle-up, making those who were rich richer and those who
were poor poorer.

The PAC believes that BEE is not only a fundamental fulfilment of the
fundamental material basis of our liberation struggle, but an assurance and
guarantee of social stability in our country. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Black economic empowerment has
been a sure way of changing the apartheid-moulded economy of South Africa
into the democracy we have today.

The MF feels that BEE is not in motion to force a black representative
market, but to allow for such black-managed companies that have great
potential and have what it takes to assist in building South Africa into a
strong competitor in the global market. Our economy represents us as a
nation, and the MF takes pride in having an economy that represents its
diversity as a nation.

Government has put many provisions in place to ensure the upliftment and
liberation of all South Africans. In this equal and fair state, our people
need to mobilise themselves. The MF feels that we need to broaden the scope
of BEE to include schools, so as to ensure a diverse economy and
opportunity for all our future leaders.

However, the broadening of BEE should not be in place to sideline
minorities. Our economy needs to be built from the best. And where the
potential and strength for a promising economy comes from, we need to
indulge in it. And even though we need to diversify our economy, we need
not take 10 steps back to do so. I thank you.

Mr Y I CARRIM:  Madam Deputy Chairperson, comrades and friends, here we
have the hypocrisy once again. The party that supports an unfettered free
market and rampant individualism is lecturing to us about empowering not
individuals but collective groups - groups that they do not represent or
even understand.

Just recently, three months ago, such groups tellingly rejected them at the
polls. Why? Because they have faith in their tried and tested organisation,
the ANC. It is this organisation, after all, that long ago made it very
clear in the Freedom Charter that liberation from apartheid meant not just
political freedom, but social and economic emancipation too.

This approach was developed at the Morogoro Conference, in Kabwe, and was
developed further when we were unbanned in 1990 and at the subsequent
conferences we had there. It was spelt out, too, in the RDP and in many
policies and laws adopted in this Parliament since 1994. The ANC’s approach
to broad-based BEE has to be understood in the context of the current phase
we are in in the unfolding national democratic transition. It is a broad,
multiclass national project.

The ANC seeks to advance, unapologetically, the interests of all classes
and strata of our people, even if we are primarily concerned with the poor.
And, yes, part of this project entails the fostering of a black bourgeois
but not, we must stress, at the expense of empowering and advancing the
poor. These are not mutually exclusive goals, but are part of one overall
national project in the current phase we find ourselves in, that is the
unfolding transition.

Let me quote what the ANC had to say in Stellenbosch under ``resolves on
black economic empowerment’’, and the DA, in particular, but perhaps also
the ID, should take note. It says:

      Black economic empowerment is a moral, political, social and economic
      requirement of the country’s collective future. BEE is defined in its
      broadest sense as an integrated and coherent socio-economic process
      located in the context of the RDP. Its benefits…


Please note, all opposition parties -


      ... must be shared across society, and impact as widely as possible.


It goes on to say that:


      To ensure that BEE is broad-based, supportive of collective ownership
      programmes…


And what does the DA know about this?


      ... by working people and communities, in the form of collective
      enterprises and co-operatives, supportive of the creation of an
      entrepreneurial class, the accumulation of assets by the poor and with
      a focus on the development of rural economies …

Where indeed is the DA‘s base in the rural economies?

Let me add that the ANC goes on to say that they will mobilise their
membership, communities in general and targeted groups in particular -
women, institutions working with children, people with disabilities, the
youth and the elderly - to take up the BEE opportunities and to participate
in the debate.

Let’s be very clear. That is the policy of the majority party. If that
policy is not being implemented by the executive, then it is for this
Parliament - the majority in this Parliament - and the ANC in particular,
to hold the executive to account as to what was decided in Stellenbosch,
while recognising that what was decided at these conferences have to be
translated into law and policies, and that some nuance of change, not in
values, strategies or orientation, should take effect.

Yes, we admit that BEE has not always worked the way it should, and that
the focus at times has been too much on the enrichment of a few rather than
the empowerment of the many. [Interjections.] But, who is to blame for
this? The captains of industry are mainly to blame. Their narrow and
cynical approach to BEE is their way of avoiding substantive
transformation.

The DA likes to criticise the ANC and our deployment policy for narrow
interpretations of BEE. The truth, however, is that most of the high-
profile BEE deals have never been discussed in any ANC structure
whatsoever. They have much more to do with the opportunistic calculation
and the so-called deployment policies, if you like, of the white captains
of industry. In fact, this is what peeves the DA the most, that the
constituency they aspire to represent, corporate white South Africa, is not
interested in approaching the small, marginal party we have here.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA: Order!

Mr Y I CARRIM:  No! No! No! What do they seek to do? They seek to influence
the majority party, it is true, by influencing people through boardroom
shuffles. What is the problem with the DA? They hope to get the white
business community behind them to raise funds and so on. [Interjections.]
But the white business community is not interested. They have a
presidential working group with our President. They reach out to the ANC.

What is the role of the DA? Let us be very clear. Why doesn’t the DA focus
on the fronting? Why does the DA not ease the anxieties of the minority
communities in this country about BEE? That is their role.
We admit that there have been weaknesses. Precisely because of these
weaknesses the ANC, not the DA, proposed the notion, over the past two
years or more, that we should have broad-based BEE. That is not the notion
of anybody else, but the ANC. The aim is not to leave BEE to the market to
implement, but for the state to give direction and cohesion. The aim is to
ensure that BEE is indeed broad-based and benefits all classes and strata
of the black people.

In fact, look at the Act… [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (C-S Botha): Order, hon members! Please give the
speaker an opportunity to make his case. [Interjections.]

Mr Y I CARRIM: No, no, no! Let me reply to the many things that Mr Nkem-
Abonta said. And basically, it does not matter where he was born. What we
have a problem with is his ideas. In that sense, we want to know whether he
was born on this planet. That is the issue. He has no sensitivity to what
is happening in this country. Whether he was born elsewhere is irrelevant.
[Interjections.]

What we want to say, moreover, is that we should look at BEE in the context
of the overall legislation. Look at the wonderful laws we have passed to
empower black people in general and disadvantaged people in general. Look,
for example, at what my Comrade Ben Martins had to say. His was a very
coherent account of what has been done in his portfolio. Look at the
Employment Equity Act, the Preferential Procurement Act, the Competition
Act, the National Empowerment Fund Act, and so on. There are many more
things to say. [Interjections.]

For example, when we talk about BEE, what about – they are acutely
insomniac when they recount what happened during the past 10 years, partly
because they are not in touch – the various other forms of black economic
empowerment? What about the IPOs? What about employment share options, and
so on? In fact, some concrete proposals did emerge from other parties
including, for example, from Adv Madasa. Most of what you said is in the
legislation anyway, Mr Madasa.

On the one out of the six proposals that the DA has offered so far, I would
say, yes, I think the appropriate people should look into what tax
incentives can be offered in the case of fostering BEE. But ultimately - we
are very clear on this - it is not about simply changing the complexion of
the owners and the managers of the economy; it is about sensibly,
sensitively and collectively changing the structure of the economy over
time. It is about evolving a new set of progressive values and ensuring
inequality reducing economic growth.

We also asked whether it is appropriate that these old order structures of
the company laws are the vehicles for BEE. Should we not be looking at
alternative, progressive things like co-operatives and so on, which the
legislation provides for?

What was on the cards not so long ago was the nationalisation of key
sectors of the economy and a radical rupture with capitalism. This has not
happened. So, let us not pussyfoot about it. Let us all - Parliament,
government the private sector, the unions and civil society - work towards
meaningful broad-based black economic empowerment. And the DA can also play
a role by easing the undue anxieties we stressed of sections of the white
business about
broad-based black economic empowerment. [Interjections.] Now, instead, what
do they do? They increase these anxieties. They forget that we have a
structural legacy of apartheid with the most acute income inequalities in
the world.

There is no way we can address the problems of this country without black
economic empowerment in the general sense. And it is in the interest of the
private sector, the white captains of industry no less, to ensure stability
and prosperity in this country. If we do not empower the masses of our
people, five to six years down the road all of us in this House, regardless
of the party we come from, will have to bear the consequences.

What does the DA say? They say that black people are poor essentially
because of the wealth of the black elite. This is patent nonsense. It is a
way of avoiding confronting the legacy of apartheid and the failures of the
market that the DA so blindingly champions. We need to develop the
productive forces. That’s what the ANC says. And if we have to develop
those productive forces, it means that the emerging black middle-classes
will have to play an appropriate role, but not at the expense of other
classes and other strata of our people.

Mr Nkem-Abonta says that the trickle-down from black economic empowerment
is not taking place. Yet he supports the trickle down based on a market
philosophy that has failed dismally in reaching out to the poor. He talks
of unconditional privatisation, yet he is opposed to the emergence of a
black middle-class.

Our differences ultimately with the DA are not just ideological, strategic
or programmatic; they are about what is common sense. The problem with the
DA is that it does not have a common touch, nor is it sensible.

Therefore it is forever doomed to being the marginal party it is. And quite
frankly, what I would like to ask the House Chairperson is: Why has the DA
put this issue up for discussion today? They have offered nothing new. I
thought that if Mark Lowe had something useful to say, we should have this
debate. Can’t we have a set of criteria that says, unless you can prove
that you have something useful to say, please do not bring these debates
here. They are a waste of time! [Laughter.]

No doubt Mr Mark Lowe, who is going to speak last, is going to misinterpret
much of what I said. [Interjections.] That is partly because he has a
prepared speech and he will tweak that prepared speech to respond to the
sort of things Ben, the Deputy Minister and I have said. But the fact of
the matter is that Mark Lowe must explain to us in his five minutes why he
suggested this topic for discussion when neither he, presumably, nor his
colleagues had anything new to say. It’s a most unproductive use of the
taxpayer’s money. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, I am very sorry that the ANC speakers, including
a Deputy Minister, have chosen to treat this important topic with such
carelessness and contempt. The reason we raised it, hon Cassim, is because
we believe that there is something seriously wrong with black economic
empowerment that needs addressing. You have run away from the debate this
afternoon, Sir, and the rows and rows of empty seats in the government
benches bears testimony to just how unimportant you think this topic is.
[Interjections.]

Last year, the DA opposed broad-based black economic empowerment because we
did not believe that is was a genuine effort to transform our economy and
empower the millions of South Africans excluded by apartheid.  At its
heart, the Bill failed to tackle unemployment, poverty and inadequate
education. It failed the many and it rewarded the few. We remain so
convinced.

Commentators from the across the spectrum have agreed that BEE is a mess,
with the chosen sons of the ANC at the trough, versus the millions on
welfare and social grants and in the unemployment queues. As Rhoda Kadalie
asked in her business column entitled “Just a nuance away from smash and
grab looting” -

      How do some board members and senior executives involved in a
      corporation or some state institutions constituted by an Act of
      Parliament and financed by the state, amass this kind of wealth within
      such a short period of time and presumably pay taxes?


Any credible broad-based black economic empowerment strategy must focus on
job creation and entrepreneurship as its key measurables if it is to make
any difference to the lives of those millions of South Africans excluded by
the past. Broad-based BEE is important, necessary and desirable, and
deracialising ownership of large listed companies is welcomed, but it is no
substitute for large broad-based empowerment which must address the urgent
needs of ordinary people at grass-roots level, something the ANC speakers
this afternoon have all but forgotten about.

In the year since that BEE debate, the jobless queue has not dropped below
eight million, while millions and sometimes billions of rands have been
transferred in the blink of an eye to a lucky, well- connected few. The
vast majority of South Africans are as marginalised as ever.

Black economic empowerment has also seen manipulation and abuse by
powerful, well-connected front men. Many of this new generation of robber
barons have not been black, and Christine Qunta is correct in pointing out
that it is wrong to differentiate between black and white billionaires. But
she fails to criticise a strategy that ignores individual risk and simply
advances and rewards a small elite, while the broad mass of people in whose
very name the system is being driven continue to starve. That form of
wealth distribution, Deputy Minister, if you are listening, is obscene. And
whether you call it legal plunder or “smash and grab looting”, urgent
reforms are needed to turn wealth distribution into wealth and job
creation.

Moeletsi Mbeki, Deputy Chairman of the SA Institute of International
Affairs, agrees. He says that black economic empowerment takes the
brightest black people, and instead of devoting their energies to creating
new companies, new products and providing and creating employment, they
spend their time looking for redistribution mechanisms to get shares in pre-
existing companies. This creates instability and builds resentment.

Of course, it is acceptable for black people to work hard to build wealth
and create empires, just as it is acceptable for anyone else, but we must
move away from a narrow focus of just transferring equity and target job
creation and enhancing black small business development.

Legislation should encourage small business employers to create jobs and to
share skills and wealth, not to build up resentment by forcing them to give
away the equity that they have built up over decades.

Along with the proper enforcement of the basic health and safety rights of
workers, we need simplified labour laws to encourage and not to discourage
the employment of people because, you see, labour legislation is not the
only fact inhibiting job creation and trade opportunities. Last week’s
World Bank report again confirms that South Africa’s labour laws restrict
businesses and curtail employment and economic empowerment.

Only innovative programmes, as my colleague has already pointed out, like
the Free Market Foundation’s Special Exemption Certificate programme - that
puts entrepreneurship and opportunities, skills development and job
creation at the very heart of BEE and at the very heart of our Presidency
and our Cabinet - will truly transform our economy and empower our people.

The ANC speakers this afternoon might like to take cognisance of the fact
that until we stop just beating about the bush, talking hot air and
pretending that all is well out there, until we start to empower the very
many in our society and not just worry about the very few, black economic
empowerment will remain a shortcut to riches for those who need it the very
least, and remain a mirage for the majority who have been promised so much,
yet have received so little. Thank you. [Applause.]




                           PAN-AFRICAN PARLIAMENT


                                  (Debate)

Ms K R MAGAU: Motlatsi wa modulasetulo, maloko a hlomphehang, ke a leboha.
Ke rata ho nka monyetla ona ho leboha sebaka sena sa ho phethisa thomo ya
komiti ya dikamano le dinaha tse ka ntle, ho tla anehela Ntlo ena ka
dintshetsopele tse ntseng di tswela pele palamenteng ya kontinente, e leng
Pan African Parliament, ka Sekgowa.

Ke boele hape ke nke monyetla ona ho amohela barumuwa ba dinaha tsa Afrika
naheng ena ya rona, bao e leng ditho tsa palamente ya Afrika, ha ele mona
letsatsi ka mora mona, ba tla be ba kopane mane Midrand motseng wa Gauteng,
ho tla buisana ka ntshetsopele ya kontinente. (Translation of Sotho
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms K R MAGAU: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson, hon members. I would like to
take this opportunity, to take up the mandate given by the International
Relations Committee, to address this House in English on developments that
are taking place at the continent’s parliament, known as the Pan-African
Parliament.

I also take this opportunity to welcome in our country the delegates from
the African countries, who are members of the African parliament, as they
will meet tomorrow at Midrand in Gauteng to discuss developments on the
continent.]

The Constitutive Act of the African Union, adopted by the Assembly of Heads
of State at its 36th Ordinary Session in Togo in July 2000, gave concrete
expression to the common vision of a united, integrated and strong Africa.
This ordinary session of the heads of state also noted that the
establishment of one of the organs of the AU, namely the African
Parliament, is informed by a vision to provide a common platform for
African people and their grassroots organisations to be more involved in
discussion and decision-making with regard to problems and challenges
facing the continent.

The purpose of this deliberation is to give a report on developments in the
Pan-African Parliament which, as a country, we were very instrumental in
establishing. I therefore believe that it will be appropriate to mention a
few of PAP’s objectives as informed by the vision and as stated in Article
3 of the Protocol to the Treaty establishing the African Economic
Community, relating to the Pan-African Parliament.

The PAP is an integral part of the African vision. Therefore, one of its
objectives is to facilitate the implementation of the AU’s policies and to
advance the African agenda of 1963, which is to unite the continent. The
unity referred to must be characterised by representivity and democratic
processes. The African agenda is therefore nothing else but an agenda
defined by Africans themselves for the development of their own continent.

The second objective is the promotion of the principles of human rights.
For a long time, among the continents of the world, the African continent
has not had a good record in the promotion of human rights. The time is
here for Africa to put human rights at the top of the agenda through
institutions such as the PAP.

The third objective is the encouragement of good governance, transparency
and accountability. This, then, means that member states in the PAP must be
in a position to do this at the level of national parliaments before they
can start doing so in the continental parliament. It is in instances such
as these that the Nepad peer review mechanism plays a vital and critical
role.

The PAP is for the promotion of peace, security and stability. These are,
therefore, the ingredients for prosperity and development. It is therefore
key that the PAP, through peaceful and healthy deliberation in its
gatherings, must and should strive for the maintenance and promotion of
security and stability on the continent.

Based on the understanding and commitment to these objectives, a
continental parliament for the African Union was inaugurated in Addis Ababa
on 18 March 2004. Two hundred and two legislators from 41 out of 53 member
states of the AU were sworn in. In accordance with the legislative
framework establishing the PAP, it is a prerequisite that at least one of
the five members proposed by each country must be a woman. It is very
pleasing, therefore, to note that several of the countries, including South
Africa, chose two or more women as representatives. Therefore, it must be
mentioned that this is the actualisation of the fifth key idea of the
vision of the AU, which states that policies and strategies to be
implemented would have no meaning unless they were human-centred. Human-
centredness in this instance means humans - of whom 50% are women - who
must, in all circumstances, be both actors in and beneficiaries of the
structural changes engendered by development.

On the other hand, development should enable humans to accept their
identities and conditions rather than fall victims to them, which was the
case in Africa during colonial rule and oppression.

According to Article 11 of the protocol, the PAP also has the following
powers and functions:

  The PAP shall be vested with legislative powers defined by the Assembly
  and, among other things, it will examine, discuss and express opinion on
  any matter either on its own initiative or at the request of the Assembly
  or any other policy organ of the African Union, and make recommendations
  as it may deem fit relating to matters in respect of human rights,
  consolidation of democratic institutions as well as promotion of good
  governance and the rule of law.


Article 12 of the protocol also provides for the adoption of the rules of
procedure on the basis of a two-thirds majority. Draft rules of procedure
have been put before the committee, and amendments were made where
necessary, for example, putting into perspective and context certain words
and phrases. Of great concern to the committee, as well as to the delegates
who were part of the rules committee, is Rule 25(7)(6), which states:


  The proceedings of the committee shall be held in public. However, the
  committee may decide to hold closed meetings.


It is this decision that the committee may decide to have closed meetings
that is of great concern to us. South Africa would have preferred the
version:

  For public committee meetings, with closed meetings held under
  exceptional circumstances.


This, we believe, would be in line with the principles of democracy – that
of transparency, openness, public access and accountability. As far as this
rule is concerned, the PAP rules committee could not reach consensus, and
has thus decided to refer the two proposals to the plenary for decision.
The plenary will be taking place in Midrand some time this week.

As far as we are concerned, we trust that our delegates will be in a
position to lobby as much support as they can to ensure that, at the end,
democracy becomes a winner.

Ha ke diela dikgala, ke nnete mosebetsi o se o entswe, e leng wa ho bea,
kapa ho hlopha dintho ka manane, jwaloka ho etsa yona melawana e tla
tsamaisa palamente ena ya kontinente. Re le naha re thabela le ho
thoholetsa qeto ya kontinente ya ho re tshepela hoba lehae la ntlo ena ya
ketsamelao. Nnete ke hore mosebetsi o moholo o sa ntse o tjamelane le rona.

Wa pele, ke ho netefatsa le ho bontsha dikontinente tse ding tsa lefatshe,
tse re nyenyefatsang ebile di re shebela tlase, hore re na le bokgoni bo ka
fetang ba bona, ho ntshetsa pele le ho ntlafatsa kontinente ena rona. Wa
bobedi ke ho dula re hopola kamehla hore kopano ke matla. Ha re kopane, ka
kgopolo e lenngwe, le tjhebelopele e le nngwe, re sebeletsa kgotso,
tshireletso, le botsitso, kahara kontinente, kontinente ena ya rona eka ba
kontinente e ruileng ka ho fetisisa.

Mafu a kang HIV, tshotleho kapa bona bofuma ba maAfrika, e kaba le toro le
tshomo. Ke a leboha. (Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, it is true that work has been done, like putting in place
laws that will control this continental parliament. As a country we rejoice
and welcome the decision of the continent to trust us to be home to this
house of legislation. The truth is that we are still facing a lot of work.

Firstly, it is to ensure and show other continents of the world that are
looking down upon us that we have more ability than they have to develop
and improve our continent. The second one is to remember on a daily basis
that unity is strength. When we are united with one idea, one vision,
striving for peace and security within the continent, our continent can be
the richest ever. Diseases like HIV, suffering or poverty of Africans, can
become history. Thank you.]

Mr W J SEREMANE: Mme Sebui, Maloko a a tlotlegang, le wena kgaitsedi ke a
go lebogela go re gopotsa gore ntwakgolo ke ya molomo. [Madam Speaker, hon
members, I would like to thank our sister for reminding us that it is
better to resolve disputes through negotiations rather than fighting.]

It is gratifying to reflect on the vision of the Pan-African Parliament,
and neatly describe it as an achievement whose moment has irrevocably
arrived. It didn’t come overnight and easily, but through decades of
deliberations, debate and relentless toil, by adhering to Pan-Africanism,
which seeks unity, stability, development and freedom on the continent of
Africa. It is therefore proper and fitting to mark the opening of the
second ordinary session of the Pan-African Parliament in two day’s time at
Gallagher Estate, Midrand, as a historic occasion in both South Africa’s
and Africa’s history. We are not unmindful of the difficulties, technical
and financial hitches that abound, and that will indeed manifest themselves
singularly and collectively as challenges to be faced and overcome.

The success of the Pan-African Parliament will depend less on rhetoric and
the usual political fire and brimstone pronouncements, and more on how true
to the letter and spirit the protocols are upheld and adhered to, including
the inspiring ideals of promoting democracy, human dignity, economic
development and human security in the African states and on the continent
itself. The Pan-African Parliament, on the basis of these imperatives, must
ensure that the body is inclusive and reflects truly the diverse political
positions of all parties in parliaments of the member states.

It is a travesty that democratic processes were manipulated by the majority
party in this Parliament, thus excluding the main official opposition, the
Democratic Alliance, and even the long-standing proponents of Pan-
Africanism – of course the PAC can speak for themselves. The majority party
did not stick to the rules and tenets of democratic processes and enhance
the integrity of the Pan-African Parliament. It is not very helpful to have
tomes and tomes of worthy and high-sounding documents which are
contradicted by practice and application. For instance, we cannot turn a
blind eye or deaf ear to the blatant violation of human, women’s and
children’s rights.

Talking about of women’s rights or gender rights, it is also appropriate in
this debate to congratulate Madam Gertrude Mongella on ascending to and
assuming the challenging responsibilities as the President of the Pan-
African Parliament. We in the DA also note the statement sketching out her
understanding of her responsibilities and expectations. Her passion that
the Pan-African Parliament, I quote, “should be judged by African
standards” is legitimate. Equally true is the fact that Africa cannot live
like an island unto itself. Africa must impact positively on human affairs
and, much the same way, she should not be impervious to positive messages
emanating from outside her own geographic location.

Without making the hon Madam Mongella the subject of this debate, I wish to
quote her again on the subject of opposition parties. In the context of
opposition in a democratic framework, the Pan-African Parliament, and I
quote, “... will be very careful about allowing opposition parties from
individual member states to pursue their agendas”. True impartiality and
even-handedness should extend that caution to all and sundry, opposition
parties and the ruling parties, lest we betray a tendency of witch-hunting
and demonising the voice of legitimate dissent, cardinal to freedom of
expression, belief and association.

Africa must speak. Africa is challenged to listen to and tolerate different
viewpoints in its debates and dialogue. The Pan-African Parliament has a
big challenge, amongst others, to nurture and sustain democracy and the
inalienable fundamental rights of all. These rights are sacrosanct and
indivisible. The Pan-African Parliament is a worthy achievement of the
African Union. In refreshing our collective memory, it needs to be said
that the PAP was established with the following objectives, that is: to
facilitate the effective implementation of the policies and objectives of
the African Union; to promote the principles of human rights and democracy
in Africa; to encourage good governance, transparency and accountability in
member states; to promote peace, security and stability; to contribute to a
more prosperous future for the peoples of Africa by promoting collective
and self-reliance and economic recovery; to facilitate co-operation and
development in Africa; to strengthen continental solidarity and build a
sense of common destiny among peoples of Africa, not divisions; and to
facilitate co-operation among regional economic communities and their
parliamentary forums.

The area that also needs attention is communication and information
dissemination. The Pan-African Parliament has to communicate and publicise
its work. This can only be done successfully when member states themselves
take up that responsibility to inform and publicise the PAP at all levels
of their different areas of jurisdiction. For instance, road shows
highlighting the institution PAP and its work should be the norm rather
than a once-in-a-while, once-off event.

Last but not least, I would also like to briefly refer to PAP member
states’ commitments and obligations. I think and strongly believe that
member states should, by all means, meet their membership dues, so that
they don’t get to be the burden of others who are willing to do that.
Member states should be truthful and true to treaties and protocols of the
institutions of the African Union, the Pan-African Parliament, etc. I thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L K JOUBERT: Chairperson, hon members, it is a privilege to address this
House on the historic day on which we inaugurated the People’s Mace.

Sihlalo, angazi ukuthi ekhaya ngizowuphedula kanjani umbuzo wokuthi sibe
malini isagila esihlobise kangaka. [Uhleko.] [Chairperson, when I get back
home, I do not know what answer am I going to give as to how much was
expended on such a well-decorated Mace. [Laughter.]]

The 21st century has been named the African century, and the IFP welcomes
the establishment of the Pan-African Parliament with great excitement. We
are especially proud of the fact that South Africa is the seat of the Pan-
African Parliament. As far as the venue is concerned, hon members will be
interested to know that Ulundi was considered, but they unfortunately lost
out to Gallagher Estate. I hear the hon member here laughing, but the
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs - that’s the new Deputy Minister, not
the permanent Deputy Minister - personally told me that. The venue, of
course, is only chosen for a five-year period, and we look forward with
anticipation to it being reconsidered in the future.

We are keenly aware of the challenges that face our continent, and it is
with great expectation that we have noted a new sense of urgency in
recognition, in most member countries, that the current state of affairs is
not optimal. We trust that the exercise of the Pan-African Parliament will
assist the African spirit to triumph over poverty and adversity. Although
still in its infancy, we already note positive results even locally. For
example, the fact that we, South Africa, are in such a minority in the Pan-
African Parliament will hopefully make ANC members appreciate what it is
like to be an opposition member in a parliament where one faces an
overwhelming majority.
Our very best wishes accompany our delegates to the Pan-African Parliament.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson and hon members, we support South Africa’s
participation in and hosting of the Pan-African Parliament. Those
representing South Africa in the PAP must realise that they represent this
Parliament as a whole and, thus, put aside their political and ideological
differences. If our representatives do not co-operate as South Africans,
but speak from their political turfs, the interests of South Africa will
not be served. Even though we were at the vanguard of establishing the PAP,
disjointed representation therefore would mean that we might as well be
represented in a “ pap and vleis ” feast instead of at the PAP.

The rules governing the PAP still have to be lobbied with other
participating countries to determine how the PAP will operate. However,
judging from the foreign affairs Committee’s briefings, it seems that there
is already much consensus. The PAP must become a voice of the people of the
continent. If it becomes just another talk shop, we are guilty of failing
Africa and wasting millions in taxpayers’ money. Finally, we urge our
representatives to ensure that the PAP takes note of the resolutions of the
African Union as well as the programme of Nepad, and that they champion
these efforts aimed developing our continent. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Madam Chair, the ID sees the Pan-African Parliament as an
exciting initiative that will hopefully provide a truly representative
forum for all the people of Africa. This Parliament must grow into a forum
where African countries can learn from one another’s experiences in
tackling our shared challenges. This Parliament, however, must not just be
about an exchange of parliamentary ideas, but it must actively reach out to
communities and civil society organisations.

During my travels around Africa, I was struck by the great divide that
exists between people and their political representatives. It is imperative
that we bridge this divide if Africa is to move forward as a prosperous
continent. The people of Africa possess keen insights into the development
challenges facing the continent, insights that have been formulated through
their daily struggles in often intolerable, situations. There is an amazing
wealth of knowledge and entrepreneurial activity in all parts of Africa,
and it should be a function of this Pan-African Parliament to highlight
these. It is only through understanding the reality on the ground that we
can formulate policies and positions that will move this continent forward.

The ID insists that the Pan-African Parliament plays an effective oversight
role in ensuring that all member states live up to the stated ideals for
Africa, which include democratic governance and respect for human rights.
It must not be a toothless body, but it must play an active role in holding
all countries accountable to the wishes of the African people.

In this respect, the ID would like in the future to see elections being
held for the representatives of this Parliament, so that Africans
themselves can decide who will represent them on this body.  In this way,
representatives can also take forward a specific mandate from their
constituencies, as opposed to the current situation whereby members
themselves decide.

The ID looks forward to the progress of the Pan-African Parliament. We will
put forward suggestions on how we feel the body can more adequately
represent the shared ideal of a truly people’s African Parliament. May the
voices of Africa finally be heard, our Pan- African governance structure
strengthened, and Africa assume its rightful place in the world. I thank
you.

Adv Z L MADASA: Chair, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Parliament for my election as part of the delegation of the South African
Parliament to the Pan-African Parliament.

The odds were in favour of the Pan-African Parliament not being established
in the near future. The reason for this is that many people and
commentators thought that, in view of the many undemocratic governments and
dictatorships in Africa, there would not be enough countries to ratify the
protocol establishing the Pan-African Parliament.

We must, therefore, congratulate President Mbeki on his unwavering
commitment to the democratisation of the continent. It is because of the
support and the encouragement of his leadership that the Parliament is now
a reality and is hosted in South Africa. We must also applaud the
indefatigable energy of the previous Speaker who contributed a lot in this
process.

The Pan-African Parliament will have consultation powers in its first term,
which is the first five years, but the Parliament has powers and duties to
discuss and make decisions on all matters affecting the African Union.  The
Pan-African Parliament can make recommendations to the Assembly of the
Heads of State for the Assembly to take decisions on such recommendations.
If the Pan-African Parliament has a good calibre of MPs, with a passion to
be the voice of all Africans on issues of economic development, human
security and disease, the Parliament, in my view, shall be a success.

It is also good news that the Pan-African Parliament is hosted in South
Africa, for this will help South Africa to be truly integrated in the whole
continent, so that we stop seeing ourselves as not part of Africa. Thank
you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon members, please note that this is
a maiden speech.

Mr S HUANG: Chairperson, hon Minister and members, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, I am humbled to have been given the podium by my
organisation, the ANC, to speak about an important institution such as the
Pan-African Parliament, especially on the eve of its second session which
will start two days from now in  Midrand, Johannesburg.

Let me firstly, like many other speakers before me, add my congratulations
to our country and its people on being chosen as the permanent seat for the
Pan-African Parliament. In fact, at the risk of sounding arrogant, it could
not have come at a better time, as our country is currently playing a
leading role in trying to find a peaceful resolution to conflicts that are
still found in some African countries.

I hope that on the occasion of the representatives of those countries which
are still in conflict visiting our land, they will further be reminded of
the need to try harder to get peaceful solutions to their differences when
they go back home. Of course, such an event also comes as our country
celebrates 10 years of democracy. We have every reason to be happy as well.

Most importantly, the sitting of the Pan-African Parliament on Thursday in
our country shows how much confidence the rest of the continent has in us.
The past 10 years of democracy has proved us to be a multiparty democracy,
which can be trusted with the huge responsibility of successfully hosting
this prestigious institution.
I, therefore, have no worry that we will successfully host it.

Allow me to use my remaining time to address a very disturbing issue about
some people in this House who, instead of focusing on the positive spending
which such an event will bring to our country, choose to ask questions on
how much it will cost us. Those who raise these questions about money need
to be reminded how South Africans got their freedom. We owe it to the
international community, particularly Africans, who, during our struggle
for liberation, supported us.

Many of the citizens of these countries paid the ultimate price, but they
never asked the question about how much their deaths, maiming and
displacement by the apartheid forces cost.  Who are we then to ask such a
question when we are requested to contribute to the building of a new
African continent free of diseases, conflicts, poverty and all the other
illnesses currently associated with it?

Article 17 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union emphasises the need
to establish the Pan-African Parliament in order to ensure the full
participation of all the African people in the development and the economic
integration of the continent. Again, as representatives of the people,
drawn from different sectors of society, we should be engaging people on
the ground, motivating and encouraging them to fully participate in this
process of developing the Pan-African Parliament from just being a
consultative and advisory body into a fully fledged legislative body which
represents all the people of the continent.

We should ask ourselves how our country’s perspectives, coming from our
experiences and lessons, serve as an example to other conflict-ridden
countries. We should also be interrogating ourselves and our communities
with the sole aim of finding out what is it that we need to do to realise
all the dreams of Africa, as they are envisaged in the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, Nepad, document. For example, research shows that in
the next 20 years the African continent will be home to over 1,5 billion
inhabitants, over 800 million of which will be younger people below the age
of 15.

It is also said that this human resource will put us on an equal footing
with China and India, and will constitute a huge market. We therefore need
to start now to think of ways in which we are going to protect this
potential market, but most importantly, how we are going to use them to
benefit the entire continent?

In conclusion, I believe we are moving in the right direction, and we dare
not fail the founding mothers and fathers of our beautiful continent,
especially at a time when our generation is so blessed with an abundance of
esteemed leadership. This is shown through a number of progressive thinking
initiatives, like Nepad, on the African continent, of which the Pan-Africa
Parliament that we are discussing today is a result.

Just like our President, I look forward to the day when the Pan-African
Parliament will pass legislation for the entire continent. In response to a
question by a member of this House, the President said:

  We should move from the basis that the Parliament should in the long run
  be able to pass and monitor legislation for the entire continent.

He further said:


  As we achieve the greater integration of the African continent, the more
  it becomes unavoidable that we must set the rules and the regulations
  together, collectively.

Allow me to end my speech with the conclusion I found in the African Human
Rights Law Journal, titled, “The Pan-African Parliament of the African
Union: An Overview”. It reads as follows:

  The Pan-African Parliament gives further impetus to the desire and vision
  of Africans to provide a democratic foundation to the African Union. The
  Pan-African Parliament ought to have a significant role to play in
  shaping an organisation that has elements of a peoples’ union. In the
  context of the Pan-African Parliament, it must realistically acquire some
  legislative powers in the near future if it is to have any credibility
  with the people.

I could not agree more with the above. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Chairperson, a case for an African parliament has been
put forward favourably by different African leaders before and after the
end of colonialism on this continent. The desire to have this type of
institution had been motivated by a need to unify and redevelop Africa.
There is no doubt that the birth of the Pan-African Parliament with its
first official base in South Africa fills us with pride as African people,
irrespective of which country we come from.

This represents a victory for African people to have an institution of this
nature. Above all, it is expected to help improve the living standards of
our people across the continent. We agree that there is a difference in
terms of establishing an institution of this magnitude and the actual
implementation of its programmes. This gap presents a challenge for the
institution to pursue its programmes of action with vigour. The litmus test
that the Pan-African Parliament must pass is its ability to bring about
stability and long-lasting solutions to the problems in the Great Lakes
region, in addition to other challenges.
In short, it should help to advance and not retard or reverse the gains
achieved in the past. It is well documented that Africa after independence
never had an opportunity to prioritise its development.
[Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Chairperson, the PAC supports the Portfolio
Committee on Foreign Affairs’ draft provisional rules on the Pan-African
Parliament. The committee has a mandate from this Parliament to make this
contribution.

With regard to Rule 276, the PAC agrees that the South African delegation
to the Pan-African Parliament should argue that committee meetings must be
open to the public, except in exceptional circumstances. However, the PAC
prefers the abbreviation for the Pan-African Parliament to be PAP, not
“pap”. We are not here to eat pap. [Laughter.]

This is the PAP and it is bought with the blood of the African people. It
did not just drop from heaven.

It is imperative to us Pan-Africanists that the Pan-African vision must be
a parliament of all African people. The Pan-African Parliament must
represent the Pan-African vision as envisaged by giant Pan-Africanists such
as Nkrumah, Sobukwe, Sekou Toure, Modibo Keita, Zephania Mothopheng, Du
Bois, George Padmore, Nnamdi Azikiwe, Lembede and AP Mda.

On behalf of the PAC, I emphasise that the Pan-African Parliament must
pursue the objectives of the Pan-African vision. Indeed, this vision can
only be articulated by Pan-Africanists. It is unfortunate that the majority
of members of the PAP will not be Pan-Africanists. This being the case, the
PAP might fail the Pan-African vision in the same way that the OAU did,
since it was a compromise of the Casablanca group and Monrovia group. [Time
expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Chairperson, poverty is a problem throughout
South Africa and is one of the issues that the MF hopes the PAP shall
alleviate. Colonisation, slavery and apartheid have had serious effects on
what Africa is today. The challenge of the HIV/Aids epidemic is on the list
of Africa’s setbacks. These are but a few of the challenges that Africa
faces. A democratic South Africa that is a member of the PAP should
influence the rest of Africa with regard to practising democratic values,
human rights, gender equality and so on.

It is certainly encouraging to have a female as the President of the Pan-
African Parliament. We honour and respect the President of the PAP. We
trust that she will serve in her capacity efficiently. We are also
satisfied with the election of the Vice-President of the PAP.

If the countries of Africa could reach a united mind-set, we can achieve
almost anything. We are affluent in terms of natural resources and we are a
strong people. We have overcome a series of difficulties over the
centuries. We have the potential and all the raw materials to strengthen
Africa and become a strong global competitor. We firmly agree that we need
to earnestly mobilise Africa to develop itself socially, economically and
politically through its own assets and liabilities. The bridges of African
languages need to be developed, ensuring every African access to their true
potential.

Women and children throughout Africa need to liberated. The MF is excited
about the PAP sitting on Thursday and it hopes that these issues will be on
the agenda. The MF salutes a united Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and members, it is
important to remind everybody gathered here that our ancestors, wherever
they are, are happy about this initiative of the PAP. This is particularly
true of our fallen heroes such as Kwame Nkrumah, Haile Selassie, Patrice
Lumumba, Oliver Tambo, Julius Nyerere – to mention but a few. The PAP is
the culmination of a long-held dream of these African liberators. We must
hail the sons and daughters of Africa who have sacrificed their lives and
liberty to ensure that Africa emerges from the yoke of poverty and
degradation. President Thabo Mbeki and other African leaders have been
working tirelessly to bring this dream of African unity to fruition.

Kukhona abantu, ikakhulukazi ngasesandleni sokunxele ezinhlanganweni
ezithize, ebebemgxeka bethi uchitha isikhathi eside engekho kuleli
lengabadi yakithi. Okuyihlaya ukuthi labo bantu abakuboni ukuthi izwe
lakithi laseNingizimu Afrika liyingxenye yezwekazi lase-Afrika.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[There are people here, especially those on the left, in certain political
parties, who criticised him, saying that he spends a lot of time outside
the country. What is absurd is that they do not realise that South Africa
is part of the African continent.]

They seem to not realise that South Africa’s development will mean very
little if the rest of Africa lags behind. We exist alongside and through
the rest of Africa. We must work together to bring about social and
economic prosperity.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member Sibande, please take a
seat. Mr Skhosana, are you rising on a point of order or do you wish to ask
a question?

Mr M B SKHOSANA: Yes, Madam Deputy Chairperson, I wish to ask the hon
member a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Do you wish to take a question, Mr
Sibande?

Mr M P SIBANDE: Yebo. [Yes.]

Mr M B SKOSANA: The hon member said in IsiZulu that
``Okuyihlaya ukuthi labo bantu abakuboni ukuthi izwe lakithi laseNingizimu
Afrika liyingxenye yezwekazi lase-Afrika’’... [What is absurd is that they
do not realise that our country, South Africa, is part of the African
continent],… which means that those on his left have been criticising the
President, saying that the President is…

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA:) Hon member Skhosana, you were given
the right to ask a question.

Mr M B SKHOSANA: Bengithi angibuze lapha mfowethu ukuthi uma uthi esandleni
sokunxele usibala sonke kusuka laphaya? Ngoba kukhona no-Kader Asmal
neNkosi laphaya. Baningi abakini abangapha. [Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu
paragraph follows.)

[Let me ask my brother whether he, when he says those on the left, is
referring to all of us on this side? Because there is also Kader Asmal and
the iNkosi here. There are many of your people on this side. [Laughter.]]

Mr S P SIBANDE: Bayazazi ebebekade bemgxeka. Uma wena ubungamgxeki
ungakhululeka, bayazazi bona. [Those who criticised him know who they are.
If you did not criticise him, just be free, they know who they are.]

President Mbeki has correctly stated that the social and economic crisis in
Africa demands that we as Africans should play a proactive role in
extricating ourselves from this position of poverty and underdevelopment on
our continent. The President issued a call to the African masses to rise up
in struggle to defeat poverty and underdevelopment to end Africa’s
marginalisation and to restore the dignity of Africans everywhere.

Kubalulekile malunga lahloniphekile,kusho kutsi, kuphumelela kwe- PAP
akungabukwa kucatsaniswe nalokwenteka kulamanye emave njengelubumbano lwe-
Europe, kepha akubukwe ngeliso labo bonkhe bantfu base-Africa, ikakhulu
mayelana nenkhululeko kanye nekubusa kwentsandvo yelunyenti. Asitishayeni
sifuba kutsi singema-Africa sihlangene senta intfo letsi wele tsine
letakutfutfukisa timphilo tetigidzi tebantfu labadla imbuya ngelutsi.
(Translation of Swati paragraphs follows.)

[It is important, hon members, to say that the success of the PAP must not
be seen against the background of or compared with what is happening in
other countries like those making up the EU, but it must be seen from the
perspective of all the people of Africa, especially with regard to freedom
and democracy.

Let us be proud that as Africans we are united in doing something that is
ours that is going to improve the lives of millions of people who are
living in poverty.]
All South Africans are waiting to embrace and welcome the delegation of the
PAP into our country. All South Africans have endorsed the motion that the
seat of the PAP should be in South Africa. We are aware that the rules
governing the PAP are of great importance to ensure genuine democratisation
of African politics. We are convinced that the amendments we have proposed
will add further value to an already well-thought-out process of
diversifying this route.

The PAP is meant to create awareness among all the people of South Africa
on several important issues around their right to participate on issues of
governance, peace and stability. One of the most important objectives of
the PAP is to strengthen continental solidarity, co-operation and
development. It is important that we ensure that the PAP leads to the
commensurate development of all African countries and not just an elite
well developed few.

In this new struggle, it is important that we forge greater bonds with
other organisations and remain mindful of our obligations in terms of the
African Union and Nepad. One of the most important rules or principles
governing the PAP should be to guarantee gender representivity among its
officers. As elected representatives of our people, we must ensure that we
use this platform to draw attention to the leadership roles that African
women can and must play in liberating our continent. We have structured our
amendments to Rule 17, paragraphs 7 and 8 to give effect to this principle.

The South African experience postapartheid has taught us that the principle
of openness and accountability dictated that most of our committee meetings
be open to the public. This also fosters public confidence in the processes
of the national Parliament, and we are convinced that the PAP can only
benefit from conducting most of its meetings in public.

However, committees must be allowed to hold closed meetings in exceptional
circumstances according to clearly prescribed regulations. It is our belief
that the Rules of the PAP should allow for such public interaction in the
proceedings of its committees.

We must ask ourselves why the people of Africa continue to lag behind
whilst the former colonial powers are opening up doors through mechanisms
such as the European Union. Why are Africans hesitant to embrace full
continental co-operation in order to address Africa’s development
collectively? The PAP provides us with an invaluable opportunity for us as
an assembly of Africans to work together to address very real challenges
and problems facing Africa.

We must give effect to our collective humanity as Africans before we become
another casualty of history.

The DA still does not understand the principle of democracy. It was the
DA’s failure to properly practice the principle of democracy and convince
others that it should be sent to the PAP that resulted in its absence. I
want to remind the hon Seremane that the DA is not entitled to anything. It
should accept that democracy determines that one wins positions through
earning respect and enough votes. [Applause.]

In conclusion, let us use the opportunity provided by the PAP for all
Africans to finally have the decisive say in Africa’s development. We
recommend that the House adopt the Report of the Portfolio Committee on
Foreign Affairs. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:27.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                          FRIDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards Board for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 73-2004].

                          MONDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 September 2004 in terms
         of Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bills as section 75
         Bills:


         (i)     National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (ii)    Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         (iii)   Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

         (iv)    Water Services Amendment Bill [B 17 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 September 2004 in terms
         of Joint Rule 161, classified the following Bills as money Bills:


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77)

         (ii)    Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op Maatskappye [W 10 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Companies
         Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Recommendation No 192 concerning Safety and Health in
         Agriculture, adopted by the International Labour Conference at its
         Eighty-Ninth Session, Geneva, 21 June 2001, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Recommendation No 193 concerning the Promotion of Cooperatives,
         adopted by the International Labour Conference at its Ninetieth
         Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
         of the Constitution, 1996.

     (c)    Recommendation No 194 concerning the List of Occupational
         Diseases and the recording and notification of occupational
         accidents and diseases, adopted by the International Labour
         Conference at its Ninetieth Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (d)    Convention No 185 revising the Seafarers' Identity Documents
         Convention, 1958, adopted by the International Labour Conference
         at its Ninety-First Session, Geneva, 19 June 2003, tabled in terms
         of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


National Assembly:


1.    The Speaker

     Report of the Inaugural Session of the Pan African Parliament.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Finance Bill [B
     13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 31 August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77),
         referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a
         Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the National Payment
     System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated
     7 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 14A - 2004].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Petroleum
     Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated
     10 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Petroleum Pipelines Levies Bill [B 18 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 77), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.



                         TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly:


1.    Messages from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and transmitted to Assembly:


     (1)    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly:

         Bill, subject to proposed amendment, passed by Council on 14
         September 2004 and transmitted for consideration of Council's
         proposed amendment:


         (i)     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) (for proposed amendements, see Announcements,
              Tablings and Committee Reports, 6 September 2004, p 659).

              The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly for a report on the
              amendment proposed by the Council.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
         report:


         (a)     Protocol on Legal Affairs in the Southern African
              Development Community (SADC), in terms of section 231(2) of
              the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Protocol on Legal Affairs in
              the Southern African Development Community (SADC).

         (c)     Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108
              of 1996).

         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Protocol of the Court of
              Justice of the African Union.

         (e)     Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of India on
              Extradition, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
              1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (f)     Treaty between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of India on Mutual
              Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

         (g)     Explanatory Memorandum on Treaty between the Government of
              the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
              Republic of India on Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance
              in Criminal Matters.

         (h)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Designation of the United
              Kingdom, in terms of section 2(2)(a) of the Cross-Border
              Insolvency Act, 2000 (Act No 42 of 2000).

         (i)     Report regarding the provisional suspension of Magistrate
              S E Tebe without remuneration pending an investigation into
              his fitness to hold office, in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of
              the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance for consideration and report:


         (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal
              Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income.

         (c)     Convention between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria for the
              Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
              Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, in terms of section
              231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (d)     Explanatory Memorandum on the Convention between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double
              Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
              Taxes on Income.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African
         Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Telkom SA Limited for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
         Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
         Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 160-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 129-2004].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 98-2004].

4.    The Minister of Education

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Qualifications
     Authority (SAQA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 111-2004].

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker

         Dear Madam Speaker

         REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SPECIAL REPORT OF THE PUBLIC
         PROTECTOR: 23 JUNE 2004

         The National Assembly, towards the end of June 2004, accepted the
         report of its ad hoc Committee on the Special Report on the Public
         Protector dealing with the investigation of a complaint by the
         Deputy President against the National Director of Public
         Prosecutions and the Prosecuting Authority. In terms of the
         recommendations contained in the report, I need to report to
         Parliament onso me of the issues within a period of 60 days.

         Although I am not in a position to provide you with a final report
         on the various issues yet, it is important for me to provide you
         with a progress report and, at the same time, request Parliament
         to grant me an extension of two months to finalise my report.

         Provisionally, at this stage, I want to report as follows:

         (A)     ESTABLISHMENT OF MINISTERIAL CO-ORDINATING COMMITTEE IN
         TERMS OF SECTION 31 OF THE NATIONAL PROSECUTING AUTHORITY ACT,
         1998

         The Committee has been established and, as I have indicated to you
         in a recent letter, already met on three occasions. Matters of
         concern were discussed and the Committee is scheduled to, from now
         on, meet on a regular basis.

         (B)     MEETING BETWEEN THE NATIONAL DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
         PROSECUTIONS AND THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR TO RESOLVE DIFFERENCES

         I have over the past two months met with the former National
         Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr B T Ngcuka, and the Public
         Protector, Mr M L Mushwana, individually. On these occasions I
         have, amongst other things, raised the relevant issues. However,
         due to time constraints and changes in the top structures, I did
         not get the opportunity to meet with the two of them together. In
         the meantime, as you are aware, Mr Bulelani Ngcuka was allowed to
         vacate his Office as National Director with effect from 1
         September 2004. That, however, will not inhibit me from continuing
         to discuss the development of effective measures to enhance co-
         operative relations between the two Institutions, both
         individually and together, on a regular basis.

         Adv M S Ramaite SC has since been appointed by the President to
         act as National Director of Public Prosecutions for a month
         pending the appointment of a permanent incumbent. As it is the
         prerogative of the President to do so, it is difficult to say when
         a successor for Mr Ngcuka will be appointed.

         (C)     THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT TO
         TAKE IMMEDIATE STEPS TO ESTABLISH AN EFFECTIVE SYSTEM OF
         INFORMATION SECURITY WITHIN THE PROSECUTING AUTHORITY

         The National Prosecuting Authority is already in the process of
         finalising an internal security policy. As a matter of fact, a
         number of officials of the National Prosecuting Authority have
         already signed an oath of security in compliance with the policy.

         As indicated above, I should be in a position to provide
         Parliament with a final report within the next two months. I would
         therefore be grateful if I could be granted an extension until the
         end of October 2004 to finalise and submit my report.

         In conclusion, I apologise for only being able to submit this
         report at this late stage. I had to go abroad and simply could not
         find the time before I left. Again my apologies.

         Your kind assistance in this regard will be appreciated.

         With kind regards

         MS B S MABANDLA, MP
         MINSTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly:

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 14 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the Companies Amendment Bill [B 10B - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75) and a proposed amendment of the National Council of
         Provinces (Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 6
         September 2004, p 659), referred to the Committee, reports the
         Bill with an amendment [B 10C - 2004].

     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Government
     Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004] (National Assembly -
     sec 75), dated 14 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill without amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal
     Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation
     and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
     dated 14 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government
         of the Republic of South Africa and the Federal Democratic
         Republic of Ethiopia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
         Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

     Request to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Convention
     between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
     Government of the Republic of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double
     Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
     Income, dated 14 September 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the request
         for approval by Parliament of the Convention between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Republic of Bulgaria for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
         the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income,
         referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section
         231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

     Request to be considered.


