---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 September 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-09-09
---

THURSDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION




Dr C P MULDER: Dankie, agb Adjunkspeaker. Ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek by
die volgende sitting van die Huis sal voorstel:

   Dat die Huis-

   (1)      ‘n bespreking voer oor –


        (a)      die beplande afdanking van 7 600 werkers by Telkom ondanks
              Telkom se wins van R4,5 miljoen; en


        (b)      die aanbevelings en verslag van die drie vakbonde by
              Telkom om hierdie saak te beredder; en


   (2)      ‘n standpunt inneem ten opsigte van wat die Regering as grootste
        aandeelhouer in Telkom behoort te doen om hierdie afdankings te
        voorkom.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. I hereby give notice that at
the next sitting of the House I shall move:

   That the House-

     1) discusses the –


           a) planned retrenchment of 7 600 workers at Telkom in spite of
              Telkom’s profit of R4,5 million; and


           b) recommendations and report of the three trade unions at
              Telkom to address this matter; and



   (2)      takes a stand in regard to what the Government as  the  majority
        shareholder in Telkom should do to prevent these retrenchments.]

Adv Z L MADASA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I hereby give notice that at the
next sitting of the House, I shall move:

  That the House debates whether the state-owned enterprises are truly
  contributing to economic growth and job creation in the country.


Thank you.

                     NATURAL DISASTERS IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I hereby move without
notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that -


        (a) lately snow and rain in KwaZulu-Natal have caused many road
             accidents in the area;


        (b) one such accident has caused the death of Montclair police
             commissioner Superintendent Danny Kuppasamy when a driver lost
             control of her vehicle and it collided into his; and


        (c) Kuppasamy was an admirable policeman who dedicated his life to
             the service of the community and that he will be greatly
             missed; and


   (2)      extends its deepest regret and condolences to the bereaved
        family and friends of the victim; and


   (3)      calls on -


        (a) all motorists in the area to drive with caution; and


        (b) the road services to make roads less slippery.

Agreed to.


                CANDIDATURE OF MR MOOSA FOR IUCN CHAIRPERSON


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Camagu Sekela-Somlomo. [Greetings
Madam Speaker.] I move without notice:

   That the House –
   (1)      notes the candidature of Mr Mohammed Valli Moosa, the former
         Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, for the position of
         IUCN President at the third World Conservation Congress of the
         International Conservation Union, (IUCN), to be held in November
         2004 in Bangkok, Thailand;


   (2)      believes that Mr Moosa has a high standing in the international
         conservation community and the ability to ensure that the diverse
         interests of the IUCN’s members and those of its Commissions are
         accommodated within the IUCN’s complex setting;


   (3)      furthermore believes that he could play a key role in taking
         forward the concerns and interests of African countries;

            4) also notes that-


           a) natural resource management and conservation, as advocated
              and practised by the IUCN South Africa in particular, has
              become an important mechanism for addressing poverty;


           b) the South African government and IUCN are pioneers in their
              methodology of community involvement in nature conservation,
              integrated rural development, livelihoods, natural resource
              management and particularly issues of land restitution,
              protected areas and marginalised communities; and

           c) conservation in South Africa speaks of a holistic approach
              that sees the role of the human being and his need for
              development within the context of environmental
              sustainability – in this regard South Africa has played an
              important role at a global level, hosting both the World
              Summit on Sustainable Development and the World Parks
              Congress in 2002 and 2003, respectively; and


   (5)      affirms its support for the candidature of Mr Mohammed Valli
         Moosa for the position of IUCN President. [Applause.]


Agreed to.


                             MEMBERS’ STATEMENTS


                                TOURISM MONTH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J D ARENDSE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the celebration of
Tourism Month in September, a joint venture between government and the
tourism industry. It was launched in 1997 in recognition of World Tourism
Day, held annually on 7 September, with a primary focus on placing tourism
high on the national agenda. This year, as we celebrate a decade of our
democracy, the Tourism Month’s celebrations come at a time when the
people’s contract to create work and fight poverty is the main pillar of
both this government and the country’s focus. Tourism has been, and still
continues to be, a major creator of job opportunities.

The ANC supports the objectives of this Tourism Month, which are: firstly,
to encourage South Africans to travel within the country in support of the
recently launched ”Sho’t Left campaign”; secondly, to make them aware of
tourism opportunities available in the country and; thirdly, to make
tourism products accessible to all South Africans and encourage all South
Africans to create a safe and welcoming environment for visitors.

We call on all our people to support this Tourism Month and all major
events that go with it. I thank you. [Applause.]


                           KANNALAND MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W P DOMAN (DA): Agb Adjunkspeaker, dit is nie goed genoeg vir die ANC-
premier van die Wes-Kaap om bloot te erken dat die manewales van die ANC-
burgemeester en ANC-raad van Kannaland Munisipaliteit vir die ANC ’n
verleentheid is nie, maar om dan in dieselfde asem die ANC se belange bo
die belange van die belastingbetalers te plaas, deur te sê dat daar geen
sprake is dat die ANC self teen burgemeester Donson gaan optree nie.

Premier Rasool se verweer dat ondersoeke daarop dui dat Donson onreëlmatig
opgetree het, maar niks onwettig gedoen het nie, is lagwekkend, en dui
daarop dat die ANC sy hande in onskuld was terwyl ’n munisipaliteit in die
grond in bestuur word.

Dit is tragies dat 28 amptenare van die munisipaliteit nou afdankingsbriewe
ontvang het as gevolg van die finansiële wanbestuur by dié munisipaliteit
waar bevind is dat langtermynskuld nooit self vereffen sal kan word nie.
Voor die verkiesing het die ANC vir Donson tydelik geskors om stemme te
kry. Nou het die ANC weer ’n besoek deur die provinsiale portefeuljekomitee
gekanselleer om die ANC verleentheid te spaar in die oorlooptydperk.

Die DA het voortgegaan met die besoek. Hulle is getref deur die armoede wat
daar heers en die vrees onder gemeenskapsorganisasies vir hulle uitvoerende
komiteelede se veiligheid. Die DA weet dat mnr Rasool se leierskap in die
Wes-Kaap op wankelrige bene rus, maar dit is tyd dat hy optree – selfs teen
die lede wat van sy eie faksie is. [Tussenwerpsels.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans Member’s Statement follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, it not good enough for the ANC
Premier of the Western Cape simply to admit that the antics of the ANC
mayor and the ANC Council of the Kannaland Municipality are an
embarrassment to the ANC, whilst in the same breath placing the interests
of the ANC above those of the taxpayer by saying that there is no way that
the ANC itself would act against Mayor Donson.

Premier Rasool’s defence that investigations indicate that Donson acted
irregularly but not illegally is ludicrous and suggests that the ANC is
washing its hands in innocence whilst a municipality is being run into the
ground.

It is tragic that 28 municipal officials have now received notices of
dismissal as a result of the financial maladministration at this
municipality where it was found that it is in no position to settle its
long-term debt by itself. Before the elections, the ANC temporarily
suspended Donson in order to win votes. Now the ANC has once again
cancelled a visit by the provincial portfolio committee to spare them
embarrassment during the floor-crossing period.

The DA proceeded with the visit.  It was struck by the level of poverty
that exists in the area and the fear of community organisations for the
safety of their executive committee members. The DA is aware that the
leadership of Mr Rasool in the Western Cape is on shaky ground, but it is
time that he acted – even against the members of his own
faction.[Interjections.][Applause.]]

                               FAKE MARRIAGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, priests hold a very high moral
standing within society and are looked upon for moral guidance and
leadership. It is therefore with great shock that we have learnt that the
SA Police Service has arrested a Johannesburg priest, who was also a
registered marriage officer, for allegedly conducting at least 600 fake
marriages between foreigners seeking South African nationality, and
unsuspecting local women.

According to the SAPS he is believed to be part of a syndicate operating
nationwide. We congratulate the police on the arrest and hope that they
succeed in their ongoing investigations into these syndicates that are
involved in the marriage scams. It is obvious that the sanctity of marriage
does not mean much to this morally challenged priest, and we hope that he
has not done any lasting damage to the reputation of the many priests who
are still looked upon for guidance and still believe in the sanctity of
marriage. I thank you. [Applause.]

       IRREGULAR PAYMENT OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT GRANTS IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu D M GUMEDE (ANC): Sihlalo, ngizokhuluma ngesimo sokukhwabanisa
kwezenhlalakahle KwaZulu-Natali. UKhongolose uyasihalalisela isinqumo
esithathwe uhulumeni wesifundazwe saKwaZulu-Natal sokugunyaza uhlelo
lokuvumbulula imikhonyovu emnyangweni wezenhlalakahle kulesi sifundazwe.

Lolu phenyo luzobheka indlela iziphathimandla ezagunyaza ngayo isondlo
nezenhlalakahle okubonakalayo ukuthi yayingekho emthethweni. Kwelinye
lamahhovisi esifundazwe eliseMzinto kutholakale ukuthi ezimalini zesondlo
ezingama-97, ezingama-90 kuzo zaphuma ngomkhonyovu. Ziyisikhombisa kuphela
ezitholakale ngendlela esemthethweni. Kutholakele futhi ukuthi kwabangama-
37 ababheka abantwana, abangama-35 kubo bathola isondlo ngendlela
engafanele.

Uphenyo olwenziwa ngabakwa-KPMG njengamanje lukhomba ukuthi abayi-11
kwabayi-14 bezikhulu bayathinteka kulo mkhonyovu. [Kwaphela isikhathi.]
Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Zulu Member’s Statement follows.)

[Mr D M GUMEDE (ANC): Chairperson, I will talk about fraud in the social
development grants in KwaZulu-Natal. The ANC applauds the decision taken by
the provincial government in KwaZulu-Natal to authorise the unearthing of
fraud in the department of social development in this province.

This investigation will look at the way in which the officials authorised
the grants in the department which manifestly did not deserve approval. In
one of the provincial offices in Mzinto it was found that out of 97 grants,
90 were fraudulent. It was also found that out of 37 foster care grants, 35
of those should not have been approved.

The investigation done by KPMG as of now shows that 11 out of 14 officials
are involved in this fraud in one way or another. Thank you. [Time
expired.]


                      TAIWAN STILL EXCLUDED FROM THE UN


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Y WANG (ID): Madam Chair, the ID knows that while the United Nations
welcomed East Timor and Switzerland as its newest members two years ago,
Taiwan’s 23 million people have remained unrepresented for over 30 years.
Despite all the UN’s achievements in peacekeeping and conflict resolution
the world over, the complete exclusion of Taiwan from the UN still poses a
moral and legal challenge to the international community.

So, following a long period of international isolation, the international
community has again embraced South Africa after its successful democratic
transition. Like South Africa, Taiwan has also recently undergone a
democratic change of government and similarly places an equally high value
on human rights. While South Africa is now a very active member of the
international community, Taiwan is still excluded from this important
international body, the United Nations. It is time to allow the voice of
the 23 million people who are living in Taiwan to be heard.

We, therefore, on behalf of the Taiwanese community in South Africa, call
on all the people and the government of South Africa to support Taiwan’s
bid to the UN with action, so that Taiwan may work hand in hand with South
Africa and make a contribution to the rest of the world. Thank you.




                          MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K D S DURR (ACDP): Madam Chair, the ACDP welcomes the discussion between
President Mbeki and others and senior Israeli politicians from the Likud
Party in a bid to make a contribution to the Middle East peace process,
using our experience in South Africa. The House respects the wisdom and
humility shown by our President when reflecting upon the deliberations.

For South Africans to have any influence in the Middle East we will need to
build credibility and earn the trust of all the parties concerned in the
peace process, particularly that of the Israeli government, the Palestinian
civil authority and other political parties in the region.

It is vital also that we inculcate greater trust and foster increasing
goodwill between the competing parties. This we can achieve by acting
impartially and by guarding against being judgemental when incidents of
lawlessness or retaliation occur. In the meantime South Africa should
continue building financial trade and cultural relationships with the
parties concerned, and be prepared for the long haul. We wish our President
well in this important initiative. I thank you.


                        MASSIVE NEW NASA INSTALLATION


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E N N NGCOBO (ANC): Madam Chair and hon members, the ANC welcomes the
initiative taken by our government for the bid to host a massive NASA
installation that may one day control the first human navigated mission to
planet Mars. The NASA project is one of the four huge potential or existing
space projects, which can turn Southern Africa into the world’s most
complete hub for the exploration of the universe.

If approved, the NASA project will be joining the Hess Gamma Ray
Observatory in Namibia, which is the largest of its kind in the universe.
If we succeed in our bid to host the NASA project, South Africa will be
directly involved in NASA planning for the 2020 landing on the planet Mars.

These projects would place Southern Africa in the poll position to answer
some of the crucial questions in science that have so far escaped humanity.
The presence of these NASA stations within our borders would encourage
learners and students to redouble their efforts in their maths and science
subjects. To those who teach these subjects it will serve as a greater
incentive to dig deep into their research about these subjects. Thank you.


                    DISPENSING FEE CHARGED BY PHARMACISTS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R COETZEE (DA): Chair, it is becoming increasingly clear that the
dispensing fee that pharmacists may charge, in terms of the regulations
governing medicine prices, is inappropriate and unreasonable, and likely to
cause the closure of many pharmacies. It is particularly shocking that the
pricing committee did no proper research into the economic impact of those
regulations on pharmacies.

Pharmacists from around the country have produced hard evidence that shows
the dispensing fee will force them to operate at a loss, and that as a
result many will have to close shop. Pharmacy closures will make it harder
for South Africans to access safe medicines. If pharmacies close, patients
will be the losers.

The Minister needs to intervene urgently to resolve this crisis. She should
withdraw the regulations and ask the pricing committee responsible for them
to produce clear and reasonable regulations that are based on a proper
impact assessment of their likely impact.




              CONDEMNATION OF INCIDENT AT BESLAN PRIMARY SCHOOL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof S M MAYATULA (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC learned with great shock
and sadness of the incidents at Beslan Primary School. We join the
international community in condemning in the strongest possible terms the
murder of innocent civilians and school children. During the three-day
ordeal, women and children were denied access to medication, food, water
and basic rights to relieve themselves.

The hostage takers forced the hostages to drink urine. More than 348
innocent souls were lost. We refuse to accept any justification for the
killing of innocent children and women, especially for political reasons.

We join our government in extending our deepest condolences to the Russian
government, the families that lost their loved ones and the people of
Russia. We wish all those injured a speedy recovery. Thank you. [Applause.]




                    SERIOUS PROBLEMS REGARDING METRORAIL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Madam Chair, judging by the streams of complaints
coming into our DA offices, clearly something is wrong with Metrorail, and
commuters seem to be getting no assistance or response from the Minister or
the department. The Minister’s own experiences on Metro Rail recently
substantiate some of these complaints, namely that trains are cancelled
without notice, that they arrive late, that changes in timetables take
place without consultation, that congestion at station exits and entrances
cause delay. Poor or no security exists at stations, despite promises that
the transport police pilot project would be implemented on 1 April in Cape
Town this year.

Coaches are dirty and vandalised. Employers and workers alike have had
enough. The time has come for strong action to safeguard the economy and to
prevent job losses caused by overcrowding and late arrivals. The DA calls
on the Minister to reconsider Metro Rail’s future as a monopoly, and to
implement measures to increase efficiency and improve service levels in
order to abate the present situation.

We should also urgently review the position of the passenger rail utility
within the broader public transport plan and consider the possibility of
introducing new partnerships into the rail commuter market to get Metrorail
back on track before the 2010 Soccer World Cup. Thank you, Madam.


                         KIDNAPPINGS IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L K JOUBERT (IFP): Thank you, Madam Chair. Kidnapping seems to be a
growing phenomenon in South Africa. In many cases children are the victims
of this cowardly crime. There have been incidents of kidnappings occurring
almost simultaneously in provinces around this country.

In the Western Cape, for example, numerous children who had been reported
missing were later found murdered. In Gauteng there was a high-profile case
recently where a young woman student was kidnapped and later found
murdered. In Limpopo province a young boy was kidnapped and mutilated while
he was still alive. He, too, later died in hospital.

Very worrying, especially for the families of these victims, is that many
of these cases are not solved. Families are therefore left with many
unanswered questions while the murderers walk free.

We urge the government to try and find ways to prevent kidnappings from
occurring as well as means for bringing the perpetrators to book. I thank
you.


                            MURDERS IN MADLANKALA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T E LISHIVHA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC condemns in the strongest
possible terms the murder of a grandmother and her two grandchildren aged
two and five years. The community of Madlankala, outside Esikhawini, was
rudely woken by the sound of guns and cries of victims of violence. Our
thoughts are with the family of the victims and the community of
Madlankala.

We call on Esikhawini community to mobilise itself against crime and work
to strengthen co-operation between the people, the community, the policing
forum and the SA Police Service in that area. We therefore call upon the SA
Police Service not to leave any stone unturned in their investigation, and
to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to book. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): ANC?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, on a point of order: The ANC
submits a whole long list of potential speakers. But, after an ANC member
has spoken, a DA member should come in. Then, if you see somebody, with
respect, the ANC can have another turn.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon member, I’m afraid that in terms
of an agreed formula of the Rules committee, this is the order in which
this will take place. Therefore, if it has to be changed, it will have to
go back to the Rules committee. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, there is no agreed
arrangement whereby the ANC would have two successive speakers.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Hon member, would you mind taking
that up with the Whips where they can perhaps sort this out and not here.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]


             NORTH WEST PROVINCIAL GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT SUMMIT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L L MABE (ANC): Ke a leboha modula setulo. [Thank you, Chairperson.] The
North West provincial government, business, labour and civil society
recently held a provincial growth and development summit at Sun City. That
summit was a resounding success. It paved the way for economic development
in the province in order to address poverty eradication, issues of the dual
economy and broad-based black economic empowerment.
/
The ANC congratulates the Development Bank of South Africa, Absa, Standard
Bank, FNB and the mining company, Xstrata, for their pledges and commitment
to ensure that they participate and contribute to economic transformation
in the province. This is engagement in the people’s contract to eradicate
poverty.


                 MEDICINE PRICES AND POSITION OF PHARMACISTS


                            (Minister’s Response)

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, uCoetzee ukhuluma izinto angazazi nje.
Bengicabanga ukuthi uCoetzee uyilungu leKomidi lezeMpilo lePhalamende.
Sigqigqe ekomidini lezempilo siya kochaza ukuthi yini ebeyenziwa yikomidi
lezamanani. Uma efika lapha akhulume sengathi akalona ilungu lekomidi,
kungcono asitshele. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, the hon Coetzee speaks about
something he doesn’t understand. I thought the hon Coetzee was a member of
the Portfolio Committee on Health. We have been up and down before the
Portfolio Committee on Health to explain what the pricing committee has
done. When he comes here he speaks like a person who is not a member of the
committee; he had better tell us.]

What I want to state categorically is that I will not withdraw the
regulations. There is an unwavering commitment from this side of the House
to bring down the prices of medicines in this country. [Applause.]

Kudala osokhemisi bevala ngaphambi kokuba siqale lo msebenzi. Base bevele
bevala kwakuqala ngoba behluleka ukusebenza ngokubambisana nabanye. Enye
into futhi engifuna ukuyisho ukuthi bake bavala lapha eCape Town kodwa
baphinde bazivulela ngokwabo, singabancenganga.

Angithi bafuna imali? Bayoqhubeka benze njalo – bavale bavule, bavale
bavule. Kodwa izindawo zethu zezempilo zona zizoqhubeka zisebenze, abantu
bathole imithi emitholampilo nasezibhedlela zikahulumeni. Uma bengafuni,
sesiyobonana phambili.
Futhi uCoetzee uyazi ukuthi le ndaba isenkantolo, ngakho-ke iwudaba
esingeludingide. Uyangiqala nje, kodwa angizikuvuma ukuqalwa uyena.
[Uhleko.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The pharmaceutical companies were closing down even before we started.
They were closing down because they were failing to work together with
others. I would like to add that here in Cape Town at one stage they closed
down and they reopened on their own without anyone begging them.

They need money. They will continue doing so - closing down and reopening,
closing down and reopening. Our places of health will continue to operate;
people will get medicines from clinics and public hospitals. If they don’t
want this, we will meet in court.]

The hon Coetzee is aware that this matter is before the court and therefore
is a matter we cannot discuss. He’s teasing me but I will not allow him to
tease me. [Applause.]]




               EMPHASIS ON DEVELOPING DOMESTIC TOURISM MARKET


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, I would
like to react to hon Arendse’s statement. Internationally the trend with
regard to tourism was a negative one, whereas in South Africa we had quite
the opposite trend. But if we really want to be a successful country
tourism-wise, we have to develop our domestic market.

That is why in this tourism month we are concentrating on developing the
domestic market. The hon member refers to the very successful domestic
tourism market campaign that is on our television sets at the moment. We
are receiving extremely good feedback with regard to it. We have no doubt
that the figures will actually support our view in that regard in a very
short time.

There is an emerging market in the country of 6,3 million South Africans
who never before saw themselves as being able to go on holiday. We are
concentrating on that market. We want to convince them that it is within
their ability and their grasp also to be tourists in their own country.

We will celebrate tourism month in September. The culmination of the events
will be on the 27th of this month in Phalaborwa, Limpopo, and a week or two
after that we will also have a tourism conference to which we have already
invited all the key-players.

Cabinet has identified tourism as one of the growth sectors and we will
continue to . . .  [Inaudible.] [Applause.]


                    TRADITIONAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I am looking for the hon Minister of
Health.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: You can’t look for me on that side of the House.
[Laughter.] You are looking in the wrong direction - I sit on this side!
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile ePhalamende, belaphi bendabuko,
ngiyanibingelela ngentokozo enkulu futhi ngethemba ukuthi nize lapha
ukuzozizwela ngezindlebe zenu ukuthi zinto zini esizama ukuzenza ukubuyisa
ubuntu bethu nenhlonipho yamasiko ethu. [Ihlombe.] Malungu ezigungu
zezifundazwe, ama-MECs, nani ngiyanibingelela futhi ngiyathokoza ukuthi
ninathi namhlanje. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, hon members and traditional healers, I have pleasure in
greeting all of you, and hope that you have come to listen to us and to
find out what it is that we are doing to reaffirm our Africanness and
respect our culture. [Applause.] I also greet the members of provincial
councils and MECs, and it is with pleasure that I see you are also with us
today.]

Therefore it gives me great pleasure to present to you today the
Traditional Health Practitioners Bill. It would be an understatement to say
that traditional health practitioners have been around for a long time in
Africa and other parts of the world. They sustained the health of African
people, like some of us, over centuries.

Unfortunately, this important source of life for millions of our people
suffered severe degradation and oppression when our history and culture as
Africans was being eroded during the era of colonialism and apartheid.

Nabanye abangalapha basaya futhi ezinyangeni ebusuku. Ningacabangi ukuthi
abayi ngoba bayaya. [Uhleko.] [Ubuwelewele.] Ngiyakuncoma phela,
ngikuncoma.[Some members of the opposition do go to traditional healers
during the evening. [Applause.] [Interjections.] I appreciate it.]

It was not so long ago that traditional health practitioners were being
labelled with such derogatory names as witch doctors and wizards. Those who
consulted these health practitioners and remained faithful to our cultural
beliefs were castigated as demons and heathens.

As with other sections of our society, the indigenous health system
resisted this oppression, and that is why we still have some 200 000
traditional health practitioners in our country. I am sure the number will
increase. Of course, the lack of regulation and co-ordinated development
has had some negative impacts on this section of health care.

There are those who used this situation to falsify claims of being
traditional health practitioners with the aim of ripping off our people and
exposing them to all kinds of health risks. All this has come to end.

Now, as we reclaim our history and dignity during the African century, and
as we begin the second decade of our freedom and democracy, we are not
alone in our intention to recognise the role and importance of traditional
health practitioners and traditional medicines.

In fact, a week ago we established a committee among Malawi, Zimbabwe and
us to further investigate traditional medicine. Also, the SADC Health
Protocol states that the 14 SADC member states should endeavour to develop
mechanisms to regulate and better understand traditional heath. The World
Health Organisation has already declared 31 August as an African
traditional medicine day, which we celebrated for the first time last year
in our country.

The WHO strategic plan on traditional medicine makes a series of
recommendations for its 196 member states. Key amongst these is the
official recognition of and legislation on traditional medicines by
national governments, and the recognition of this field of practice as an
equally important component of national health care systems.

Some of the priority areas identified by the WHO are: identification of and
research into safe and effective traditional medical treatment for diseases
that represent the greatest burden; recognition of the role of traditional
medical practitioners in providing health care; and preservation and
protection of indigenous traditional medical knowledge.

Hon members, the proposed legislation on traditional health practitioners
that is before you today will go a long way towards the realisation of
these priorities. The Bill creates a framework within which many of these
priorities can be systematically dealt with involving traditional
practitioners themselves.

Our work in this field as the Department of Health is not only limited to
regulating individual practitioners in the area. During the African
Traditional Medicine Day last year we launched the National Institute for
African Traditional Medicine as a reference centre for traditional
medicines. The centre is a joint initiative involving the Department of
Health, the Medical Research Council, the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research and traditional health practitioners themselves.

Its objectives are, amongst other things, the establishment of an
information system on traditional medicines; the promotion of research and
development focused on standardisation and authorisation of products based
on medicinal plants; the identification of education and training needs
relating to traditional medicine; the protection of indigenous knowledge;
and the promotion of trade in an environmentally sustainable and
economically viable way.

Similar reference centres have also been established in other provinces,
including here in the Western Cape, as part of our comprehensive plan for
the management, care and treatment of HIV and Aids. We have transferred
more than R6 million for research into traditional medicine that brings
benefits to people living with HIV. We have also established a
pharmacological vigilance centre at the Medical University of SA, Medunsa,
in order to monitor the impact of these and other Aids-related treatments.

The passing of the Bill before you, hon members, will affirm the dignity
and respect to which thousands of traditional healers and millions of their
patients are entitled. The Traditional Health Practitioners Bill has been
in the making for a while. The Portfolio Committee on Health explored the
possibility of regulating this sector some six years ago whilst I was still
its chairperson, following consultative forums that were held in various
provinces.

It has taken this long to finalise this Bill, because it is a
groundbreaking piece of legislation. There are no precedents to follow,
except our general understanding of how other practitioners are regulated
and the information provided by traditional health practitioners on their
functions.

Traditional health practitioners are clearly not the same as doctors,
nurses and other conventional health practitioners in their approach to the
delivery of health services. The question was whether they could be
regulated in a manner similar to that of other health practitioners. We
therefore made sure that we came up not just with a Bill that recognised
their uniqueness, but also made it possible to set professional and ethical
norms and standards and empower them to regulate themselves as
professionals.

Formal legal recognition of the practice of traditional medicine has a
number of benefits for practitioners and their patients. In terms of the
Medical Schemes Act, schemes may only pay for health services rendered by
registered health practitioners. When this Bill is passed, traditional
health practitioners will become registered practitioners in terms of the
law. [Applause.]

Another advantage is that genuine practitioners can be distinguished from
charlatans. Only those who are properly skilled will be able to practice.
Because this is a new area for us, we will have to develop the regulations
in collaboration with traditional health practitioners through the Interim
Traditional Health Practitioners Council. The main objective of the interim
council is to make recommendations to the Minister of Health on the
composition and the constitution of the permanent council, its scope of
practice and required education and training, as well as norms and
standards of practice.

We are seeking to regulate four kinds of practitioners: The diviners, or
izangoma; herbalists, or izinyanga; traditional birth attendants; and
traditional surgeons. Anyone wanting to practice traditional medicine will
have to be registered with the council. They will have to satisfy the
council that they possess the necessary skills and knowledge to render
traditional health services. Patients will also be able to appeal to the
council when aggrieved with the service.

The majority of traditional health practitioners consulted during the
development of this Bill wanted to be recognised and regulated by the House
and government. They want to be recognised as valuable partners in the
provision of health services.

The Traditional Health Practitioners Bill will be of significant benefit to
thousands of traditional health practitioners and millions of their
patients. The vast majority of people of this country use the services of
traditional health practitioners as a first point of contact with the
health system.

I thank you for your time. I trust you will support the enactment of this
Bill and contribute to restoring the dignity of millions of Africans. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, as the DA we support this Bill, just as we
opposed the medicine regulations that have come into effect. And if the
Minister thinks that people are going to stand in queues in hospitals for
up to 14 hours a day in order to get medicines because the chemists have
closed down, then I think she, in the words of George W Bush,
“misunderestimates the amount of unhappiness that exists out there”.
[Interjections.]

The DA supports this Bill, and we believe that there are three good reasons
to do so. The first is that the Bill confirms and formally recognises the
central role that traditional healers play in seeing to the health needs of
our people.

It is not just South Africans who are increasingly recognising that
traditional medicine has a value, which has long been neglected by formal
health systems. The World Health Organisation’s first global strategy on
alternative medicine advocates the integration of Western and traditional
medicine. Last month Ebrahim Samba, the World Health Organisation’s
regional director for Africa, appealed to African countries to be more
active in developing traditional medicine to reduce deaths from preventable
diseases such as malaria. He stressed the need for mutual respect and
closer co-operation between modern and traditional health practitioners.

It is very likely that traditional medicine will, in the future, give us
new hope in the treatment of diseases that continue to rob our people of
their health and their lives. Our own Medical Research Council has already
started to explore these possibilities with research into indigenous
knowledge systems, and in this it joins many other African countries doing
similar work. Moreover, traditional health practitioners are all in private
practice, and they take on a large part of the heavy demand for health care
in our country that would otherwise fall to the state to provide.

For the vast majority of South Africans traditional medicine is the only
health system that is both easily accessible and affordable. This is
especially so when we consider the grave human resource crisis that besets
the public health care system in our country and for which a set of
solutions is desperately and urgently required. So traditional health
practitioners are very much a part of the solution as far as the provision
of health care goes. This Bill will reinforce that.

Secondly, the Bill seeks to provide the patients of traditional health
practitioners with protection from mistreatment and malpractice. I am
pleased to say that together with my colleagues on the portfolio committee,
we managed to amend the draft Bill by making it a requirement that the
Traditional Health Practioners’ Council, and I quote:

  Publish information regarding the objects and functions of the council,
  its operations and the rights that any member of the public has under
  this Act.


Legislation that exists in a vacuum is no good to anyone. It is no use
giving citizens the right to lay complaints, unless we also make an effort
to inform them of that right and ensure that they are able to exercise it.
So the council must find an effective way to publicise its existence and
the service it provides to members of the public.

The council must take this requirement very seriously and must not think
that it has fulfilled its obligation if it publishes information in the
Gazette or some other official publication that has a very limited
readership.

Thirdly, by conferring on traditional health practitioners formal status in
our law, this Bill reaffirms our constitutional commitment to the promotion
of cultural diversity and tolerance of difference. For some it is doubtless
a controversial piece of legislation, or at least a strange one. The New
York Times - I was astonished to see - devoted a decent-sized article to
this Bill before any South African newspaper did, to the best of my
knowledge. And it displayed a certain admiration for our ability to, and I
quote: “. . . straddle the divide between traditional and empirical
medicine(.

The lesson is that respect for cultural and religious practices does not
have to involve tolerance of harm and does not require us to close our eyes
to rights violations. Equally, a concern for the rights and safety of our
people does not demand a rejection of valuable cultural knowledge or
practice.

I should add here that the Bill does not seek to regulate the spirit world,
as some have suggested. It seeks to regulate the behaviour of human beings
and hold those creatures of flesh and blood accountable for their actions
irrespective of their motives or inspiration.

Our Constitution is clear that no individual is entitled to harm another on
any grounds whatsoever, and the Bill reaffirms that. Having said that,
there may be problems to which this piece of legislation does give rise. In
particular, some concern has been expressed that traditional health
practitioners will give patients leave to take an excessive amount of time
off from work, and this would adversely effect our economy. While I can
find no convincing evidence that that is likely to occur on any significant
scale, if it does, then we would obviously need to consider the
implications and make appropriate adjustments to the law.

In conclusion, Madam Chair, I wish to deal with the implications of this
legislation for the ongoing campaign against HIV/Aids. The legislation will
make it illegal for anyone who is not a registered traditional health
practitioner to offer treatment or a cure for Aids - that is as it should
be. But from this, it must not be inferred that registered traditional
health practitioners are able to offer a cure for Aids. There is as yet no
cure for Aids, either traditional or otherwise.

Although the progress of the disease can be slowed by changes to one’s
lifestyle and diet, the only effective way in which it is possible to
launch a sustained offensive against the virus is through the use of
antiretroviral drugs. That is the reason a greater effort must be made to
give people living with Aids access to antiretrovirals.

We need a much greater sense of urgency in rolling out the antiretroviral
programme, and in this regard we need to set realistic timetables and
deadlines to which those who are responsible for implementing the programme
can be held accountable. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L V J NGCULU: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. We are now at the
closure of the first decade of freedom and are poised to enter the second
decade. Steadily, as we move towards the future consolidation of our hard-
earned freedom, we resolve to reverse the marginalisation of the African
people. Their culture and esteem are now strengthened.

This piece of legislation is yet another nail in the coffin of white
supremacy. For centuries the practice of traditional health in our country
was subject to ridicule and marginalisation. Traditional healers were
regarded as wizards and witches, and their practising as paganistic,
backward and unhealthy. This happened in spite of the fact that their
practising healed and rescued life and limb for centuries before and after
colonisation and conquest.

We recall that the Grey Hospital in King William’s Town is named after Sir
George Grey, who at some point was a governor of the Cape. The plaque at
that hospital states that the hospital was built in order to counteract
acts of witchcraft. This means that our practice of traditional healing was
regarded as witchcraft. Hence, of course, what the Minister says, that “ .
. . inkqubo yethu yamaxhwele namagqirha soloko njalo kubalulekile ukuba ibe
nembeko nesidima. Simele ukuba siyazi into yokuba kwantlandlolo, kudala
yanyanga abantu.” [It is imperative that our programme of traditional
healers and traditional doctors should have respect and dignity at all
times. We have to know that since time immemorial it has been healing
people.]

We all know that Western education and propaganda have done much to
discredit our heritage and culture. We also know that part of the
opposition to and marginalisation of traditional medicine and traditional
healers had to do with profit. This was a period of systematic destruction
of the dignity, knowledge and belief in the efficacy of our traditional
methods of prevention and care. It might perhaps be the very same mistake,
unwittingly, that is slipping into the mind of hon Ryan Coetzee, who
counterpoises the issue of efficacy of antiretrovirals versus traditional
healing.

We should not find contradictions in these two practices; they complement
each other. Both are important in the overall intervention in the health of
our people. These medicines, of course, we all know, are not only used in
this country, but perhaps in 80% of our continent and the entirety of the
world. They are more available, more affordable and simple to use.

One traditional healer on our continent, Dr J Ngombe, stated that the
secret of traditional medicine lies in the proper dosage and its
preparation. Hence today we must salute the Department of Health for
introducing this very important piece of legislation. We are beginning to
give proper meaning to the dignity of the African people.

Of course, it is also important to note that this Bill also aims at
ensuring the efficacy, safety and quality of traditional health care
services and to provide control over registration, the practice and
training of traditional healers.

The Bill also provides for the establishment of the interim traditional
practitioners’ council of South Africa, which, among other things, will
actually ensure that it promotes public health awareness. It will ensure
the equality of health services in the traditional health care arena. It
will protect and serve the interests of the public.

The council will also ensure that it issues guidelines concerning the
practice of traditional health, make enquiries and conduct investigation
into complaints and allegations concerning the conduct of registered
practitioners. In other words, the council is designed to serve the
interests of the people and also to regulate the linkages between
traditional health practitioners and other health practitioners. Once
again, there is no contradiction between the two.

It must also ensure that it advises the Minister on the scope, including
the health needs of our country. It will also, in consultation with the
department, ensure that it determines policy decisions regarding matters
relative to educational fees, etc.

The council shall ensure that it is representative in its composition, that
traditional health practitioners from each province, medical practitioners,
pharmacists, communities and various categories of traditional healers are
all represented.

The Bill, therefore, once again restores respect and dignity to a practice
that was somehow consigned to the book of history. It brings respect to the
African person. We shall ensure that a practice that has saved our lives
for many centuries occupies its rightful place in our country.

We are also aware that it is important for us to ensure that in our
approach we move away from the Western paradigm of health and that we
recognise other paradigms of health that also contribute to the wellness
and the health of the people. Also, it is most important to recognise that
to be a traditional healer, you need not have formal education.

Uyathwasa; uyabizwa; unazo zonke izinto ze ube ngumkhwetha. Kodwa
siyavumelana ukuba kubalulekile ukuba abantu baqhube beyiphucula le nto
bayenzayo ukwenzela ukuba abantu bazi ukuba ihamba namaxesha; amaxesha
ngamanye. (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.) [You are being
traditionally called; you have all these traditional gifts to become a
recruit. But we agree that it is crucial that people continue to improve
what they are doing so that people know that it goes with the changing
times; time has changed.]

The Bill is broad when it relates to disqualification. We run away from the
Western approach to education and recognise a number of other approaches.
However, it is also most important for us to recognise that everything
moves according to time and space, including knowledge. In order for this
practice to consolidate its rightful place in South Africa, it must meet
today’s challenges.



Ungaba yingcibi kuba usithi wawuyingcibi kwakudala, kodwa kula maxesha
siphila kuwo kukho izifo ngezifo. Kubalulekile ke ukuba ube yingcibi
ekwaziyo ukulungisa iingxaki ezinjalo . .  (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[You can be an initiation surgeon, because you say you have been one for a
long time. But nowadays there are different types of diseases. It is
therefore important that you become an initiation surgeon who are able to
rectify such problems.]

. . . so that as ingcibi, a traditional surgeon, you are also able to
contribute to the avoidance of morbidity, mortality as well as the
questions of HIV and Aids. And therefore it is important that knowledge is
actually updated.

There is also a provision that actually deals with the question of bogus
practitioners in this practice, as well as search of and access to
premises. My colleagues from the ANC will contribute further with regard to
this aspect, including the transitional arrangements that are actually
outlined in the Bill.

It is also important for us all to note that for the first time all
traditional healers of our country shall be regulated, hence the need to
ensure that the process of registration is not rushed, so that we do not
disadvantage a number of our people. As the ANC we salute this seminal
piece of legislation most importantly as it comes during the celebration of
the Heritage Month, September.

As part of the celebration of our freedom, traditional medicine and
practitioners are beginning to be recognised as a critical component in
improving the health of our people. We are certain, as proclaimed in the
Bill, that the dignity and the integrity of this practice are being
restored.

We also remember the song of Vuyisile Mini, which went: “Bhasobha
indod’emnyama, Verwoerd(. [Beware the black man, Verwoerd.] We support this
Bill. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is high time that Western
disciples of scientific materialism recognise the vast storehouse of
indigenous knowledge at the fingertips of traditional herbalists such as
those visiting us today. It is also high time that the thousands of
traditional healers, who have influence over the minds and bodies of
millions of South Africans, become part of the effort to tackle HIV and TB.

The IFP welcomes the passing of this Bill as a watershed in the provision
of health care in our country. We have long called for co-operation between
different medical paradigms, so that we can jointly tackle epidemics such
as HIV and TB. Western orthodox doctors, homeopaths, ayurvedists, Chinese
herbal doctors and traditional practitioners must jointly spread the word
that HIV is caused by a virus, spread by sexual intercourse or blood
contamination, identified by conventional testing methods, and treated with
a vast array of methods including diet, herbs, mental attitude and
antiretrovirals.

Myths must be dispelled, such as that sleeping with a virgin combats Aids.
But we are concerned that this Bill will add even more contradictions to
the irrational mix of control and compete in our health policy. It may also
be impossible to implement, become tokenist or make the same mistake as the
law regulating alternative health practitioners.

The statutory council includes everyone from beauty therapists to
homeopaths with a six-year degree. It has lowered standards of alternative
health care and rendered it virtually unaccountable. In this traditional
health practitioner’s council would be professionals who use a wide variety
of methods and who would range from learned traditional surgeons, birth
attendants and herbalists or inyangas, who work transparently with medical
doctors to sangomas who combine esoteric practices with sound herbal
knowledge.

Trying to regulate these practitioners the same way as doctors are
regulated will be well nigh impossible. The Bill reflects this by referring
to traditional health practice as a means of diagnosing, treating, and
preventing physical and mental illness. But how does one regulate and hold
people accountable for diagnoses based on ideologies, beliefs and customs?
How does one punish practitioners for improper or disgraceful conduct, or
attach evidence to, “books, records, documents or things that relate to the
matter under investigation”?

Much that is contentious will come in regulations, such as the following.
Will medicines be registered by the MCC? Will traditional health
practitioners be entitled to issue medical certificates? Will medicine
prices be fixed? Will practitioners be condemned by an ethics committee and
lose their licence to practise and cease practising? How will things be
evaluated and unprofessional conduct be judged?

Things that members felt could not be identified included concepts such as
“uchatho”, which is an enema syringe; “umantindane”, which is the
“tokoloshe”; “umhlahlo”, which is divining; “imfene”, which is a baboon
riding at night; and “ukugcaba”, which are cut marks. If such things cannot
be classified and regulated as permissible implements, substances, and
actions, any attempt to regulate them will be impossible.

We propose that in regulation at least a list of outlawed activities be
clearly enunciated. The IFP would have liked to narrow the scope of this
Bill, clarify its range and use it to improve the communication between
traditional practitioners and Western doctors, and to promote documentation
and research in traditional medicine.

We have had 10 years in which to register the failure of our health
department; to improve communication between Western doctors and
homeopaths, instead of encouraging doctors to widen their vision, scope and
training; and to share continued professional development points.
Practitioners are rigidly divided and discouraged from developing an
integrated development approach.

Many patients are financially exploited by ordinary doctors and by
traditional health practitioners. And the Bill calls for the council to
determine and publish fees that are the norm. The traditional practitioner
may be required to return the amount deemed to be in excess. But this price
control is legislated at the same time that we have a competition
commission commissar, who has slapped a fine of R15 million on the Hospital
Association of South Africa for publishing an independent assessment on
hospital costs, and fined the Board of Health Care Funders and the Medical
Association of South Africa for publishing recommended tariffs which
medical schemes should pay providers.

But who then should protect patients from excessive charges? We have fixed
medicine prices, fixed pharmacy charges, but leave medical scheme charges
to the market. We have free orthodox practitioners, but controlled
traditional ones. It is a muddle to say the least. There is little in this
legislation that will increase the confidence of practitioners with
priceless indigenous knowledge to share their wisdom so that their
medicines can be patented, cultivated and be a source of reward for their
communities.

The concept of benefit-sharing has not been clarified and remains
contentious. The patenting of indigenous knowledge has not been secured and
biopiracy is alive and well. And as fewer people remain alive with
indigenous knowledge, the race intensifies to capitalise on their wisdom.
Clear steps are needed to promote the protection and development of the
herbal industry.

Unfortunately we are speeding ahead with genetically modified organism
industries, but lagging behind in promoting indigenous knowledge. To its
credit, this Bill acknowledges that Western style science-based medicine is
not the only means of treating disease, and that disease is not merely due
to an assault by bacteria, viruses or parasites, or due to chemical
imbalances or mechanical faults. It allows a more holistic view of disease
as a lack of balance in a person’s physical, emotional and spiritual
realms, and we hope it will produce a lot more research.

In summary, the IFP supports the Bill. The legislation is necessary; it’s
moving in the right direction; it’s experimental and it’s ambitious, but it
represents the beginning of a learning curve and will require a lot more
refining. Thank you.

Nk M N S MANANA: Sihlalo, ngibonga kuNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo namaLungu
ahloniphekile ePhalamende ngokuthola leli thuba lokuthi ngiphawule kulo
Mthethosivivinywa. Angiqale-ke ngokusho ukuthi ngiyawemukela lo
Mthethosivivinywa ngiphinde ngiwesekele futhi.

Sesiside-ke isikhathi abelaphi bendabuko benganikwa indawo yabo, bebukelwa
phansi futhi bengahlonishwa umphakathi. Kusukela endulo, abelaphi bendabuko
babekhona bengakafiki abaseNtsonalanga. Yibona abakade belapha lapha
eNingizimu Afrika kusukela kudala kanti basaqhubeka nakho futhi. Eminyakeni
eminingi kade bebukelwa phansi kuthiwa bangabathakathi. Uma ufuna usizo
kubo, nawe ububukelwa phansi ubukeke sengathi awuhlakaniphile ngoba ungayi
kodokotela besilungu.

UNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo ubazi ukuthi ezempilo zizobe aziphelele uma abelaphi
bendabuko bengakabi yingxenye yezempilo. Yingakho ebone kukuhle ukuthi kube
khona lo Mthetho ophathelene nabo. Ngithanda ukubonga uNgqongqoshe
wezeMpilo ngoba ubonile ukuthi isikhathi sesifikile sokuthi abelaphi
bendabuko bahlonishwe, futhi babekwe endaweni efanele njengeyokwelapha.
Nabantu abaya kofuna usizo kubo kufuneka bazizwe bekhululekile,
bangabukelwa phansi. Ngithanda ukubonga kakhulu kunina belaphi bendabuko
ngomsebenzi omuhle kakhulu eniwenzile wokwelapha abantu balapha eNingizimu
Afrika, nanjengoba nisaqhubeka nokubelapha. Thokozani bogogo! [Ihlombe.]

Ukwelapha ngamakhambi kudala kusetshenziswa esizweni, kanjalo nokhokho
bethu babewasebenzisa. Umsebenzi wabelaphi bendabuko usemqoka kakhulu kanti
futhi obabo ubuchwepheshe bujule kakhulu. Inhlangano kaKhongolose ithi
isikhathi sokuthi abelaphi bendabuko basebenze ngokomthetho walapha
eNingizimu Afrika sesifikile.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa uzokwenza ukuthi kube khona umkhandlu kazwelonke
wesikhashana ozohlala iminyaka emithathu, ngokuvumelana noNgqongqoshe
wezeMpilo. Lo mkhandlu uzosebenza njengeminye imikhandlu efana
neyabahlengikazi, odokotela, neminye efana naleyo.

Inhloso yalo mkhandlu kuzoba ukwazisa umphakathi ngobukhona bawo lo
mkhandlu; uzoqinisekisa izinga eliphezulu lokwelapha kubelaphi bendabuko;
uzovikela amalungelo omphakathi - okuyiziguli zabo; uzobona ukuthi
baluqhubekisa kanjani ulwazi lwabo; uzobuka ukuthi aziphatha kahle yini
amalungu awo; kanti futhi uzovikela ukuthi iziguli zingaxhashazwa abelaphi
bendabuko.

Umsebenzi walo mkhandlu uzoba yilokhu okulandelayo: uzokwenza uphenyo uma
kukhona izikhalo emphakathini; uzovumelana nabelaphi bendabuko ngoluhla
olufanele abazosebenza ngalo; uzokwenza imithetho ephathelene nomkhandlu;
uzokwazi ukuthenga izinto zomkhandlu ngaphansi kwegama lomkhandlu;
uzokweluleka uNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo ngezinto obona ukuthi kufanele umtshele
zona; uzokwenza imithetho ephathelene nokusebenza kwabelaphi bendabuko;
uzogcina amagama abo bonke abelaphi bendabuko eNingizimu Afrika; wonke
umuntu ongumelaphi wendabuko kuzofanele ukuthi abe khona ohlwini ukuze
aziwe ukuthi ungumelaphi; uzokwazi ukuqasha izisebenzi ezizosebenzela
umkhandlu; uzokwazi ukukhulumisana neminye imikhandlu efana neyodokotela;
uzoxhumana noNgqongqoshe ngezinto ezibalulekile eziphathelene nomphakathi;
uzogcina izimali zomkhandlu; uzophinda ugcine nezimali ezikhokhwa amalungu
akade ekhipha izimfanelo zawo kanye ngonyaka.

Mangisho-ke ukuthi lo mkhandlu uzoma kanjani. Lo mkhandlu uzokwakhiwa
abantu abangama-22. Usihlalo uzokhethwa uNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo, iphini
lakhe lizokhethwa umkhandlu qobo lwawo. Izifunda ngezifundazwe zona zizoba
nomuntu ozimele ongumelaphi wendabuko kodwa ozobe eneminyaka eyisihlanu
akuqeqeshelwa ukwelapha. Amanye amalungu amathathu kuzoba ngamalungu
omphakathi azobe ebhekele izidingo zomphakathi, kanti futhi sizoba nabanye
abaphuma kweminye imikhandlu efana ne-Health Profession Council ne-Pharmacy
Council. Kuzoba khona futhi ozobe ephuma eMnyangweni wezeMpilo.

Mangisho-ke futhi ukuthi obani abantu abafanele ukuthi babe kulo mkhandlu:
abantu abahlala lapha eNingizimu Afrika; kungenzeka ungabi yilungu lalo
mkhandlu uma ungasahlali lapha eNingizimu Afrika noma uma kuthokalakala
ukuthi ugula ngengqondo, njengoba kushiwo esigabeni 1 se-Mental Health Care
Act wango-2002; uma uziyekela ngokwakho, ufaka isicelo sokuthi ukhululwe,
ungayekiswa ukuba yilungu lalo mkhandlu; uma ungaziphathi kahle njengelungu
lomkhandlu; kanti futhi uma kungenzeka ushone, uphelelwa ubulungu balo
mkhandlu. Kungenzeka kube khona izinto ongazenza ezikwenza ukuthi ungabe
usaphumelela ukuba yilungu lalo mkhandlu; uma kwenzeka uhamba lapha
eNingizimu Afrika; uma ungasesona isakhamuzi saseNingizimu Afrika; uma
ungaboshwa ngaphandle kokuvunyelwa ukuthi ukhiphe inhlawulo; uma usebenza
kwezombusazwe; kanti futhi uma uyilungu lePhalamende noma yilungu
lephalamende lesifundazwe noma uyilungu lomkhandlu kamasipala.

Lo mkhandlu kufanele uhlangane kabili ngonyaka ngaphandle uma usihlalo esho
ukuthi ufuna ukubiza eminye imihlangano. Lo mkhandlu uzoba nesigungu
esikhulu esibizwa ngokuthi yi-executive committee ezobheka ukusebenza
komkhandlu imihla ngemihla kanti futhi izokwakhiwa ngamalungu
ayisishiyagalombili. Kuzoba khona namanye-ke amakomidi afana namakomidi
okuqondisa izigwegwe, namakomidi lapho ungacela khona kubhekwe ukuthi
isigwebo onikwe sona ngesinobulungiswa yini.

Umkhandlu uzokwazi ukuthi ube nomuntu ozobhalisa bonke labo abakhona
ohlwini, esimbiza ngokuthi yi-registrar. Lo nobhala omkhulu nguyena
ozokhipha amagama awo wonke umuntu owelaphayo lapha eNingizimu Afrika khona
ezoba khona ohlwini, ukuze ukwazi ukusebenza ngokwemvume yalapha eNingizimu
Afrika. Lo nobhala omkhulu kuzofanele ukuthi agcine nezimali zomkhandlu
ukuze izimali zawo zisebenze kahle. Kuzofanele futhi azi ukuthi kunomthetho
kahulumeni obizwa ngokuthi yi-Public Finance Management Act azosebenza
ngaphansi kwawo.

Sengigcina-ke ngithanda ukubonga kakhulu abelaphi bendabuko ngomsebenzi
omkhulu abawenzile. Siyazi ukuthi abantu, ngaphambi kokuthi bafinyelele
kodokotela, baqala kubo abelaphi bendabuko bese bedlulela kodokotela.
Kanjalo futhi bayasuka kodokotela babuyele kini, niphinde nibasize. Yilokho-
ke esifuna ukuthi kuqhubeke kwenzeke lapha eNingizimu Afrika ukuthi kube
khona ukusebenzisana phakathi kodokotela besilungu nabelaphi bakithi
bendabuko.

UKhongolose uyawesekela kakhulu lo Mthethosivivinywa. Uthanda futhi
nokwazisa nabantu bomphakathi wonke ukuthi abaqale bahloniphe abelaphi
bendabuko njengabantu abasebenzela umphakathi kakhulu. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu speech follows.)

[Ms M N S MANANA: Chairperson, I thank the Minister of Health and the hon
members of Parliament for this opportunity to say a word on this Bill.
Firstly let me state that I accept and support this Bill.

Traditional healers have been looked down upon for a long time. They were
not recognised. The public also looked down upon them.  Since time
immemorial traditional healers  have been there – since before the arrival
of Western doctors. They are the ones who have carried on treating our
people as they have continued up to now. For many years they have been
looked down upon and  called witches. When seeking their help you subjected
yourself to criticism and would be regarded as foolish for not having
consulted the Western doctors.

The Minister of Health was aware that the health sector would not be
complete without the inclusion of traditional healers. That is the reason
why she found it correct to have this Act. I would like to thank the
Minister of Health for seeing that the time has come for the traditional
healers to be respected and to be placed correctly where they deserve to
be. Those who seek their help should feel comfortable and not be looked
down upon. I would like thank you traditional healers for the good work you
have done in treating South Africans, as you are continuing to do. Be
happy, traditional healers! [Applause.]

Traditional healing has long been used in society, and our ancestors used
it. The function of traditional healers is crucial and their technology is
complex. The African National Congress says that the time has come for the
traditional healers to work in terms of the South African Act.

This Bill will create the interim national council for a period of three
years in consultation with the Minister of Health. This council will
function like the nursing, HPCSA and other similar councils.

The functions of this council will be to inform the public about its
existence; to ensure the highest standards of treatment in the traditional
sector; to protect community rights - their patients; to further their
knowledge; to ensure compliance of members; and to protect patients from
abuse by traditional healers.

The functions of this council shall be: to conduct investigations if there
are complaints from the community; to reach agreement with traditional
healers about their scope of work; to make regulations for the council; to
purchase council’s property under the name of the council; to advise the
Minister of Health about issues; to pass regulations related to traditional
healers; to keep the register of all traditional healers in South Africa -
every person who is a traditional healer must be on the register so that
one feels that one is a traditional healer; to appoint employees for the
council; to consult with other councils like the HPCSA; to consult with the
Minister on important community issues; to administer the council’s funds
and annual membership funds.

Let me state the composition of the council. The council shall be made up
of 22 members. The Minister of Health shall elect a chairperson and the
deputy will be elected by the council members. The provinces will be
represented by a member who is a traditional healer with five
years’experience after qualifying as a traditional healer. The three
members will represent the community’s interests. We shall also have
members from the Health Profession Council and Pharmacy Council. There will
be a member from the Health Department.

Let me state that the persons who are supposed to serve on the council must
be citizens of South Africa. It is not possible for one to be a member of
the council if one no longer resides in South Africa or if one is found to
be mentally ill, as contemplated in Section 1 of the Mental Care Act of
2002. If one wants to withdraw one’s membership, one submits an
application. One’s membership could be cancelled if one misbehaves, and if
one dies one loses one’s membership. There are certain types of conduct
which can cause one to lose one’s  membership: if one leaves South Africa;
is no longer a South African citizen; is convicted without the option of
paying a fine; is a member of a political party, a member of Parliament, a
provincial legislature or local council.

This council shall meet twice a year unless the chairperson wishes to call
further meetings. The council shall hold the executive committee
responsible for the functioning of the council and shall comprise eight
members. There shall be other committees, like the disciplinary committee
and reviewing committee, where one can apply for a review of whether a
sentence passed was fair.

The council shall have a registrar who shall be responsible for registering
all members. The registrar shall keep all names of traditional healers in
South Africa so that they function in accordance with the law. The
registrar shall be responsible for the administration of the funds of the
council for the smooth running of the council. The registrar shall acquaint
himself with Public Finance Management Act.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all traditional healers for their good
work. We are aware that before people approach doctors they first consult
traditional healers. They approach you after consulting doctors, and you
help them. It is therefore our intention to create an atmosphere of co-
operation between doctors and traditional healers in South Africa.

The African National Congress supports this Bill. We therefore appeal to
community members to respect traditional healers as people working
tirelessly for the community. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Madam Chair and hon members, the Bill before us seeks to
address the legal and regulatory vacuum that has existed since the advent
of democracy with regard to traditional health care. The fact is that vast
numbers of South African citizens trust and make use of traditional
healers. In fact, many would seek the advice of a traditional healer whilst
consulting a Western, orthodox health practitioner. This reality places a
moral and constitutional responsibility upon government properly to
regulate traditional health care.

The benefits of the legal framework created by the Bill fall into two broad
categories. Firstly, there are the benefits for the population. A regulated
traditional health profession ensures that South Africans can now make use
of these health care services with confidence and that poor or dangerous
treatment is legally impermissible. The recognition of traditional health
care will further enable patients to claim from their medical scheme for
their treatment.

Secondly, the Bill will provide benefits for the traditional healers. With
legal regulation comes financial security. Traditional healers will now be
able to standardise professional and ethical conduct and it will also have
those who bring this profession into disrepute disciplined, sanctioned or
even removed from the profession.

There are also overall health benefits for the country as a whole. Greater
interaction between traditional healers and the rest of the health care
profession will hopefully lead to more advanced and comprehensive health
care solutions. Already there is a certain level of interaction between
traditional healers and the medical research council. Further future
collaborations will perhaps uncover new cures or treatments for some of the
persistent health challenges facing the country.

The disease burden in South Africa is huge. We can, therefore, simply no
longer afford to exclude or dismiss a large group of healers. Consequently
the UDM supports this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, members . . . le lona
dingaka tsa rona ko godimo koo, re a le dumedisa. [. . . as well as our
traditional healers up there, we greet you.]

The traditional health practitioners are part of the communities within
which they practice, and as a result know and understand the people and the
traditions of the communities.

Dingaka tsa rona tsa setso di tswa ga lowe. Go tloga kgale batho ba bantsho
ba ne ba etela dingaka tsa rona tsa setso go batla kalafi ya malwetse a
mantsintsi a re golang a ntse a le teng. Lebaka la bothapi jwa bophirima,
le dingaka tsa rona tsa ditshipi, bo dirile gore dingaka tsa rona tsa setso
di se tlhole di tlotliwa; di gatakiwe, di nyadiwe mme mo godimo ga moo di
tsewe jaaka e kete ga di itse sepe. Nako dingwe di tsewa jaaka batho ba ba
sa felelang sentle.

Mokgatlho wa rona wa ANC, ka lenaneo la ona la Reconstruction and
Development, o ikemiseditse gore o lebisise ditshotlo tseo dingaka tsa rona
tsa setso di ntseng di tshela mo go tsona. Mme ka lona lenaneo le, o tla
dira gore tlotlo e boele mo dingakeng tsa rona tsa setso ka mananeo a a tla
beng a dirisiwa gore tlotlo ego e boe. Re ka gakologelwa gore mo poung ya
pulo ya Palamente ka Mopresidente, Mopresidente o buile gore: (Translation
of Tswana paragraphs follows.)

[Our traditional doctors are from ancient times. Black people have been
visiting traditional doctors to seek medical help for various diseases that
affected our people. Western influences have caused our doctors to lose
respect, to have their rights suppressed, to be undermined, and on top of
that, to be regarded as if they know nothing. Sometimes they are regarded
as people who are not well mentally.

Our organisation, the ANC, with its Reconstruction and Development
Programme, intends to investigate the hardships that our traditional
doctors still experience. Through these programmes our traditional doctors
will get the necessary respect by implementing programmes that will bring
back the respect of traditional doctors. We will remember that at the
opening of Parliament, our State President stated that:]


  We will continue to do what is necessary to improve the programmes that
  promote a better health profile of the nation as a whole.

Therefore the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill does exactly that. And
in this discussion we will look at the qualifications and the norms and
standards of traditional health practitioners and students. “Re tlo
simolola ka go lebelela . . .” [Regarding citizenship . . . ] . . . we will
start looking. Only South African citizens will be allowed to practise as
traditional healers. “Fa re tla mo” [Concerning] . . . age limit . . .  “ke
gore dingwaga tsa kamogelo mo go thwaseng . . .”  [That is admission age
into initiation . . . ] . . . the Bill will regulate the age requirements
for admission at any registered training institution for traditional
healers.

“Bathong, re utlwisiseng gore mo go tla bo go sa dire lefapha la tsa kalafi
fela . . .” [We must understand that it will not only be the Department of
Health . . . ] . . . that will be looking at the age limits; we will be
working in consultation.

Re tla bo re dirisana le Lefapha la Thuto, re dirisana gape le Lefapha la
Tlhabololo ya Loago ka gonne re a itse ro rotlhe gore ngwana ke ngwana e
bile o tshwanetse kwa sekolong, a kere? Jaaka ka batsadi re tshwanetse gore
re bone gore re rotloetsa bana ba rona ka tsela e e tshwanetseng mme fa ba
fitlha mo dingwageng tse ba ka yang go thwasa ka tsona, ba ye. Jaanong go
tlo tshwanela gore e nne boikarabelo jwa rona setšhaba sotlhe le dingaka
tsa rona tsa setso, gore re bone gore re tlotla dingwaga tse ngwana a
tshwanetseng gore a amogelwe kwa go thwaseng. Re se ke ra tsoga fela jaaka
nna ke le motsadi, ngwana a lala a lela bosigo ke be ke re ngwana yo, o ne
a etetswe ke bontatemogolo wa koko wa ntatagwe ba re a ye go thwasa, a nne
ngaka. Dilo tse di tshwanang le tseo re tshwanetse gore re di tlhokomele,
re bone gore ngwana ke ngwana o tshwanetse go ya go thwasa ka nako e a
tshwanetseng go thwasa ka yona. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[We will be working with the Department of Education and the Department of
Social Development because we know that children should be in school, is
that not so? As parents we should encourage our children in a proper way so
that when they reach the proper age they should go to the initiation
school. It should be our responsibility as a nation and traditional doctors
to ensure that our children go to initiation school at a proper age. We
should not just wake up one morning and declare that the child was crying
the whole evening because he had been visited by the grandparents of the
grandmother of the father who said that he should go to initiation school.
We should be careful about these matters and ensure that children go to
initiation school at the correct time.]

“Fa tla mo katisong . . .” [Concerning training . . .] . . .  we know that
students of traditional healing live with their tutors in their houses and
during that time they are being observed ”gore e ka nna dingaka na.” [. . .
to determine whether they can become traditional healers.]

After a certain period they are assessed and qualify as practitioners. We
know that training, so far, is not standardised and “molaotheo wa rona o
tla re thusa go lebisisa tseo(. [our Bill will help us to take care of
that.]

The knowledge of the availability and influence . . . “ya dingaka tsa
setso, le kitso ya dingaka tsa rona tsa setso re ka e lemoga ka ditsela di
le dintsi.( [. . . of traditional healers as well as the knowledge of our
traditional healers, can be realised in many ways].

“Ka 1978 kwa( [In 1978 at] the Alma Mater Conference the World Health
Organisation suggested that traditional healers should spread curative as
well as preventative help as part of primary health care.

At Madadeni hospital in KwaZulu-Natal chronic patients receive their
regular medicines from traditional healers in their districts rather than
tramping to the hospital for their regular medication. These inyangas and
sangomas hold regular monthly meetings with the doctors at the hospital. We
also know that under the ANC government, the National Department of Health
has established a section “go na le lefapha le lengwe mo lefapheng la rona
la bosetšhaba la kalafi moo” [a department in our national department of
health] where traditional healers have a section as a way of integrating
this section into the public health system.

According to the South African Primary Health Care Handbook, traditional
healers generally hold positions of respect within the communities and are
looked up to for guidance on health matters and other issues important to
the people.


Re a itse gore go le go ntsi batho ba leba dingaka tsa setso gore ba ba
eletse. Le dingaka tsa rona tsa kgale, pele go tla tsa kwa bophirima, re ne
re itse gore dikgosi tsa rona di ne di gakololwa ke dingaka tsa setso. Re
ka nopola bo kgosi Shaka le dingaka tse dingwe. Di ne di na le dingaka tsa
setso mo gaufi ga tsona gore di ba gakolole gonne di ne di tshepa katiso ya
tsona. Ke tla mo go ba tlabeng ba ruta ba e tlabeng e le . . . (Translation
of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[We know that many people consult traditional doctors for advice.
Traditional doctors also advised our kings before Europeans arrived here.
King Shaka and others are some who used traditional doctors’ services. They
all had traditional doctors nearby so that these doctors could advise them,
and they trusted their advice. Traditional tutors who will be . . . ]

. . .  qualified persons to teach students at recognised institutions will
be regulated according to this Act. They are known to be reputable inyangas
. . .

. . . ba ba itseng gore ke dingaka tse di itseng kalafi tota. Ke ka moo e
leng bone ba rutang. Ba a tlotliwa mo godimo ga moo ka gonne ke dingaka tse
di tshepiwang, tse di filweng marapo a gore e ka nna bafatlhosi ba setso.
[. . . who know that these doctors are able to heal. That is why they are
the ones  teaching. They are respected because they are trusted doctors
because they have been given the status of being healers of the nation.]

They use indigenous languages for their training. “Ka tsela eo, tsalano ya
bona le baithuti ba bona e dira gore go nne le tikologo e e monate ya
thuto.” [Therefore, their relationship with their students creates an
environment Molaotlhomo wa rona, mo godimo conducive to education.]

“Molaotlhomo wa rona, mo godimo ga moo” [Our Bill, on top of that]
discusses conditions relating to continuing education. Motlotlegi Ngculu o
buile gore thuto e tsamaya e ntse e fetoga, a kere? [Hon Ngculu said that
education is always changing, is it not so?]


The Bill further discusses these conditions relating to continuing
education where the council “e e ntseng e tlhalosiwa ke motlotlegi Manana”
[which hon Manana was explaining] will from time to time prescribe
conditions relating to education and training to be undergone by persons
registered in terms of this Act in order to retain such registration.

The council will also be looking at the nature and extent of continuing
education and training to be undergone by persons registered in terms of
this Act. Again the criteria for the registration of continuing education
and training courses and education institutions offering such courses will
also be looked at by the council and from time to time . . . ba tla be ba
lelebela gore nare ba santse ba le mo tseleleng e ba ka tsweletsang thuto
ka yona. [. . . they will be checking if they are still on the right track
of improving education.]

Jaanong re tla mo go . . .  [Concerning . . . ] . . . the fees for the
services rendered . . . eo e bothata . . . [. . . that is a difficult one .
. .] . . . “because we know that fees for services rendered by traditional
practitioners, definitely need to be regulated by the Act. Payment . . .״
re a itsi, ka tsela yeo ba sepelago ba patella ka gona ge ba etswa kalafing
ye ya dingaka tse tsa rena tsa setso. Ga re tsebe gabotse gore go patelwa
bokae, ka gore nako ye nngwe batho ba bao babotsa gore aowa ke go thusitse
sepela, ke a leboga, solanka o ka fihla o fola. Ke gore motho yoo, ga a
patella selo. E be go sepela, go sepela yo mongwe a be are ke nyaka dikgomo
tse ka, go sepele go sepele yo mongwe a re ke nyaka dithousand tse di kaka.
Bjalo ka tsela yeo re a bona gore dingaka tsa rona molao o a nyakega gore o
kgone go laola gore batho ba ge ba swanetse gore ba tlile go lena gore le
ba tuse ka gore re a tseba gore le a thusa, ba tsebe gore ditšhelete tše di
sepela bjang. Re tla mo ka tsela yeo dilo di swanetšego gore di bereke ka
gona.

[. . . we know that they pay the traditional healers for their services. We
do not know exactly how much is paid, because at times they are excused
from paying as long as they get well. It means that this service was for
free. Some would request cattle as payment and some would request thousands
of rands as you proceed. That is why we think there should be an Act to
regulate this. People should know how much should be paid for these
services. We do acknowledge that you assist them.

We are here for the smooth running of these services.]

Traditional healing is sociocultural. Practitioners should uphold the norms
and standards of the communities “ba tshwanetse gore ba itse gore fa ba ya
kwa motseng oo, molao wa teng o tsamaya jang.” [They have to know the norms
and standards of a village they are visiting.]

As students they should be trained in professional ethics and community
norms. We also know that traditional healers use medicines. We should also
be interested in seeing . . . [Time expired.]

Ms F BATYI: Hon Chairperson and hon members of the House, “ndibulisa
amagqirha ethu.” [I greet our traditional healers].

The current proposed Traditional Health Practitioners Bill will impact
quite profoundly on the current health system, to say the least. It will be
the first time that the practising of traditional healing will be legally
recognised, despite the controversial debates surrounding the issue.

In a country such as South Africa, where the majority of the people have
consulted a traditional healer, legalisation of this provision does not
need serious consideration. Most rural communities consult traditional
healers.

Training, registration and legislation of these healers can only be to the
benefit of all South Africans. With registration, the traditional healing
practices can be monitored, and those who claim to be healers without any
training and accreditation can be stopped from causing any harm.

Quite frankly, South Africa is experiencing a national HIV/Aids crisis, and
until there is a cure we need to use all the help we can get, provided the
people’s right to good medicine is secured. However, the following issues
need serious consideration: resources and infrastructure need to be made
available for testing of traditional medicine, instead of continued
ignorance and prejudice against traditional healing practices; the issue of
traditional surgeons needs to be made clear, as the Bill does provide
clarity on this specific issue.

Although the Bill has set some minimum standards for the qualifications of
traditional healers, the issue of experience needs to be addressed. Many
traditional healers have years of experience, but no formal training. The
ID supports the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Sihlalo nani baPhathiswa namasekela, malungu abekekileyo
nani bagula ngokufa okumhlophe, abo bangcwaliswe yimilowa nabakwelemimoya,
sithi siyacamagusha. Makube chosi, kube hele! [Uwele-wele.]

UKhongolozi unkqenkqeze phambili ekwakheni lo Mthetho uYilwayo ngenxa
yoxanduva awazithwalisa lona, lokukhokela abantu baseMzantsi Afrika ukuya
kumpilo-ntle. Unyango lwemveli mandithi ludala kwiAfrika iphela, yaye
abantu baphile ngalo kwihlabathi lonke.

Masingalibali ukuba nangona izangoma namaxhwele enegalelo elikhulu elinjalo
ekuphiliseni uluntu, akwanefuthe elikhulu eluntwini ngenxa yale misebenzi
yawo. Ngokuqinisekileyo, imiqathango yokohlwaya
izaphula-mthetho ezivonya-vonyana nempilo yabantu iyafuneka.

Kwezi ntsuku siphila kuzo, imiqathango nemigaqo emakusetyenzwe ngayo
empilweni jikelele sele ibunjwe ngendlela echubekileyo engena gingci
kwinkqubo kunye nemithetho elawulayo kule mihla. Lo Mthetho uYilwayo uhleli
ekhondweni usiphathela iindlela zokohlwaya abaphuma endleleni.

Xa sisamkela futhi sibhabhatiza unyango lwemveli, sibandakanya ukuvuma
ukohlwaya izangoma ezonayo. Oko kuthetha ukuba abagula ngokufa okumhlophe
baza kukhuseleka kungcikivo nokunyenjwa abakufumana emaphepheni
akugwengulayo ukuqokelelwa kweendaba. Ndalatha ikakhulu xa kupaphashwa
izinto ezifana nee-muti killings – ngelikaJoji - ngala maphephandaba sinawo
kwezi ntsuku.

Xa siwuqaphela, lo Mthetho uYilwayo utyibela ungene nzulu, unabile
kunjalonje, xa usiza kweli cala lokohlwaya izaphuli-mthetho neendlela
zokuphanda kwa ezi zaphuli-mthetho.

Kukho ibhunga eliza kumiselwa phantsi kwalo Mthetho uYilwayo. Eminye
yemisebenzi yalo kukohlwaya abo bonileyo xeshikweni befunyaniswa benetyala.
Emasikuqaphele kukuba lo msebenzi wenziwa zizangoma nezanuse ezikweli
bhunga, eziza kube zikhethwe kwa zezinye kuzwelonke. Loo nto ke iqinisekisa
ukuba umcimbi uza kube uchotshelwe ziingcali eziwaziyo.

Kwalapha kukwaqulethwe iindlela-ndlela zokuchophela nokuphicotha ityala
ngalinye elisenkundleni ngendlela eyiyo. Ngokunjalo izohlwayo eziza
kungqamana nobukrakra kunye nobunzima betyala nesono ngasinye zikrozisiwe
ukwenzela ukuba abo bone kancinane bagwetywe ngendlela eyahlukileyo
kwabagcwele ubugulukudu obugqithisileyo.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo uthi xa kuphandwa abakrokrelwayo ngobuqhetseba
makuphandwe ngendlela efanelekileyo. Nditsho ke nokuba kukho izinto
ekufuneka ziphengululwe zikhangelwe, zide mhlawumbi zithathwe zibe
selugcinweni lwabomthetho. Yonke le ndlela kuza kusetyenzwa ngayo
iqanyangelwe yimigaqo ebonisa indlela emakuchankcathwe ngayo ngabo baya
kube besenza uphando olo.
Mayiqhwatyelwe izandla le nkqubo kuba isekhondweni elibonisa intlonipho
yamalungelo abantu kunye namakhaya neendawo abasebenzela kuzo. Yaye
asiyithandabuzi into yokuba u-ANC uyixhasa kakhulu le ndawo yokuhlonitshwa
kwamalungelo abantu.

Ukubaluleka kwendlela iingxelo zophando emazenziwe ngayo kukwachazwe
ngokucacileyo, ikakhulu xa lowo ebephandwa efunyanwa enetyala. Masiqaphele
ukuba xa isigwebo sisihla kumoni sukube kunyembelekile, yaye
kungasemnandanga. Kungoko kunyanzelekile ukuba indlela ekusetyenzwa ngayo
inonotshelwe ukuze kungabikho sikrokro.

Okunye okuqulethwe apha sisagweba esingqamene nemigulukudu namatshijolo
azenza amagqirha nezanuse, abe engengawo. Masikhumbule ukuba inde yaye
inzima indlela ehanjwa ngabagula kukufa okumhlophe phambi kokuba bavunywe
kuthiwe ngamagqirha apheleleyo. [Uwelewele.] Aba batyhutyha-tyhutyha eli
lookhokho bexoka besithi bathwasa phi phi phi nakwimilambo esingayaziyo,
into abaphela beyenza kukulimazana nabantu, bexuba amayeza abangawaziyo,
bangxale abamsulwa ngeetyhefu, bashiye izigede baqengqe ugodo.
[Kwaqhwatywa.]

Mawethu, zidwesha nani zidwangube, masiwugxininise umahluko phakathi
kwamagqirha, amaxhwele nezanuse kwelinye icala, kunye nobugqwirha kwelinye.
Kwaye mayicace okwekat’ emhlophe ehlungwini ukuba uninzi lwabanyanga
ngokwemvelo lunyanisekile yaye luphehlelelwe ngabaleleyo, yaye umthetho
luwubambile. Gqwidi ke ngoku zizingcoli zemiguvela ezisebenzisa esi siphiwo
ukwenza ubuqhophololo nokungcolileyo.

Kambe ke isimnyama esi sona besisetyenziswa ngabanye bethu ngexesha
besizabalaza, ukuba siphephe ukubanjwa nokugqogqwa kwezithuthi ngamapolisa
kwiindawo ezithile. [Uwelewele.] Ukuvalelwa ngaphandle kokuvela enkundleni
bekungemnandanga, futhi nentelezi wena besingekude kuyo. [Kwahlekwa.]

Xa sifakela imiqathango yokohlwaya kulo Mthetho uYilwayo, ngenye indlela
sibuyisa isidima nesithozela esavuthululwa sagonyamelwa ngabo baxobula
basixutha ubuntu bethu. Nditsho ndisithi noluntu luza kuba nethemba
sisiqinisekiso sokuba asiwamkeli nje amagqirha namaxhwele singabeki
miqathango yokuwohlwaya xa onile.

Nditsho mna ke ne-World Health Organisation, kwimizamo yayo yokubuyisela
unyango lwemvelo kwisimo sangaphambili, umba wokuhlonipha nemiqathango
yokusebenza ngendlela ayiyilibalanga. Oko ke kwandlalela ukuba kwakhiwe
imiqathango nemigaqo yokohlwaya. Ngako oko ke liphuma litsolile elithi,
kwabo bakrokrayo bengathembanga, makhe bazanezise. Inyathi ibuzwa
kwabaphambili. Nantsi i-World Health Organisation, mayibuzwe.

Ezi zohlwayo nemigaqo idweliswe kulo Mthetho uYilwayo ibukeka ngakumbi xa
ichankcatha phezu kovulindlela wokuba makuphandwe kuqala. Gqirha, sanuse
nexhwele elikrokrelwayo kunyanzelekile ukuba liphandwe kuqala futhi
ngendlela efanelekileyo enganukunezi sidima samntu. Iingcali ezingooPotter
noo-Ogden zithi nangona imithetho yokuziphatha ineengcambu ezondele
kwiimbali zoluntu, iye yaguquka kuba amaxesha nawo ayahamba, kutsho kucace
ukuba nathi masimamele amaxesha esiphila kuwo.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo unika nothathatha walapha eMzantsi Afrika ilungelo
lokufaka isikhalazo kweli bhunga liza kumiselwa xa lo mthetho sele
usebenza. Phofu ke, nabo abagula yingulo emhlophe baza kube bekhuselekile
xa kufakwa ezi zikhalazo kuba ityala liza kubekwa enkundleni xa liphandiwe
kwaza kweziwa nobungqina ngendlela efanelekileyo. Apho ke asihanahanisi,
kuba siqinisekisa ekuhlonipheni amalungelo abantu, nto leyo uKhongolozi
norhulumente amkhokelayo ayimele ngolona hlobo.

Yintoni esiza kuyizuza kulo Mthetho uYilwayo? Ngokuqinisekileyo akusobe
kuphinde kuthiwe abanyanga ngokwemveli baza kwenza utyhatyhiwe
bangohlwaywa. Apha kuzanywa ngeyona ndlela ukuqinisekisa ukuba iinkonzo
zonyango lwemveli ziqhutywa ngendlela efanelekileyo nekhuselekileyo, kambe
ekwachubeke ngolona hlobo.

Unyango lwesiNtu lude lwabe luze kuphehlelewa nasePalamente, nto ke leyo
iqinisekisa kwanabo bangaqondiyo, abakrokrayo kwa nabo banyembayo.
UKhongolozi wayidandalazisa phandle kwangonyaka ka-1994 injongo yakhe
yokuba abone amagqirha, amaxhwele nezanuse zamkelwe ngokwasemthethweni yaye
zibe yinxalenye yeenkonzo zempilo jikelele.

Apha ke sibandakanya nabo bajongene namasiko nabafunde benezinwe zokuzalisa
emakhaya, ukubelekisa ke ngamanye amagama. Kambe ke,  sisanyuka induli kuba
kaloku inkxaso yoluntu ifuneka nangaphezulu, ngakumbi xa lo mthetho sele
usebenza.

Torhwana mnye umba, kukuba unyango lwemveli luchankcatha phezu kwamasiko
nezithethe zesiNtu, nto ke leyo eza kukhe ibe namagingxigingxi kwiinkqubo
zikarhulumente zale mihla, isi-modern ngamanye amagama.

Sihlalo nani bakowethu ndivala ngelithi umntu ngamnye kweli lookhokho bethu
unoxanduva nomsebenzi omkhulu wokuqinisekisa ukuba xa sele ugqityiwe
ukuqulunqwa lo mthetho, sele usebenza, mawungathintelwa ukuze unike
iinkonzo zonyango lwemveli indawo yalo efanelekileyo kwisizwe sethu
siphela.

Namhlanje siyavuya ukubona nabamhlophe abanokugula okumhlophe bekunye
nathi, ukwenzela ukuba siqinisekise nakwilizwe lonke ukuba la ma-300 000
yabo ekufanele ukuba azibandakanye nathi ekunyangeni abantu aza kube ekunye
nathi ngenxa yalo mthetho. Makudede ubumnyama kuvele ukukhanya!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Camagu!

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Sicamagusha kwabakwelemimoya!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Camagu!

Mnu S J NJIKELANA: Makube chosi, kube hele! Enkosi, Sihlalo.
[Kwaqhwatywa.](Translation of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Mr S J NJIKELANA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputies, hon members and
you who have the traditional calling, those who are solemnized by the
forefathers and the ancestors, we say we hail thee. Let there be peace, and
prosperity! [Interjections.]

The ANC is leading in the formulation of this Bill, as a result of its
commitment of leading the people of South Africa to better health. The
traditional method of healing was in existence in the whole of Africa long
ago, and is used worldwide to cure people.

Let us not forget that as much as sangomas and traditional healers make a
great contribution to healing people, they also have a great influence on
the community due to their work. Certainly, we do need stringent conditions
of punishing those criminals who mess up people’s health.

These days we are living in, rules and conditions of practice governing the
health sector in general has been formed in a civilized manner which fits
in well in the programme and regulations of these days. This Bill is on the
right track; it gives us ways of dealing with those who do not conform.

When we accept that we approve of traditional healing, we should at the
same time acknowledge punishment to the sangomas who are transgressing.
This means that those who have the traditional calling will be protected
from the ill treatment and the rebuke they receive from the newspapers,
which vaguely collect news about their practice. I am referring especially
to when the newspapers we have these days publish things like, “the muti
killings,” in English.

When we look at this Bill, we see that it is very intensive and broad when
it comes to punishing the transgressors and ways of investigating them.

A council is going to be formed under this Bill. One of its duties is to
punish those who have transgressed when they are found guilty. What we
should know is that this duty is going to be performed by sangomas and
fortune-tellers in this council who will be elected nationally by others.
This ensures that this matter is in the hands of experts who knows it very
well.

It also contains different ways of presiding over and trying each case
before the court in a proper way. At the same time, punishments are going
to be in line with the seriousness and gravity of each case and each
transgression as stipulated, so that those who commit less serious
transgressions should be sentenced differently from those who are full of
corruption. This Bill states that when those suspected of fraud are
investigated the investigation should be proper. I mean even if some things
have to be searched, and maybe confiscated by the police. The procedure to
be followed by those conducting the investigation is emphasised in the
rules of procedure.

Let us clap our hands for this procedure as it is in line with showing
respect for people’s rights, their homes and their places of practice. And
we do not doubt that the ANC is fully supporting the respect of human
rights.

The importance of how the investigation reports are to be formulated is
explained clearly, especially when the one who was being investigated is
convicted.  We should note that when the transgressor is being sentenced it
is because there is no other choice, and it is not nice. That is why it is
compulsory that the procedures should be followed carefully so that there
should be no uncertainty.

Encompassed in here is the sentence that deals directly with criminals and
nonentities who pretend to be traditional healers and traditional doctors,
whilst they are not. Let us recall that people who have the traditional
calling go a long way that is very difficult before they get ordained as
fully fledged traditional practitioners. [Applause.] Those who go all over
our forefathers’ land claiming that they heeded the traditional call at
very far unknown rivers, end up hurting people by mixing medicines they do
not even know, and by forcing innocent people to drink this poison, they
leave people hurt and injured and others dead. [Applause.]

Compatriots and hon members, let us emphasise the difference between
traditional doctors and traditional healers on the one side, and witchcraft
on the other. And let it be crystal clear that the majority of those who
heal traditionally are honest and blessed by the forefathers, and that they
stick to the rule. Suddenly now there are evil criminals who misuse this
good talent in doing their fraudulent, dirty tricks.

In actual fact the isimnyama (camouflage medicine) was used by some of us
during the time of our struggle, to avoid being arrested and raided by the
police on vehicles at certain places. [Interjections.] Detention without
trial was not a nice thing, and the use of intelezi (battlefield medicine)
was just handy. [Laughter.] When we include conditions of punishment in
this Bill, we are bringing back the dignity which was violently taken away
by those who regarded our humanity with no respect. I mean even the
community will have trust and confidence in the assurance that we do not
only accept traditional doctors and traditional healers without conditions
of punishment when they transgress.

I mean even the World Health Organisation in its attempts to bring back the
traditional way of healing to its original form, regard the issue of
respect and conditions of proper practice as important. This paves the way
for formulating conditions and procedures of punishment. Therefore it is
clearly stated that those who have doubts and mistrust others, let them
satisfy themselves. If you do not know, you should ask those with
experience. Here is the World Health Organisation, it can be asked.

The rules and punishment as stipulated in this Bill become more interesting
when they are based on investigation, as a point of departure. Traditional
doctors and traditional healers who are suspected have to be investigated
first, and that must be done without undermining anybody’s dignity. The
experts, Potter, Ogden and others say, as much as the foundation of the
rules of self-independency is based on human history, it has changed due to
the changing times; it becomes clear then, that we have to adapt to the
times we are living in.

This Bill gives everybody in South Africa the right to lodge a complaint
with the council, which is going to be established when this law is in
operation. In fact, even those who have the traditional calling would be
protected when a complaint has been lodged, because the case would only go
to court after it has been investigated and evidence has been produced in a
proper way. We are just bluffing about that, because we are very strict
regarding human rights, which is what the ANC and the ANC-led government
are good custodians of.

What are we going to benefit from this Bill? Certainly, the traditional
healers will never again do as they please without being punished. Here we
are trying our best to make sure that traditional services are performed in
a proper, safe and most civilized way.

Traditional healing has been accepted by Parliament, something which
assures even those who do not understand, those who doubt, and those who
criticise. The ANC voiced it even in 1994 that its aim is to see
traditional doctors and traditional healers legally accepted as part of the
health services throughout. Here we also include those in their line of
practice who deal with tradition, who due to  their experience have gained
the skills of mid-wives. There is still a lot to be done, and the community
support is needed more especially when this Act comes into operation.

There is only one issue, and that is that traditional healing should be
based on traditions and customs, something which will have hiccups in
government’s modern programme.

Chairperson, brothers and sisters, let me conclude by saying that every one
of us in this land of our forefathers, have the responsibility and the
daunting task of ensuring that, after the Act is formulated and is in
operation, it should not be blocked so that it gives our traditional
healing services its rightful place in the nation in its totality.

Today we are happy to see that even white people need the traditional call
with us, so that we ensure even to the whole world that the 300 000 who are
supposed to associate themselves with us in healing people, they would be
with us due to this Act. Let the darkness vanish, let there be light!

HON MEMBERS: Thank you!

Mr S J NJIKELANA: We thank the ancestors!

HON MEMBERS: Thank you!

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Let there be peace and prosperity! [Applause.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP recognises the need for the regulation of  the
traditional health sector and  supports  efforts  to  research  and  develop
sound and ethical  natural  health  solutions.  Attempts  to  bring  African
indigenous knowledge into the mainstream are commendable  and  necessary  to
ensure that this body of knowledge is not lost  simply  because  it  is  not
adequately researched, recorded and codified.

A council of 22 members will exist for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  standard
ethical conduct for practising traditional health. The Bill,  however,  does
not specify the minimum requirements, training or standards for  recognition
as a traditional health practitioner, although it is clear  that  those  not
registered in terms of the Act will not be able to practise.

Previously, educational requirements weren’t necessary  when  a  person  was
called to practise traditional  medicine,  and  when  a  traditional  healer
graduated  no  certificate  was  issued,  yet  proof  of  qualifications  on
registration will now be required.  How  these  and  other  issues  will  be
worked out is rather unclear and cause for some concern.

Since 1997 the Medical Research Council and others have been  working  on  a
traditional medicines database with a view to setting safety  standards  for
herbal remedies. This is encouraging. There is  still  a  long  way  to  go,
however, if the WHO concerns are to  be  allayed  and  criteria  to  support
worldwide use are to be met.

The protection of protected or endangered  plants  and  animals  is  another
area of concern, which the Bill does not address, and  nature  reserves  are
vulnerable as unlimited amounts of protected species are used with  apparent
immunity. Regulation of this industry constitutes an enormous challenge  for
the  Department  of  Health  and   medical   aids   will   face   tremendous
difficulties, but patients will be  able  to  access  medical  treatment  of
their  own  choosing  with  a  greater  chance  of  being   protected   from
charlatans.

In the interests of consumer protection, however,  the  ACDP  is  unable  to
unconditionally support this Bill  and  will  therefore  abstain.  We  share
concerns that the Bill is premature in many aspects and  we  urge  you,  hon
Minister, to ensure that critical issues are attended to in order  to  avoid
potential problems. We are of the opinion that  further  broad  consultation
will be necessary in order to honestly  serve  the  best  interests  of  the
public. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr B E PULE: Madam Chair, allow me to congratulate the Department of  Health
on the mere recognition that traditional health practitioners  have  a  role
to play in our health system.  For  quite  a  number  of  years  traditional
health practitioners were relegated to  an  insignificant  role.  It  is  an
irrefutable fact that without recognition and control  of  their  practices,
it would undoubtedly spell a national calamity, as health  is  the  business
of the nation.

Like all other professions, their council will be in a position to  regulate
the extent to which they operate, ensuring that traditional health  practice
complies with universally accepted health care norms and values. This  would
really be a milestone in the  history  of  the  traditional  health  system.
There  are  so  many  diseases  that  liaison  between  traditional   health
practitioners and other  health  professionals  registered  under  different
laws has to be promoted.

Rona re le UCDP molao o, re o nesetsa pula ka gore o tla thusa mo mabakeng
a le mantsi jaaka maloba go ne go fetisiwa molawana wa gore motho yo o
ratang go ntsha mpa a ka e ntsha. Jalo re itumelela gore le fa re ne re
ganana le molao o, go tla nna le thuto ya gore batho ba ba batlang go dira
jalo ba rutwe gore fa o bolaya ngwana o kgone go somarela mmaagwe. Jalo
UCDP e tshegetsa molao o. [Legofi.] (Translation of Tswana paragraph
follows.)

[We, as the UCDP, support this Bill because it will assist in many
instances, like when the Abortion Bill was passed. So, we are pleased that
even though we were against this Bill, there will be lessons for the people
who want to practise that and in order to do that, they will be taught that
to kill the baby you must be able to spare the life of the mother. So, the
UCDP supports this Bill. [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Deputy Chairperson and hon members, the PAC joins the
progressives and enlightened in supporting this Bill, and the Minister of
Health for her bold and farsighted leadership in this regard. This Bill,
coming ten years into the democratic breakthrough, gives meaning to the
consolidation of the national democratic revolution. Colonialists did not
only oppress and exploit the African people, but sought to denigrate and
wipe out the history and cultural practices of the African people.

Everything European was supposed to be godly, and all things African were
regarded as devilish. It was in this context, therefore, that traditional
healing, practitioners and medicines were denigrated. Owing to the cultural
resilience of our people, the practice of traditional healing has remained
a practice of choice to millions of our people.

The PAC sees the Bill as a restoration and a reaffirmation of our humanity.
The mainstreaming of traditional health practitioners will go a long way in
removing the colonial stigma that the majority of our people have ignored.
We do, however, accept that there will be challenges in a number of areas
in terms of configuration and maintenance of norms and standards in the
conventional sense. But these should be seen within the broader picture.

With the enthusiastic assistance of the traditional leaders themselves, it
should be easier for the department to realise the objectives of the Bill.
It is indeed a great day today, as we roll back one of the legacies of
colonialism. The PAC supports the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. Indigenous South Africans
have for years depended on traditional healers to manage their health. The
Minority Front respects this, but agrees with the World Health Organisation
on the quality and the quantity of the medicines dispensed. We further note
that there are approximately 200 000 traditional health practitioners in
South Africa and that a large majority of people in the rural areas
frequently consult such practitioners.

This sector needs to be managed, monitored and regulated by legislation. We
are grateful for the research compiled by the various parties concerned in
establishing the traditional medicines database, Tramed. This will
certainly contribute towards maintaining the safety standards of herbal
remedies. Who knows what the study of plants and their healing properties
could reveal - perhaps even the cure to HIV/Aids or other epidemics. The
Minority Front supports the Bill in its efforts to ensure that South
Africans, who consult traditional practitioners, receive safe and adequate
medicines.

The Bill further promotes the proliferation of traditional practitioners
through research, education and training in the field concerned. Ensuring
that measures are put in place to control the registration, training, and
practice of traditional health practitioners would further ensure that our
citizenry is obtaining efficient and safe assistance.

The Minority Front is, however, concerned as to how this legislation will
be implemented effectively and whether the traditional health practitioners
will be receptive to such legislation. The MF seeks a healthy South Africa
and thereby supports the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Setjhaba, theang tsebe le mmamele. Ntokolleng ke roke mmuso wa tokoloho. Ke
thoholetse dingaka tsa setso, ke bine mabinabine a pelo ya ka. Maobeng, re
ne re sa rere mmoho, hona maobeng, re ne re sa etse dintho ka mmoho, empa
kajeno, yena Mbeki, o fetotse mawa. A hlokomela seabo sa dingaka tsa setso,
a ba lokolla. Banna le basadi, hetlang morao le bone dingaka tsa setso
nakong ya kgatello. Maswabi difahlehong tsa bona ese ho iphapanya.

Tjhe, ntho di fetohile. Banna le basadi bophelo ke ntlola-ntlole, e, ke
masiyasiyane mahlokalebelo, feela a re utlwa Tlatlamatjholo a re romella
boetapele ba ANC, botle ntho ke ho kgotswa. Kajeno ke bua ka baetapele ba
nang le lentswe, mmuso wa ba neha sebaka, tjhaba sa nyakalla. Sa nyakalla
sa bina thoko sa re “le rona re lokolohile,” [Ditlatse.]  “Re bina tokoloho
ka motlotlo, re a thwenya, re a tantsa hle. Re re pele ya pele!”


Mmuso ke rona, mme he ha re ikotleng difuba. Dingaka tsa setso, phuthullang
difahleho tsa lona, le eme ka motlotlo le re “Viva demokerasi, Viva ANC!”
(Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)


[Nation, listen carefully. Allow me to praise the democratic government, to
congratulate the traditional doctors and sing praises from my heart. In the
past, we were not planning together. Still in the past, we were not doing
things together, but today, Mbeki himself changed plans. He recognised the
role of traditional doctors and freed them. Ladies and gentlemen, look back
and see traditional doctors during the time of oppression. There was
sadness on their faces.

Well, things have changed. Ladies and gentlemen, life is full of problems.
Yes, it is the survival of the fittest, but God heard us and sent us the
leadership of the ANC - what a wonderful thing! Today I talk about the
leadership that has a voice; the government gave them a chance and the
nation rejoiced. It rejoiced and sang praises and said, “We, too, have been
freed”. [Applause.] “We sing freedom with pride, we hop and dance. We say
forward ever!”

We are the government, so let us be proud of ourselves. Traditional
doctors, remove sadness from your faces, stand up with pride and say, “Viva
democracy, Viva ANC”!]

Madam Deputy Chair, today we debate a very important piece of legislation
for our people. We are resuscitating confidence in the historically known
herbal remedies and cures. Our traditional health practitioners from today
- hey madoda from namhlanje [Laughter.] - will be able to claim payment
from any person who has a medical aid card according to the provisions of
the Medical Schemes Act.

Now, Minister, it is going to be very difficult indeed, because I am
tempted to join that gang over there. [Laughter.] I want to join you,
because you are going to treat even people like myself. I have a medical
aid card, so I am going to be one of your clients very soon.

Never again will you see educated people like myself going to see those
people during the night. [Laughter.] I will now go during the day, because
they will be registered. [Applause.] People who pose as registered
traditional health practitioners will be found guilty if they make false
entries in the register, or obtain certificates by false means. They will
be found guilty if they make unauthorised entries in, or alterations to, a
register. They will be punished if they destroy, damage or render illegible
any entry in the register, without the permission of the holder thereof.
Any holder of an issued certificate will be found guilty if he or she
forges a certificate.

For the investigation of matters relating to teaching and training, only a
person authorised by the council in writing is allowed to enter any
institution or premises utilised for these purposes. Any person who
prevents an authorised person from entering such institutions or premises
is guilty of an offence and liable to a fine, imprisonment or both.

Like any other council, this council will also have rules to govern its
affairs in terms of their business conduct, procedures followed during
meetings, how contracts must be entered into, how accounts of the council
must be kept, and on how to dispose of moneys accrued. They must also have
rules on how allowances may be paid to members, and rules on duties and
conditions of services of the registrar and other officers who will be
appointed. They must have rules on how various registers are kept, how
certificates are issued, and any other matter that may be promulgated under
this Act.

A person who is not a registered traditional health practitioner will be
found guilty if he or she practises as a traditional health practitioner
for gain, physically examines a person, diagnoses or treats any person,
prescribes or provides traditional medicine, pretends to be a traditional
health practitioner and diagnoses, treats or offers to treat or cure cancer
or HIV/Aids. For the first time, our traditional health practitioners will
now be asked to pay an annual fee.

“Nizakubhatala ke ngoku kudala siniyekile nisebenza ningabhatali
Nizakubhatala.” [You are going to pay now since we have given you a chance
for a long time to work without paying. You are going to pay.]

. . . because the Minister will have to prescribe, on the recommendation of
the council, the amount that you will have to pay annually. Anybody who
fails or refuses to pay this annual fee “siyanivalela etrongweni.” [will be
put in jail]. [Time expired.]

LINGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Kunzima ukulandela uMaDumisa kodwa njengoba
nimbona eqhuga nje usethembele kinina ukuthi nizomnyanga onyaweni lwakhe.
Angibonge-ke amalungu ahlonophekile ePhalamende ngokuxhasa nokusekela lo
Mthethosivivinyo. Ngithokoza kakhulu futhi ukuthi ngibona sengathi
siyavumelana sonke noma kukhona nje abanye abagxekagxekayo kodwa sisho
ngazwi linye ukuthi kufanele sibuyisele amasiko ethu nobuntu bethu.

Ucishe asidide-ke u-Coetzee uma eseqala ukufaka oma-retrovirals esesho
nokuthi kufanele kuphenywe ukuthi senzenjani ngawo. Lo Mthethosivivinyo
awungawo ama-retrovirals kodwa ungokubuyisa isidima nobuntu bethu ...
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: It is difficult to follow MaDumisa and as she is
limping she hopes that you will treat her leg. Let me thank the hon members
for supporting this Bill. I am also very happy to see that we seem to be
agreeing that it is important to restore the dignity of our culture and
reaffirm our Africanness.

Mr Coetzee confuses us then when he speaks about antiretrovirals, saying
that there should be an investigation as to what we are doing about them.
This Bill is not about antiretrovirals, but about the restoration of our
dignity and Africanness . . . ] . . . our uniqueness as Africans.

Uphinde waphawula-ke engasakhulumi ngendlela esibhekelela ngayo ingculazi –
sizomcela futhi ayofunda i-comprehensive plan on HIV/Aids – yokuthi
sikhuluma ngokudla okunomsoco, ukuziphatha nangazo zonke izinto ezinjalo.
Kufanele afunde uMthethosisekelo, angalokhu ezoma lapha phambi kwethu
evikela amaphakethe ongxiwankulu. Asimele ukuzokhuluma ngalokho namhlanje,
siyophinde siyixoxe leyo.

Uphinde waba nokungabangabaza futhi ngokuthi mhlawumbe kukhona abanye
abazosebenzisa lo Mthethosivivinyo ukutshela abantu ukuthi bangayi
emsebenzini ngoba begula. (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[He made yet another remark, but this time it was not in relation to the
way in which we fight HIV/Aids. I request him to go and study the
comprehensive plan on HIV/Aids where we discuss things like nutritional
food, good behaviour and so on. He must read the Constitution, and should
stop coming here to defend the capitalist interest. We are not here today
to debate that, therefore let us close that issue; we will discuss it next
time.

He also expressed uncertainty in that some people will abuse this Bill by
encouraging other people not to go to work and then to claim to have been
sick.]

I think I just need to point out that the conditions of service are covered
under the Basic Conditions of Employment Act. These conditions do not
change arbitrarily. Therefore, there are only a certain number of days that
can be taken for sick leave, and it will apply to the traditional healers
also.

If you have exhausted the amount of sick leave days to be taken, you will
have to take unpaid leave or vacation leave. Therefore, whether a
traditional practitioner or a doctor writes false medical certificates to
grant extra leave, this makes no difference, as leave is kept in this
country. [Applause.] In addition, managers and supervisors can pick up on
occasions when leave is being abused. This is how it was picked up that
doctors had abused the granting of sick certificates to some patients. It
is not only going to be particular to them. This is why we have this
regulation.

U-Rabinowitz naye ufuna ukusidida. Uzobuza imibuzo ebivele iphendulwa
nasekomidini, uzosidida nje ngeminye ngemibuzo futhi uyazi ukuthi
kuMthethosivivinyo awukwazi ukufaka yonke imininingwane. Imininingwane
uyifaka uma ngabe usuwenza ama-regulations naye uyakwazi lokho.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[The hon Rabinowitz also wants to confuse us. She is asking questions that
have been answered in the committee; she confuses us with additional
questions and yet she knows very well that it is impossible to put all the
details in a Bill. You only include everything when you are making the
regulations, and she knows that too.]

I do not think that she should take traditional medicine and try to fit it
into a Western medicine box. It will not work. So, do not try to do so. Do
not try to ask a lot of questions that just tend to confuse the issues,
because you are using an allopathic model that we are not using in this
regard. I have stated that this legislation is the first of its kind, and
it is innovative. In a similar way, that is how we will deal with
regulations, and the implementations thereof.

Umama u-Batyi naye uke wathi ukudideka kancane. Naye kuzofanele
simchasisele kahle ukuthi mhlawumbe akawufundanga kahle lo
Mthethosivivinyo. Ngimyalele-ke esigabeni 46, 1(f) . . . I think Mama Batyi
is also a bit confused. We also need to explain to her that she did not
read the Bill thoroughly. I refer her to section 46,1(f), which empowers
the Minister, in consultation with the council, to make regulations
relating, inter alia, to registration of categories of practitioners
including traditional surgeons.


“Ngakho ungakhathazeki mntakwetu ngabelaphi bendabuko, nabo sizobalawula.”
[Therefore do not worry my friend, these traditional healers are also
subject to regulation.]


Let me just end off by saying . . . ngithokoze kakhulu ukuthi sixoxisane
ngomoya opholile futhi singaxabani ngoba nento esiyixoxa namhlanje
iyinqayizivele, ikakhulukazi lapha eNingizimu Afrika ayikaze ibe khona.
Ngenye indlela senza into ebalulekile. (Translation of Zulu paragraph
follows.)

[I was very happy that what we discussed today was discussed in very good
spirit. We did not quarrel because what we are discussing here is very
rare, particularly in South Africa as it has never existed. In other words,
we are doing something that is important.]

We are beginning, in part, to address some aspects of the second economy in
this country. We are doing the same also, with the envisaged health charter
in this country. I just want to say, once more, that this is a restoration
and a reaffirmation of our dignity and our Africaness. I think this is a
great day, a historic day for South Africa, and we must say: “Halala, ANC,
halala!” [Applause.] Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (African Christian Democratic Party abstaining).


       BEIJING PLUS 10: AN EVALUATION FROM A PARLIAMENTARY PERSPECTIVE


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I want to start off
by thanking the Speaker for allowing this debate to take place today, as we
prepare for a debate with 146 other parliaments at the beginning of October
2004.

Our democracy was one year old when a very able and committed leader headed
a South African delegation to Beijing. This hon member is a shining star.
She has proved to the world that women, given an opportunity, can move
mountains and cross oceans with ease. That hon member is the Minister of
Foreign Affairs.

Today, she and many other South African leaders look back with pride to
that historic occasion. Not only did we promise the world to change the
status of women in South Africa, but we excelled. Before 1994 South Africa
was one of the worst and backward countries in relation to gender-related
issues. Today we are number 12 in the world and countries like the United
States and the United Kingdom are way down the line.

The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action emanated from the Fourth
World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in September 1995. The Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action provides the agenda to empower women
and aims to remove all obstacles to women in all spheres of public and
private life. It recognises that many women face barriers such as race,
language, ethnicity, culture, religion, disability or socioeconomic class
that prevent them from enjoying basic human rights. It identifies 12
critical areas of concern, that is, areas of particular urgency that stand
out as priorities for action. These are poverty, education and training,
health, violence against women, armed conflict, the economy, power and
decision-making, institutional mechanisms, human rights, the media, the
environment and the girl-child.

In order to empower women in these critical areas, governments and
parliaments are required to undertake various actions to ensure that women
have equal access to, and full participation in, power structures and
decision-making. In June 2000 a special session of the General Assembly
reviewed the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action and we called that Beijing+5. In the outcome document they adopted,
governments pledged to review domestic legislation with a view to striving
to remove discriminatory provisions as soon as possible, preferably by
2005.

The year 2005 is an important milestone for international women’s rights as
it marks the 10th anniversary of the 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women
where the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action was adopted. The 10-
year international review and appraisal of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action will take place at the 49th session of the Commission
on the Status of Women in March 2005.

In addition to reviewing the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, the commission will also discuss current challenges
and forward-looking strategies for the advancement and empowerment of women
and the girl-child. After the Beijing conference many African governments,
including the South African government, declared their support for the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and
developed national action plans to give effect to their commitment.

These action plans outlined governmental priorities in implementing the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action as well as the proposed methods
and institutional frameworks within which the state objectives were to be
met. In 2000 the government of South Africa adopted the National Policy
Framework for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality.

Freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from all
forms of oppression. That is what we said when we came here in 1994, and
that is what we are still consistently saying. All of us must take this on
board and the fact that the objectives of the Reconstruction and
Development Programme will not have been realised unless we see, in visible
and practical terms, that the conditions of the women of our country are
radically changed for the better and that they have been empowered to
intervene in all aspects of life as equals with any other member of
society.

Ke itumelela thata gore fa re bua ka selo se sa Beijing, re bua le ka
mokgwa o se tshwanetseng gore se thuse bogolosegolo bomme, re bua ka sona
gompieno re na le lona bomme ba dingaka tsa rona le fa le setse le tsamaya.
Re na le lona gompieno, re itumela le lona gore le lona le tla tshwana le
batho. Le mo utlwile Tona gore o rileng, le mo utlwile mme Madumise gore o
rileng. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[I am very happy when we talk about Beijing. We talk about the way this is
supposed to help, especially women who are traditional healers - even
though you are now leaving. We are with you today; we are happy that you
will be recognised just like any other person. You heard what the Minister
said; you heard what Ms Madumise said.]

South Africa’s commitment to human rights is embedded in our Constitution.
Human rights are considered to include women’s rights. They also include
the sexual and reproductive rights of women, men and young people.

I would like to conclude - and I will give the rest of my speech to Hansard
- but I just want to say that it helps us to discuss topics that are going
to be discussed at an international conference so that we can hear the
views of South Africans, and that when people speak, they can actually say
we have heard “ukuthi uMaMkhize yena uyibona kanjani le ndaba.” [what an
ordinary woman’s views are on this matter.]

This is what we have started to do. We have asked the presiding officers
please to table all the topics so that when people go to international
conferences they go well prepared. One of the things that will be discussed
at the Inter-Parliamentary Union conference in Geneva next month will be
the Beijing+10 from a parliamentary perspective. We are actually readying
ourselves for that conference. The other two topics have been dealt with in
the National Assembly and the NCOP.

We want to thank the Whips very much for allowing us to keep on bringing on
board these topics for discussion so that that sharpens our participation
at international forums.

I think my time has expired now. I can just see the Table staff looking at
me and I think, as one who presides there, I should actually set a very
good example and end now. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Deputy Speaker, we noted that you
didn’t finish your speech. I am sure that if you copied it and circulated
it among parties they would have the benefit of the rest of your speech.
Thank you.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, the World Conference on Women held in
Beijing, China, in September 1995, was the fourth in a series of World
Conferences on Women - all organised under the auspices of the United
Nations. The then UN Secretary-General, Mr Butros Butros Gali, noted that
the commitments made at that conference were not only as a result of
diplomatic negotiations, but that behind them lay the strong and organised
power of the World Women’s Movement. He affirmed that the UN regarded
itself as a staunch ally of the Women’s Movement, and that to achieve the
goal of full equality of men and women, as stated in the UN Charter, the UN
had always worked with the Women’s Movement.

It is worth recalling that the Secretary-General of the Beijing Conference,
in which 189 countries participated and endorsed the Beijing Platform for
Action, was the current President of the Pan-African Parliament, Mrs
Gertrude Mongella. She is presently in our country to prepare for the
coming session of the Pan-African Parliament. I am sure we all welcome her.


The South African delegation to Beijing was led by the hon Minister, as
already mentioned by the Deputy Speaker. Thousands of NGOs and other
international bodies participated in the conference. At this conference the
South African government committed itself to the Beijing Platform of
Action, which called on governments to take action on 12 critical areas of
concern. These are listed in the Beijing Platform of Action, and I will be
referring to some of them in my speech.

Governments, the international communities, civil society - including the
NGOs - as well as the private sector are all encouraged fully to commit
themselves to take strategic action in the 12 areas that have been
identified. By April 2000, that is five years after the conference, 119
member states, which is 63%, had submitted their national plans of action.
The South African government is one of them, and is just expected to report
on its progress on the 12 critical areas.

South Africa’s first progress report, the Beijing Platform of Action 2000,
has since been submitted. One of the critical areas identified is women and
poverty. The commitment of the ANC-led government in this area is very well
known. Its antipoverty strategy includes two components, namely, meeting
the basic needs and developing human resources, a strategy that has enabled
the department to shift from a purely welfare approach to a developmental
approach, thus responding to the challenges of the people’s contract.

An extensive study on poverty, involving consultations with stakeholders,
has resulted in the formation of partnerships between civil society and the
government, leading to the establishment of a poverty fund. Service
delivery road shows have been organised by all spheres of government to
promote the principle of Batho Pele. The integrated primary school
nutrition programme addresses poverty that afflicts families and thus
affects child development. The child support grant is progressively being
extended to reach more and more children living in poverty, especially in
rural areas. The Expanded Public Works Programme is the latest addition
intended to eradicate poverty through creating labour-intensive jobs. In
areas where the programme has been launched, we have observed that women
are already benefiting.

Concerning women and education, the Beijing Platform of Action recognises
that education is a human right and an essential tool for achieving the
goals of equality, development and peace. Therefore governments are
expected to ensure equal access to education; eradicate illiteracy among
women; improve access to vocational training, science and technology and
continuing action; allocate sufficient resources for educational reform;
and promote lifelong education and training for girls and women. Since
1994, steadily but surely, the doors of learning and culture have been
opening wider and wider for women and girls in our country.

The Department of Education continues to receive the biggest chunk of the
national Budget in order to carry out the necessary reforms. Some of the
programmes from which women benefit include Curriculum 2005, the culture of
learning and in-service teacher training, where more than 50% of
participants are women. The current learnership programmes of the
department for unemployed graduates and out-of-school youth are targeting a
60% enrolment of women.

The Beijing Platform for Action states that women have the right to enjoy
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health - the
enjoyment of this right being vital to their lives and wellbeing, and their
ability to participate in all areas of public and private life. It
recognises and reaffirms the rights of all women to control all aspects of
their health, in particular their own fertility, as basic to their
empowerment.

The free health care policy, the primary health care approach and the
school health promotion programme are some of the initiatives taken to
benefit women and children. The comprehensive policy on HIV/Aids which
includes awareness, care and treatment, the programme for rape survivors,
prevention of mother-to-child transmission and the roll out of the
antiretroviral treatment programme for people living with HIV and Aids and
legislation on reproductive health issues are all part of the package to
implement the Beijing Platform for Action.

The Beijing Platform for Action sees violence against women as an obstacle
to achieving the objectives of equality, development and peace. South
Africa has identified violence against women and children as one of the
five national priority areas of concern. As a result the South African
government led by the ANC, of course, has committed itself to a strong,
proactive and integrated programme to eliminate the scourge. Gender
violence is integrated in the national plan for human rights, a national co-
ordinating committee on gender violence has been established and victim
empowerment programmes exist.

Parliament has passed several pieces of legislation to address violence
against women. I am sure my other colleague will mention these pieces of
legislation just to remind us. We know them, because we passed them.
Governments are supposed to take measures that will ensure women’s access
to, and full participation in power structures and decision-making.
Governments must commit themselves to gender balance in governmental bodies
and committees, as well as in the public administrative entities and in the
judiciary. Governments must also increase women’s capacity to participate
in decision-making and leadership.

In South Africa the Labour Relations Act, Act 66 of 1995 gives basic rights
to domestic workers and public sector workers. The Employment Equity Act,
Act 55 of 1998, outlaws discrimination on grounds of race, sex, gender,
family responsibility, pregnancy, HIV status and so on, and thus protects
women. The Skills Development Act, Act 97 of 1998, empowers women. The
Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination, Act 4 of
2000, empowers and protects women.

South Africa is a signatory to the SADC declaration on gender and
development, requiring a minimum of 30% representation of women in decision-
making structures. In this area we have made strides, moving quickly from
position 141 in the world before 1994 to number 8, as the ANC adopted a 30%
quota for women regarding its list. The number of women Ministers and
Deputy Ministers keeps on increasing. It now stands at almost 40%; fast
approaching a 50-50 balance.

However, local government, particularly at ward council 1evel, still lags
behind, and so does the private sector at management level. In order to
achieve a national and international commitment to gender equality,
national gender machinery was put in place. These structures aim to achieve
equality for women in all spheres of life.

These spheres include the Office on the Status on Women; the gender focal
points or gender desks; the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement
of Quality of Life and Status of Women; the Women’s Parliamentary Caucus -
it is a pity it’s not functioning properly, but I think we will have to
revive it; the Commission on Gender Equality, an independent statutory body
that monitors progress and achievements towards gender equality; and
lastly, civil society women’s organisations that play a vital role in
influencing policy.

South Africa has come a long way since September 1995. Our achievements in
the Beijing+10 are well-documented. While in some areas we are well-
advanced and posed to meet the challenges, in other areas much work still
needs to be done, for example, programmes tackling poverty among women must
be intensified. Illiteracy among women is still higher than among men, yet
more women than men participate in the Adult Basic Education and Training
programme, Abet. Therefore, there is an urgent need to increase the
resources for both capacity-building of service providers and for learning
materials.

The way the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, is administered
needs a review, in my opinion. Many, many poor students have been abandoned
by the fund right in the middle of their courses and are now roaming the
streets. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, it was my privilege to be part of the
Government delegation to the UN Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing
in September 1995. Therefore, I am very pleased to be part of this debate
on evaluation of the conference by our Parliament, exactly nine years
later.

The Beijing Conference was an incredibly exciting and demanding experience
for me personally and, as far I could judge, also for all the members of
our 25-women delegation. We worked very hard to make our contribution to
the now famous Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. I remember the
deputy leader of our delegation, then Deputy Minister Geraldine Fraser-
Moleketi, calling working sessions after supper every evening, which went
on late into the night. I do believe that at that conference, because of
all our hard work, we truly punched above our weight.

However, experience was also humbling and brought some perspective about
our rather modest place in the world and left me with the strong impression
that we operate most effectively as an important part of our Southern
African region. Certain things stand out in my memory: the huge Nigerian
delegation - some 200 delegates compared to our 25 - all dressed the same
in vast, brightly colourful dresses, and the predominance of the Americans.
I recall our press conference, which was attended by a mere handful of
journalists. As we left the conference room, we encountered Madeline
Allbright who headed the US delegation entering the conference room,
pursued by a huge horde of media people. And, of course, Hillary Clinton
stole the show when she addressed the conference!

These are realities that we have to deal with, and they will no doubt be
applicable when the review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action takes place in New York in March 2005. This review
will focus on implementation at regional and national levels, and so we
must again be well prepared.

The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action is the most thorough
document ever produced by a UN conference on the subject of women’s rights.
It includes agreements aimed at eliminating discrimination against women,
eradicating poverty and adopting measures towards placing a decisive number
of women in key positions. It also recognises the right of women to control
their sexuality - reproduction being one of their human rights.

Additional critical areas of concern included an equal access of women to
education and training, health care and related services. It also included
a critical area of concern such as violence against women and the
persistent discrimination against the girl child. Also of note in the
Platform for Action are the definitions contained in the chapter on armed
conflict, where rape is for the first time included as a war crime, and the
acknowledgement of the racial and ethnic roots of discrimination and
equality.

In assessing the achievements and further challenges nine years on, Africa
as a region and South Africa as a country provide plenty of food for
thought. There have been huge failures and, of course, some achievements.

If we are brutally honest, Africa has particularly failed women around the
issue of sexual violence during armed conflict. In so many violent
conflicts in Africa during the past nine years, even in Southern Africa,
sexual violence has been used as an instrument of war. Rape is still a
weapon, which has been and is still being directed at hundreds of thousands
of girl children and women on both sides of these conflicts. Trafficking
and sex slavery are ancillary results.

The women of Liberia, the Ivory Coast, Sierra Leon and Angola have
suffered. The women of Sudan, Darfur, Burundi, Rwanda, the eastern DRC and
northern Uganda are suffering still. It is therefore gratifying that
leaders from our country are playing a positive role in the peace processes
in these war-ravaged areas.

While the HIV/Aids pandemic was not focused on as the major health concern
in 1995, it certainly is now since a large majority of the millions of
Africans who are HIV-positive or who have Aids are women, particularly
young women. A positive development at the review meeting held in Lusaka in
April this year was the recognition of the HIV/Aids pandemic as a priority
concern for the SADC region.

Poverty is still endemic in Africa and has got worse during these nine
years, not better. This challenge was also acknowledged at the review
meeting in Lusaka.

On the positive side, real progress has been made in establishing and
implementing national gender policies and improving women’s representation
in political decision-making. South Africa has far surpassed the 30% target
set by our region and while Mozambique can chalk up a woman prime minister,
with almost 50% of cabinet Ministers women in South Africa, this
achievement puts us way ahead of the pack in our region. Progress has also
been made with women’s access to health, education and micro finance.

In charting the way forward the Lusaka Report makes the point that
notwithstanding progress, disparities between men and women still exist in
the areas of legal rights, power-sharing and decision-making, access and
control over productive resources and education and health, with the result
that women still constitute the majority of the poor.

These are just some of the issues that we should concentrate on in our
country evaluation and up to the IPU meeting and, of course, at subsequent
review meetings. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M M MDLALOSE: Chairperson, the role and equality of women rightly remain
high on the political agenda since the World Conference on Women held in
Beijing in 1995.

The issues discussed at this conference were of direct relevance to the
women of South Africa. These areas, amongst others, covered women and
poverty, education and training of women, women and health, violence
against women, institutional mechanisms for the advancement of women and
the rights of the girl child – umntwana wentombazane. These issues will be
tabled at the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Geneva in two weeks time.

The repertoire has deliberately homed in on four areas, namely, women in
power and decision-making, women and violence, women and the economy and
the girl child. In our next national context we have also highlighted the
unfinished agenda of the liberation of women from all forms of oppression
and sexism, which continue to flourish within our families, workplaces, in
our societies and communities. This remains a challenge to us as a nation.
As one nation we are still striving to narrow the gap between the “paper
rights” of women codified in the Constitution and the real lives that women
lead.

“Sithi akungagcini ephepheni phela, akube sempilweni ngqo.” [We say that
these should not be mere “paper rights”, but should be practical.]

The grim reality is that abject poverty affects women worse because they
bear the responsibility of raising families and are often the sole
breadwinners. And, the shocking truth is that physical and sexual violence
against women has climbed steadily.

As parliamentarians, we are a virtual link to international public opinion.
All parliamentarians who believe in the full empowerment and equality of
society bear a moral responsibility to voice the interests of the South
African women, and indeed, women everywhere.

The percentage of women at the highest level of national and international
decision-making has changed significantly since the Beijing conference, but
not enough progress has been made at the grassroots level.

“Abantu abakaqondisisi kahle ukuthi kufuneka basizwe kanjani abesimame,
kufuneka bathuthukiswe kangakanani, nokuthi yini okufanele yenzeke ukuze
amalungelo abo abe ngcono.” [People do not yet exactly understand how women
should be helped, how they should be developed and what should be done to
improve their rights.]

It is essential that we consider how Parliament can improve the status of
women at this level. South Africa has a wealth of experience in working
towards the empowerment of women. I believe our delegates will have much to
contribute to the debate on implementing the Beijing Agenda. It is
imperative that we furnish our representatives with clear and bold mandates
at this conference, if we are to have a meaningful impact. I believe it is
vital that the mandates must make practical recommendations and directives
rather than being long on rhetoric and of a discursive nature. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson and hon members, it is sad to note that whilst we
are left with only 11 years to the 2015 target endorsed by the Beijing
Conference, only 16 countries have at least 30% women representation in
their parliaments. This percentage will not increase without the political
will of political parties represented in these parliaments to ensure that
parliaments are more gender sensitive and to ensure greater women’s
political participation in the introduction of gender sensitive policies.

In many countries the challenges facing women are no longer legislative,
but administrative. The laws are there and it is now time to ensure that
they are being implemented. Therefore, it is clear that women should be the
vanguard to educating society, to changing the social attitudes and beliefs
that condone, for instance, domestic violence.

Even in countries like ours, where governments have taken some measures to
ensure the participation of women in the economy, these measures have not
been effective, mainly because they are not systematically implemented. Our
governments and parliaments should enhance our capacity to monitor progress
and encourage positive change.

Despite the important steps taken by our government, it is still evident
that there remains a continued cultural discriminatory attitude toward girl
children as well as a lack of financial resources, which prevent their
economic independence. Too many governments have a tendency to leave these
matters to the community concerned on the grounds that the decision is a
tribal or cultural one.

As a democratic country and progressive Parliament, we have a special duty
to reach out to the other parliaments and political parties in order to
encourage gender equality. We have a contribution to make, and we shouldn’t
hesitate to do so. Whilst we share our experience, we may also learn
innovative new ways of advancing gender equality in our own country.

These efforts must be an ongoing exercise informed by genuine political
will, as opposed to the occasional debate or conference. Otherwise we
merely look back every year and lament the lack of progress. I thank you.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, it’s such a pity that the House is so empty,
and I hope that this is not a reflection of what we think of women’s
issues. [Interjections.] Certainly not! No, they are there, I’ve already
made sure of that.

The original Beijing declaration calls for all countries to have a national
action plan to improve and address all aspects of gender discrimination,
equity and advancement. During the UN’s 23rd General Assembly session on
the Beijing +5, governments unanimously agreed regularly to assess further
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action.

The South African government has achieved much in terms of gender
representivity at senior management and Cabinet level, and in the public
sector where women make up 53% of the Public Service and 26% of senior
management. Government should continue to incorporate and utilise the
process of gender-based analysis and gender-responsive budgeting with
respect to the development of legislation, policies and budgets.

The increasing feminisation of poverty is cause for concern. Economic
activity must be opened so that women can be given more access to
productive resources. The current international trade regime is deeply
unfair to developing countries, impacts most negatively on poor women and
is largely developed without the parliaments of this world. Parliament must
ensure that poverty eradication becomes the priority of all government
programmes.

The main challenges to gender equality in South Africa are the high
illiteracy and mortality rates, HIV/Aids, poverty and violence against
women. The South African Parliament should carry out a critical review of
its processes to ensure implementation of programmes that will give effect
to the Beijing declarations. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the ACDP notes that the major focus of the
Beijing +10 Evaluation Report is women and violence, and the girl child.
The strategic objectives based on the Beijing Platform or Action in terms
of women and violence include eliminating trafficking in women and
assisting victims of violence resulting from prostitution and trafficking.

In this regard the ACDP further notes reports that South Africa is a key
player in the trafficking of girls between the ages of 4 and 17 years, from
rural and urban areas who are in search of work or survival, with the
victims of poverty and sexual abuse, runaways and orphans being the most
vulnerable.

It is commonly known that prostitution opens women to abuse and
degradation. A study shows that 75% of prostitutes have attempted suicide.
It is not a harmless, victimless crime as is often stated by those
promoting legalisation. Of course, those most vocal and determined to push
for decriminalisation are those who stand to gain the most financially from
this form of slave trade.

Women and children are led into and trapped in prostitution through money
and drugs, and it would be irresponsible for any government to protect
those preying on women by legalising prostitution. Victoria in Australia
decriminalised prostitution in 1994, resulting in an alarming increase in
rape, violence, prostitution, abuse, brothels, etc. According to police
legalisation failed dismally there.

Where prostitution is legal, countries become the most popular destinations
for trafficked women owing to an increase in demand. Traffickers and pimps
avoid prosecution as it is argued, as in the case of Sarah Baartman, that
women entered into contracts voluntarily.

The UN international crime prevention head of operations admitted that when
prostitution is legal or semilegal, it helps gangsters and makes
enforcement more difficult. In Sweden, however, prostitution is listed in
legislation against abuse of women as a gross violation of women’s
integrity; and the purchase of sexual services is prohibited and
punishable, placing the focus on the user and not the prostitute. This is
commendable. The ACDP supports all measures to focus positive attention on
the plight of women and children who face daily violence and abuse. I thank
you. [Time expired.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi! [Praise the name of women!]
Chairperson, the MF firmly supports gender equality and all efforts to
attain it. We already have a foundation in South Africa for the attainment
of gender equality, as provided for by the supreme law of the nation - our
national Constitution.

As we proudly note, all levels of government and legislation promote gender
equality and efforts are made to achieve this. However, we need a database
to monitor the progress of gender equality throughout the various spectrums
of South African society. As it may have been noted last month, it was hard
attaining such information. We could, certainly, assist the attainment of
gender equality by maintaining such a database. Further, we support the
primary socialisation of girls into a society promoting social, economic
and political rights and awareness.

The fight against violence against women and children needs to be
intensified, and all spheres of life concerning women need to be addressed
though the empowerment of women. As Parliament we already have the
necessary legislation in place to work towards effective gender equality.
However, we need to mobilise such legislation effectively. We also have a
responsibility in Africa to influence gender equality. The MF supports
Beijing +10. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, hon members, as already mentioned by others
before me, the debate today centres around the progress made since the
adoption in September 1995 by some 189 countries of the Beijing Platform
for Action, which called on governments to take action in 12 critical areas
of concern regarding gender equality or, perhaps to put it more accurately,
inequality in the world.

It is with utmost humility that I represent my party, the ANC, in this
debate, being a man and being mindful of the role that men have played or
failed to play over the years in relation to gender equality in this
country and the world in general.

May I for a moment pause to express appreciation to the many women in our
country who, on a daily basis, continue against many odds to sustain the
livelihoods of families and households, and to express appreciation, in
particular, for the role they play in raising children and providing a
caring, supportive and nurturing environment for them to grow up in often
without the needed support of their spouses or the fathers of the children.

This contribution often goes unnoticed, unrecognised and, therefore,
unrewarded by society and, indeed, women are often penalised by the manner
in which the social and economic systems of society operate. Women in the
workplace, for example, are often given very little or no support and, even
worse, penalised for fulfilling their social responsibilities towards
children, against the spirit of our Bill of Rights, labour laws and laws
aimed at promoting gender equality.

Our country in particular is faced with many challenges relating to the
advancement of the status of women. The mass democratic revolution, which
is the central political project of the ANC, is premised on the key goal of
building a new society free from racism and sexism.

In order to achieve this goal, as stated in the National Policy Framework
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality adopted by Cabinet in December
2000:


      . . . the country must undergo a paradigm shift with regard to how
      resources are allocated and how people relate to each other.

These two key areas highlight the centrality of the economic and social
dimensions of society in the struggle towards achieving gender equality.

The policy framework further states that:
  The challenges facing South Africa have been translated into national
  priorities.


All of these priorities have been compelling gender dimensions which need
to be addressed if the country is to advance towards gender equality.

Some of the key challenges are gender relations; poverty; HIV/Aids;
violence against women; access to basic needs and resources such as
education, housing, social welfare services, fuel and water; access to
employment, the economy, land, science, technology; and participation in
political and decision-making structures.

Regarding gender relations, the challenge is to shape the broad
transformation project in a way that acknowledges the centrality and
compatibility of the transformation of gender relations to the broader
institutional change process. This requires a fundamental review of what
has come to be accepted as “business as usual”.

South Africa has made significant strides in the advancement of women and
the eradication of social and economic exclusion, as well as in restoring
the inherent right of women to dignity, and freedom from degradation, abuse
and discrimination.

Policies and programmes in the economic field include Twip, which stands
for Technology for Women in Business, driven by the Department of Minerals
and Energy to promote the participation of women in technology and to
recognise, through awards, the contribution of women in technology.

In terms of women in agriculture, women are supported and encouraged to be
farmers through training and small grants specially established for women.
There is preferential procurement for women through the Department of Trade
and Industry; and women in construction are recognised by the Department of
Public Works facilitating their entry into the market.

In the justice field, for example, despite the generally held view within
the judiciary against the establishment of specialised courts owing to the
risk of fragmenting the justice system, family courts have been established
and are functioning in areas such as Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth,
Lebowakgomo and Johannesburg. These courts are designed to improve services
to women and children in family law matters.

At this juncture, I wish to congratulate the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development on her unwavering determination in pursuing
issues of gender and race, herself being the first black woman to become a
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development in this country.

To increase the number of women on the bench remains a challenge that
continues to haunt the Judicial Service Commission, of which I am humbled
to have been appointed a member recently by this august House. At our last
sitting, for example, we recommended the addition of two more black and two
more white women. Unfortunately, the culture within the legal profession
still alienates and discourages young women from joining and advancing
through the ranks of the legal profession, thus limiting the scope of
potential candidates for selection for judgeship by the commission.

Reform of the maintenance system is an ongoing priority, according to the
briefing given by the department during the budget hearings earlier in this
Parliament. The project here is aimed at establishing relief measures in
respect of procedures pertaining to maintenance, and at improving the
management of maintenance matters focusing on six key result areas, namely,
legislation, infrastructure, human resource development, information
technology, communication and the integration of services.

Twenty million rand has been set aside for the appointment of the first
maintenance investigators, and the first 59 of these investigators, who
have been the missing link in the maintenance services chain, were
appointed in 2003.

No less than 50 sexual offences courts are currently operational. They have
impacted significantly on the lessening of the trauma of victims and have
increased the conviction rate of offenders. The development of a victims’
charter has also helped in the empowerment of victims of sexual offences.

Finally, let me express appreciation that is also, I believe, on behalf of
this House at large to the Minister of Social Development for rolling out
the various social grants, in particular the child support grant, to the
many poor and vulnerable amongst the masses of our society; thus providing
the tool women in particular need to shield their children against the
devastating effects of poverty, and promoting social cohesion. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

 GENEVA ACT OF THE HAGUE AGREEMENT CONCERNING THE INTERNATIONAL REGISTRATION
                            OF INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS

  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

   PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE MADRID AGREEMENT CONCERNING THE INTERNATIONAL
                         REGISTRATION OF TRADE MARKS

  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson and esteemed hon members, the Geneva Act of
the Hague Agreement concerning the international registration of industrial
designs and the protocol relating to the Madrid Agreement concerning the
international registration of trademarks are the enabling instruments in
respect of the Hague and Madrid systems respectively.

The Hague system seeks to facilitate the establishment and maintenance of
design protection through a single international registration for all the
member countries. All designs will now be registered at a central point,
namely, with the World Intellectual Property Organisation. Of the 30
members of the Hague system, 33% are from developing countries. Other
member countries include key trading partners of South Africa, such as
Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Spain and Switzerland.

The Hague system also provides for the participation of regional systems,
for example, through the Southern African Customs Union and the African
Regional Industrial Property Office. The Madrid system on the other hand
seeks to facilitate international registration, maintenance and the renewal
of trademarks.

The benefits accruing from joining the Madrid and Hague systems will,
amongst other things, include, firstly, effective protection and quicker
registration of intellectual property rights by offering a single
registration process for a number of designated countries; secondly,
providing a platform for South Africa to compete internationally; thirdly,
generation of foreign income through registration fees; fourthly,
confidence-building for investors; fifthly, harmonisation of our
intellectual property laws with those of our trading partners; sixthly,
protection of intellectual property rights for South African investors; and
seventh, the creation of a fair and equitable framework in the field of
intellectual property. I thank you. [Applause.]

Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration
of Industrial Designs approved.

Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
Registration of Trade Marks approved.

  CONVENTION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
  CABINET OF MINISTERS OF UKRAINE FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND
      THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

  AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE
 GOVERNMENT OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND
      THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

  (Consideration of request for approval by Parliament in terms of section
                           231(2) of Constitution)

Dr R H DAVIES: Chairperson, in the 10 years of democratic order, South
Africa has negotiated double taxation agreements with a significant number
of countries in all parts of the world. In general terms double taxation
agreements provide for persons from one of the constructing jurisdictions
who is paying taxes in that jurisdiction not also to be subject to taxes in
the other jurisdiction, arising from short-term or temporary activities
carried out there.

Double taxation agreements encourage trade and commercial interaction, as
well as cultural, educational and other exchanges by removing double
taxation obligations, which might impede the development of these
relations. They usually also provide for the exchange of information
between the tax authorities of the two contracting parties that could be of
significance in enforcing compliance. There are also proposals for later
generations of double taxation agreements to include provisions to co-
operate in tax collection.

The double taxation agreements that South Africa has been involved in
negotiating over the years have followed the format of the Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development model convention, which is similar in
most respects to a United Nations model convention.

The model provides a framework within which there is a need for individual
case-by-case negotiations on such matters as the maximum time a
construction firm or service provider may be present in the other
jurisdiction before being regarded as a permanent establishment, subject to
tax, in that other jurisdiction.

The two double tax agreements before the House today, between us and the
Ukraine and Kuwait respectively, are wholly within the parameters of other
double taxation agreements approved by this Parliament. The Portfolio
Committee on Finance was unanimous in recommending the approval by the
House, and I trust that the House will concur. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Convention between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income approved.

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
Government of the State of Kuwait for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income approved.

The House adjourned at 17:05.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 26709 of 24
              August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         10 September 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report of the South African Geographical Names Council for 2002-2003
     [RP 203-2003].


