---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-09
---

TUESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:01.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.




              PRECEDENCE GIVEN TO ORDER NO 2 ON THE ORDER PAPER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move the
motion as printed in the name of the Chief Whip on the Order Paper, as
follows:

    That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 29(8), Questions shall not
    have precedence tomorrow, 10 November 2004.


Agreed to.


                     MEDIUM TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT


                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Madam Speaker, hon members, the tabling of the Medium Term
Budget Policy Statement presents Parliament and all stakeholders – labour,
civil society and business – with an opportunity to engage with the budget
process at a very critical stage. This statement sets the stage for what
lies ahead of us in the upcoming Medium Term Expenditure Framework. Public
participation remains critical in the ANC’s commitment to the Freedom
Charter’s first clause, in which the people’s movement declared for all our
country and the world to know that, ``the people shall govern’’.

Lo mhlahlandlela wesabelo sezimali zaleli zwe unika izakhamuzi ithuba
lokuhlaziya imigomo nezinhlelo zikahulumeni zeminyaka emithathu ezayo. Lolu
hlelo luyingqayizivele, ngisho nasemazweni asemnkantshubomvu kwintando
yeningi alukho. Impela badlela ogageni uma sekuziwa ngakwezomnotho nakuyo
intando yeningi imbala. (Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[This medium-term budget policy framework gives the people an opportunity
to analyse policies and programmes of the government for the three years
ahead. This arrangement is very rare; even the countries that have long
been democracies do not have this kind of arrangement. In actual fact, they
cannot compete with us in terms of both economy and democracy.]

This year’s Medium Term Budget Policy Statement is a direct response to the
challenges of poverty and underdevelopment alluded to by the President in
the state of the nation address in May this year. The Minister of Finance
reminded us of our commitment to the people’s contract to fight poverty and
create work when he tabled this statement on 26 October 2004. In his own
words he said:

  The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement provides a concise overview of
  the Government’s economic, social and development policy priorities, in
  the context of projections for the economy over the next three years and
  a coherent framework for fiscal policy and the national Budget.

He further said:


  Its point of departure is a medium-term strategic framework that
  recognises the limits of the state’s resources and the importance of
  promoting a vibrant and competitive market-based economy.

It is against this background that the Joint Budget Committee held its
public hearings immediately after the tabling of this statement. The
committee’s terms of reference require us to consider the Medium Term
Budget Policy Statement when tabled and report to Parliament, as we hereby
do today.

This mandate was interpreted by the committee to mean that we should
consider, firstly, the likely impact of the expenditure allocations in the
Medium Term Budget Policy Statement on the effectiveness and efficiency
with which departments can respond to Government’s stated policy
priorities; and secondly, whether the departments are making the tough
choices required, tailoring their planned expenditures according to
priorities, choosing effective strategies and seeking efficiency in
implementation.

The hearings were conducted under the following themes: Justice and
Protection Services, Employment and Economic Growth, Rural Development and
Urban Renewal, Social Services and International Relations.

Under the Justice and Protection Services theme, the committee had a
submission by the Minister of Safety and Security and the Assistant
Commissioner. The department confirmed that the Medium Term Budget Policy
Statement is in line with its key strategic priorities and that the
committee was satisfied that the department is well on track to deliver.

The Department of Correctional Services, led by the Deputy Commissioner and
its chief financial officer expressed concern that the Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement does not support the requirements of their White Paper,
which changes the department’s strategic direction to focus on the
rehabilitation and correction of offenders. The Joint Budget Committee
trusts that this matter will be dealt with by the Portfolio Committee on
Correctional Services.

The Department of Defence, led by its chief financial officer, also
expressed similar concerns to the Department of Correctional Services, and
the committee also felt that its revised strategic plan would reflect this
concern. In its written submission the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development was satisfied that the Medium Term Budget Policy
Statement is in line with its strategic priorities.

At this point I would like to apologise to the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development for what seems to have been an oversight of the
committee to count the department as one of those departments that did not
apologise. Of course, indeed, his apology was tabled in the meeting.

The overall view of the committee is that the departments are relatively
ready to respond to the challenges with the limited resources allocated to
them. As my colleagues will demonstrate in the debate, there are challenges
that might limit the capacity of some of the departments to deliver
optimally, but the level of commitment is insurmountable. Our
recommendations at the end of the report speak to some of these challenges
in detail and call upon all of us and stakeholders, more particularly
Parliament, to exercise meaningful oversight to ensure the implementation
of the policies and realisation of the required outcomes.

It is regrettable that some of the departments were not led by their
political heads or senior management. The delegations of some departments
were led by their respective Ministers. These were: Safety and Security,
Finance, Minerals and Energy, and Home Affairs. The committee commends
these Ministers for taking their accountability to Parliament seriously and
trusts that there will be an improvement in the future. The presence of
Ministers and or senior officials made the engagement very fruitful and
assisted the process tremendously. The opposite is, however, true for the
departments that didn’t do that.

The ANC’s commitment to fighting poverty is further demonstrated by an
expansionary fiscal policy despite the global economic slowdown. The Medium
Term Budget Policy Statement projects growth of 4,3% in overall noninterest
expenditure, representing additional expenditure of R50 billion over the
MTEF, with most of this allocated to the social services sector.
Allocations to provincial and local government spheres are also expected to
increase significantly over the MTEF. Provinces will receive a bigger slice
of the additional resources - 67% - while national government receives 27%
and local government will receive 5,6% over the MTEF.

The most important policy change in provincial spending will be the shift
of social security to the National Social Security Agency and also the
inclusion of the primary health care function, which was previously
provided by local government. The management of the transitional phase will
be very critical, as an interim conditional grant will be augmented for
this purpose.

Isabelo sohulumeni basekhaya sona sikhuphuka ngesamba sika
R2,3 billion - ngehlulekile ukuthola igama le “billion” ngesiZulu ngoba
abantu bakithi ngendlela abahlupheka ngayo abakaze babe nemali efika kwi
“billion”. [Uhleko.] Ngakho-ke ngizophinda ngithi isabelo sohulumeni
basekhaya sikhuphuka ngo-R2,3 billion kule minyaka emithathu ezayo ukuze
labo hulumeni bakwazi ukunikezela ngezidingongqangi kubantu bakithi,
ikakhulu labo abadla imbuya ngothi. Ngaphezulu kwalokho, isamba esiyizigidi
ezingama-R500 siyengezwa emalini ebhekene nokuthuthukisa izingqalasizinda
kulesi sigaba sohulumeni basekhaya.

Konke lokhu uhulumeni ka-ANC ukwenza ukuze kuncishiswe igebe phakathi
kwabadla izambane likapondo nalabo abadla imbuya ngothi. Okubaluleki-ke
ukuthi imiphakathi yakithi isukume ibambe iqhaza kulezi zinhlelo zentuthuko
nalapho kucutshungulwa ukwabiwa kwezimali emikhandlwini yayo, nalapho
kudwetshwa izinhlelo ezididiyelwe, ama-IDPs. (Translation of Zulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The budget for the local governments has been increased by R2,3 billion -
I failed to find an equivalent for ``billion’’ in isiZulu. Our people are
so poor that they have never had money in the sum of a billion. [Laughter.]
Therefore, I want to repeat that the budget for local governments has been
increased to R2,3 billion for the three-year period that lies ahead in
order to capacitate the municipalities to provide services, particularly
for the poor. In addition to that, a sum of R500 million has been added to
the local sphere of government for the development of infrastructure.

The ANC-led government is doing this in order to bridge the gap between the
rich and the poor. It is therefore very important for our people to
participate in these development programmes, and also to participate in
budget debates as well as IDPs.]

What also becomes critical is our oversight as members of this House, which
cannot be overemphasised. Our oversight stretches across the political
spectrum to ensure that our Government honours its side of the people’s
contract to fight poverty and create wealth. My colleagues will speak more
on the subject of bridging the gap between the first and the second
economy, but let me say that this is one of our major challenges and it
demands that we all work together to overcome it.

Let me take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Finance and his
department for leading the process that has produced the statement. We
would also like to thank all those who participated in the hearings –
Government departments, business, labour and civil society. May I also
thank the committee members for the hard work they put into the entire
process under enormous pressure and time constraints; last, but not least,
our researchers for their support.

Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you, Chairperson.[Applause.]]

Ms R TALJAARD: Madam Speaker, hon colleagues, the South African economy is
poised for higher rates of economic growth in the context of a fairly
benign global environment, and with moderate inflation projections going
forward.

We acknowledge that factors largely beyond our control like the price of
crude oil, any slowdown in the global economy and lacklustre conclusion and
implementation of the Doha development round remain a threat and that
uncertainty and may threaten this growth.

We remain convinced, however, that government policy has the most impact on
our country’s ability not only to capitalise on its potential, but also to
realise its promise. Whilst South Africa is poised for higher growth – and
projections of GDP growth at 4% appear reasonable – this dimension of the
challenge ahead lies squarely in the realm of government control. This is
where governments the world over, irrespective of their ideological
persuasions, often fail.

South Africa needs a strategy for growth and entrepreneurship, as well as
clear policies to support this vision. This is the only solution to effect
a turnaround in our levels of unemployment and the consequent
unsustainable, existing structure of social security support.

The DA strategy for growth and entrepreneurship includes but is not limited
to, a clear industrial policy backed by fiscal and regulatory reforms that
fosters comparative advantage; an unwavering focus on small business that
not only seeks to free it from compliance and regulatory burdens, but also
seeks to support entrepreneurs through financing government services and
targeted fiscal incentives; a review of labour law in the context of basic
ILO standards; a review of tax policy and taxation burdens at all levels of
government with a view to savings incentives, investment and employment...

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, could you please lower your voices?

Ms R TALJAARD: Thank you, Madam Speaker ...continued support for monetary
policy anchored by inflation targeting, especially regarding the impact of
administered prices; modernising of the Public Service, with emphasis on
the word “service”; reforming existing BEE provisions that merely serve to
counteract any notion of broad-based empowerment, as evidenced in the
recent Telkom announcement; a dedicated fund for infrastructural
development and maintenance beyond the R165 billion announcement, as
maintenance would be crucial; and a review of tax provisions in the
residence basis of taxation, combined with the skills recruitment drive
under the new immigration policy, to fill vital skills gaps.

While broadbased development is a critical challenge, it is but only one
side of a far more complex coin. Job creation remains our country’s most
pressing priority, irrespective of the recent labour force survey numbers,
which show that unemployment is stable at around 42%. With due respect to
the much-admired – and I reiterate, much-admired – DG of Finance, we need
to think creatively beyond Setas and Expanded Public Works Programmes to
tackle decisively our skills deficit, unemployment and its ravaging effects
in terms of poverty.

This is where the challenge has always been for government and will
continue to be over the MTEF period and beyond. It is also where Cabinet’s,
the opposition’s and all MPs’ focus has to remain in terms of oversight and
accountability. Despite our macroeconomic stability, our economy has failed
to create sufficient jobs over the past 10 years of democracy to lessen the
pressure on social support.

There can be no doubt that the burgeoning social security net in the
MTBPF’s projections is a clear consequence of this failure of jobless
economic growth. This is not a conclusion we must bicker about. It is one
we will all have to confront together, because the social security
structure as such, at this stage, is unsustainable beyond the MTEF period.

While economic growth of 6% and higher is desirable in itself, all emerging
markets and developed countries alike need creative and clear job creation
strategies to maximise their competitive and comparative advantage in a
rapidly-changing and fast-evolving global, complex economy. In our country
this is imperative and even more compelling if we are to ensure that the
gains of a constitutional democracy are realised and deliver the fruits of
socioeconomic change. As an emerging market we need to think creatively to
unlock the potential in all sectors of our economy.

On a recent state visit the Prime Minister of India captured the
imagination of this House with the emphasis of his country on harnessing
biotechnology and nanotechnology as engines for growth in their five-year
national foreign trade policy. While we are not harnessing nanotechnology
or biotechnology, the challenge is in creative thinking in putting a job
creation strategy on the table. Despite our skills constraints, we need a
clear strategy on the table to maximise our country’s participation not
only in new markets, but also in order to create our own opportunities in
the global marketplace far more creatively and aggressively than we have
done.

Whether this creative policy-making is unleashed through call centres, the
economic potential in cultural diversity beyond tourism, or investment
incentives – anathema as they may be to National Treasury – a clear jobs
strategy is not on the table and it needs to be. We need a strategy that
not only takes the pursuit of higher growth as its point of departure and
foundation, but also seeks to go beyond it.

It is in this context that many of the proposals in the MTBPS must be
weighed and concerns raised. The Adjustment Appropriation Bill that
accompanies the MTBPS will, pending the rebasing of GDP figures by Stats
SA, increase the projected Budget deficit marginally.

These figures are not profligate or irresponsible public expenditure, as
the muted market reaction showed. They are also more than acceptable in a
global economy where many EU member states are failing to meet the deficit
target laid down in the EU Growth and Stability Pact.

Minister, we are concerned about the composition of the deficit between
capital and consumption expenditure. We have raised this with you, and I am
not going to belabour the point. Suffice it to say that, based on the
public sector wage negotiation agreement and the increased uptake in social
grants, there is concern that we are falling on the wrong side of the
balance between consumption and capital expenditure.

Equally as laudable as the infrastructural drive of R165 billion is, and as
necessary as it is to create an accelerated growth path, we have to be sure
that most of this would be off-Budget, because if not, we do see the
consequences on the public sector borrowing requirement. And because a lot
of this would be import-heavy and import content, we also see the impact on
the current account going forward, and these remain areas of focus and
concern.

Higher deficits that fail to strike the right balance become more difficult
to defend over time; so do higher public sector borrowing requirements and
current account deficits. The cautionary tales of many countries that have
learnt this lesson the hard way should be salient.

The DA welcomed the relaxation of exchange control, but we are worried
about the retention of the administrative requirements. We also believe
that we need to finalise prudential regulation provisions, place a clear
timetable on the table and address some of the bias against individuals in
recent liberalisation. It is no small achievement to receive a Fitch and
Moody’s upgrade, but we believe that a lot more needs to be done.

Colleagues, this is my last speech in this House. [Interjections.] When I
walked into Parliament as a researcher in 1996, I never realised how
interwoven my own life would become with the democratic destiny of the
country that I love above all others. I would like to thank each and every
one of you for your camaraderie as fellow MPs, though it often expressed
itself not only in howls of approval, but very often in howls of
disapproval of what I had to say, as it happened again today.

I would like to thank many of you, across party lines, for the friendships
I have been able to form and the challenges I have lived through with many
of you - albeit often on opposite sides of this House. These are bonds that
I will cherish long after the political ink of this speech is dry.

We live in a complex country with a complex history and an uncertain
future. If I have one concern that I would like to place as a challenge
before all of you, it is this: Politics, not only in our own country, is
overpopulated with staunch beliefs and dogmas on all sides, and
underrepresented by commitment and curiosity. We live in a world that is
filled with statements of tolerance, when what we see is an alarming
increase in mutual hostilities and intolerance.

      I would like to leave you with the words of my favourite Nobel
      Laureate, Bertrand Russell, whom I believe had the answer to certainly
      many of my own challenges, but also the one I have cited, and I quote:
      What is wanted is not the will to believe, but the will
to find out, which is the exact opposite.

Perhaps what we all need more of across the globe and locally is the will
to find out, the will to respect and the will to debate. We have taken
steps in this House in this regard, in building it in
10 years of our democracy. My fervent wish for this House is that we will
take leaps forward in that regarding the years ahead. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I am sure I will be representing the views and the sentiments
of the House when I say that the House wishes you well in your future
endeavours. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Speaker, the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement is
tabled against the background of a significant improvement in the
performance of the South African economy. The gross domestic product has
grown and the consumer price index remains subdued. The IFP remains very
concerned that in spite of every effort by the Minister the problems of
poverty, unemployment, HIV and Aids and inequality still remain unabated.

We applaud every effort by the Minister, but we wish to see sustainable
interventions to reduce poverty and unemployment. The IFP is concerned
about what seems to be a bottomless pit created by the Road Accident Fund.
The IFP would like to see the reduction of retirement tax.

Social services continue to absorb nearly 60% of government expenditure
with social security spending increasing by 11,4% per year. We have a sound
policy framework that balances the demands of an emerging and growing the
economy with the budget constraints it faces.

It is vitally important that delivery and efficiency is enhanced through
improving management capacity. The IFP hopes that the steps to reduce the
number of grants going to people who do not warrant them will not result in
unintended consequences of adversely affecting deserving cases.

We agree with the hon Minister that some of the challenges are to improve
the performance of the state, to consolidate the institutional reforms of
democratic transition, to build capacity where service delivery falls short
and to promote greater participation and interaction of people with organs
of government.

Our financial institutions have been very slow in accepting the invitation
to the party. How many, if any, have assisted black small businesses
through facilities offered by the Ntsika and Khula Trusts? Another sad fact
is that very few previously disadvantaged people know about Ntsika and
Khula. The reality is that we are dealing with communities who were
deliberately dispossessed and disempowered. In 1911 the President of the
Chamber of Mines stated: He, the black, cares nothing if industries pine
for want of labour when his crops and home-brewed drinks are plentiful. He
called for a policy to force blacks into the cheap labour market by
splitting their land into native reserves under tribal tenure. In order to
intensify the war against poverty, inequality, ignorance and disease,
schemes like the Agricultural Credit Schemes, the Apex Fund and others
should be assisted to deliver as a matter of urgency. The IFP urges the
state to promote and provide funding for self-help projects in order
drastically to reduce the numbers of those who depend on social grants.

In conclusion, let me repeat that the growth projections underlying the
MTEF are realistic and attainable. They do not depend on unrealistic
assumptions about the performance of the world economy. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS:  Hon Speaker, colleagues and comrades, it gives me great
pleasure to speak on the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, because today
we stand in this country knowing that there is increased business
confidence, not only outside the country but also inside the country. There
is buoyant consumer, regional and international acknowledgement of South
Africa’s resilient and robust economy.

This Medium Term Budget Policy Statement gives evidence of a series of
sequential measures designed to bridge the divide between the first and
second economies, and to overcome the legacy of years of this special brand
of colonialism, called apartheid, which was designed to destroy human
capital, but which, ironically, led to its own demise.

The impact of a sustained low inflation target, unprecedented in 30 years,
with low interest rates and a visible turnaround in employment prospects,
is underpinned by the projections in the MTBPS and the 4% economic growth.
Also, what is reflected there is the three-pillar strategy to fight poverty
and unemployment. The latest monetary policy review from the SA Reserve
Bank confirms that the inflation-targeting framework is standing firm.

Now, I must say, hon colleagues that the economic situation in our country
is unique and cannot be compared to either Canada or Chile, as some would
advocate. Instead a customised set of measures must be implemented, and
these have been identified. President Mbeki laid the first plank in the
fight against poverty earlier this year. And what we are doing now amongst
many things, is to build, on that.

We are implementing a programme of action that will expand economic
opportunities so that even the most marginalized of our people can reap the
fruits of their labours, already enjoyed by South Africans in the
mainstream.

The MTBPS will also allocate resources sequentially to implement these
measures. In the context of the global economy the resilience of the South
African economy has enabled South Africa to successfully weather the 2003
economic slowdown. Moody’s imminent upgrade of South Africa’s rating to be
BAA 1 is yet another indication and endorsement of South Africa’s economic
growth and its potential to overcome poverty.

The external position and liquidity have been underpinned by our recovery
and capital inflows and a broadly balanced current account. As a catalyst
to increase income’s resources, the Ministry will facilitate economic
activity in the second economy through a flow of resources to
underdeveloped areas. There will also be a strategic deployment of
resources to facilitate the capacity of people to participate in the
mainstream and earn a living wage.

The Expanded Public Works Programme is indeed government’s pre-emptive
strike against poverty, contrary to what my hon colleague, Ms Taljaard,
said earlier. She said that this might not be the most effective
instrument. I am surprised to hear this coming from a DA quarter,
considering the many times this House has heard over the last 10 years
about the effectiveness of the Roosevelt plan and the Marshall Plan, both
of which relied on expanded public works.

And indeed, the government in our own country in the 1930s relied on an
expanded public works programme, albeit for the whites only. Now,
acknowledging the increasing pressure of social grants, the MTBPS lays down
a timeline to ensure that we meet these commitments without destabilising
the Budget in any way. Systems are being developed to ensure that only
those eligible to access and receive social grants will do so.

The ANC as a government is certainly committed to maintaining and
sustaining the integrity of social grants in the long term. We heard
comments about jobs and the unlikelihood of being able to meet the targets
that we have set. No, we are not going to throw cash at people for very
short-term, emergency-type jobs. No, that is not our policy, and, as you
have yourself acknowledged, the ANC has not changed it policies, but merely
developed strategies to implement its sound policies.

So, the jobs we are creating are capable of not only being sustained from
the 400 000 increase, but growing and contributing to transforming the
second economy, so that it joins in the mainstream of the first economy
eventually. And it is not how many times - we will repeat saying this
because it is a reality. [Interjections.] This is a realistic Budget that
takes into account constraints we have in this country, including most
unfortunately a few people still using brakes. [Interjections.]
The Budget deficit of 3,2% is sustainable, notwithstanding the expansionary
nature of the Budget; and indeed it will stimulate the economy.

The commitment of government to create an enabling environment to increase
the rate of investment, that is gross fixed capital formation in the public
and private sector from 16% to 25% by 2014, is indeed possible.

The ANC party fully supports the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement
measures and accelerated implementation as a platform for economic growth
and sustainable measures that I believe will reverse the ravages of
poverty. The set of measures outlined here, I believe, is an optimistic
platform. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Madam Speaker, hon Minister and hon members, recently I said
in this House that the funding of social services is a fundamental duty of
the state. No socially responsible state can escape or avoid its vital duty
to support the weak, the poor and those in society who find themselves in
need; nor should it wish to do so.

Whatever the incentives offered to individuals and private enterprises to
contribute, the lion’s share is inevitably and quite correctly borne by the
fiscus. Obviously, the long-term solution for poverty is job creation.
However, sustainable jobs cannot be created overnight. In the interim poor
people must live. They cannot exist in suspended animation until jobs have
been created for them. Poverty relief must thus be the number one priority
of the MTBPS.

Thus, while we are pleased to see the estimates for social services grow
significantly over the MTEF, we are concerned that they are still wholly
inadequate. The real value of most grants and pensions is insufficient to
relieve the desperate poverty of the beneficiaries.

Poverty relief cannot be achieved parsimoniously. Grants must be big enough
to sustain the receivers as independent people living with dignity. Yet
during a committee meeting the Minister stated that we cannot afford
higher, living pensions and grants. Moreover, although the social security
grant net has been cast wider, it falls far short of reaching all those who
should receive them.

It is incredibly disturbing that the Minister of Finance describes the
expansion of the social grant net as unsustainable. The Minister seems to
consider this expansion to be merely the result of cheating. Does he not
consider that around half the population lives below the poverty line?
Given a population of some 45 million, this translates to around 23 million
poverty-stricken people, of which only 8 million – roughly one third -
receive social security grants. The Minister should not be surprised by the
expansion, but should budget for it.

Every household not elevated from poverty today will result in three or
four poor households over a generation. Malnourished and undereducated
children face almost insurmountable obstacles to eventually rise above
their poverty. They will present an even greater challenge to the fiscus in
future. The nettle must be grasped now.

Consequently, government’s claim that we cannot afford to sustain poverty
relief is unacceptable. We cannot afford not to sustain it. Pleading
inaffordability rings hollow after years of tax cuts, foregoing billions in
royalties in annual revenue through largesse to companies, the rich and
middle classes.

We do not lack the wherewithal to sustain social security. What we do lack
is the political will to find the funds to finance an adequate, holistic
social security system. The system that will allow our people to live
without fear, without want and to be treated by their government with the
care, love and compassion they deserve...

The SPEAKER: Order, order! Hon member, I’m just trying to get the hon
members to listen to you. That’s all I’m trying to do. [Laughter.] Hon
members, please lower your voices so the hon member can be heard.
[Laughter.]

Mr M STEPHENS: Can I repeat that, Madam Speaker? I conclude by indicating
that it is not enough for government to sympathise with the desperately
poor; it must put its money where its mouth is. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, hon Minister, hon members and
everyone who is watching, thank you very much. Given the limited time, I
would just like to raise two points from our party for consideration by our
hon Minister.

Firstly, the ID would like to see perhaps more tax incentives for our
professionals in South Africa. One should admit the fact that there are
lots of doctors, IT professionals and engineers leaving South Africa.

A month ago I delivered a speech, together with my fellow students, at the
Information System Department at UCT. They had a very good project where
students went to the communities – the disadvantaged groups - to give them
guidance on computer skills and so forth. They wished to do that as an
offering to the communities. Perhaps there should be some incentives for
these professionals when they graduate, such as some kind of tax relief.
That needs to be considered. I have one minute left, which is quite nice.

Secondly, as far as the relaxation of foreign exchange controls is
concerned, the ID believes that the Minister is liberalising them at a
correct pace and bit by bit, which is very nice. What we would like to see
though, is a speeding up of these steps. I always see this as a Halloween
party, because investors are like kids running to get treats.

If we can provide them with better opportunities and worth, as the hon
Fubbs mentioned earlier, a better economy, and speed up the process of
relaxing foreign exchange controls, I’m pretty sure we will boost their
confidence in South Africa and will give them better shares. I think in
that way we can create more job opportunities and a better economy. I thank
you.

Mr K D S DURR: Speaker, may I first say to Ms Taljaard that we in the
opposition liked, respected, and admired her. Her going will be a great
loss to this Parliament. [Applause]

This budget, Minister, is expansionary and focuses on growth and
development by deepening the means to achieve it, and comes with particular
locomotive projects linked to infrastructure and social services that will
trigger general development.

We will need to attract more foreign capital to augment savings. Saving
incentives and instruments such as retirement annuities, which you,
yourself, have mentioned, will have to be revisited, as well as additional
business investment spending incentives. Growth will itself attract further
foreign capital investment and in turn create employment that will in turn
expand the tax base, which will enable us to meet expanding social and
developmental needs.

A willing workforce will be vital. We will need to deregulate the labour
environment if we want the rising tied to lift all boats, even the poorest
of the poor. This is the virtuous circle and the balance needs to be
struck. I am sometimes fearful, Minister, when critics of the long-term
economic plan take too much for granted. They focus on our successes as a
nation and blame the shortcomings that we have on our successes and the
things we are doing, instead of the things that we fortunately did not do.

We cannot sacrifice the growth we have achieved thus far in pursuit of
failed policies and ideologies. The macroeconomic success has set the
scene, I believe, for a massive upliftment of South Africans from poverty
through economic growth. This country at the moment is moving into a boom,
which has the potential of lifting this nation to new heights.

We don’t want to be in circumstances for the captain to leave the bridge.
Don’t respond to the siren sounds of the private sector. We have the chance
to make this country truly great; and that chance is now. The ACDP supports
the medium-term budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMAN: Madam Speaker, Comrade Deputy President, Ministers,
comrades and hon members, the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement we are
discussing today is the first in this the third democratic Parliament. It
lays the foundation for the continued implementation of the ANC’s programme
of creating work and fighting poverty. It forms a key component of
government’s commitment to enter into a people’s contract to create work
and fight poverty.

The mandate of the Joint Budget Committee was to consider the distribution
of available resources in line with the policies and priorities of
government through engagement with national government departments. Two of
the themes covered during the hearings included rural development and urban
renewal, on the one hand, and social services on the other, which I will
focus on in this debate.

The development and renewal of the 21 rural and urban nodes form part of
the strategy of government in addressing the challenges of the second
economy.

The successful development and renewal and the long-term economic
sustainability of the identified nodes require that all involved
departments in the three spheres of government work together in a co-
ordinated manner. The respective departments should be encouraged to
indicate in their annual reports their participation in the rural and urban
nodes. In addition, they should also include their budgeted participation
in each of the nodes over the MTEF period. The nodal financing protocol,
which is currently being developed, will play an important role in speeding
up the development of these nodes.

The Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs play an important role in
the rural nodes. In particular, the Microagricultural Finance Scheme will
provide financial services to those in rural areas who need it most. A
clear operational plan needs to be put in place to ensure its success.

The Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme is not focused
solely on building physical infrastructure. It is also about improving the
lives of the people, and in particular the lives of farmworkers.

The collaboration of the Departments of Social Development and Home Affairs
to curb the fraudulent use of false identification documents is welcomed
and supported. These two departments indicated that they work jointly in
promoting access to social grants and the necessary identification
documents, birth certificates and so on. They further advised that it is
only recently that such active co-operation has come into being. Of
concern, however, is the duplication by both the national and provincial
departments in investigating whether beneficiaries are correctly receiving
social grants.

Whilst it is correct that government should ensure that only those
beneficiaries who qualify for grants receive them, it is also incumbent on
both officials in the respective departments and members of the public to
ensure that fraudulent access to grants is curbed and that such acts are
reported when they become known. Those who gain access to grants through
fraudulent means need to be dealt with harshly and must feel the full might
of the law. At the same time efforts will need to be intensified to grow
the economy and create work so that over time the number of people who rely
solely on social grants is reduced.

The actions being undertaken by the Department of Home Affairs to establish
the numbers of people without the necessary documents are supported. This
will assist in ensuring that we reach a stage where all South Africans have
the correct identification documents, enabling them to access social
services, grants and other services such as being able to open bank
accounts.

The budget allocations need to take into account the commitments made with
regard to school buildings, water, sanitation, electricity, housing, health
facilities and the comprehensive plan on HIV and Aids, as announced by
President Mbeki in this House on 21 May.

The Integrated Development Plans need to include participation from all
spheres of government. This process should not be regarded as a local
government function alone. The departmental budgeting processes must take
the IDPs into account when finalising spending priorities. We would
encourage departments to have clear spending plans in place so that last-
minute spending and roll-overs are reduced. In addition, we urge
departments to ensure that staff vacancies are filled with the correct
staff. That will help to ensure that the expenditure of government
generates quality outcomes.

Both national and provincial departments also need to ensure that amounts
owing to municipalities are paid timeously to avoid strain being placed on
the finances of local government. Effective mechanisms to monitor and
evaluate how funds transferred to provinces and local government are spent
need to be developed and put in place.

The hearings on the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement have allowed the
Joint Budget Committee to engage departments on their budgets and their
state of readiness to both implement and deliver quality services to the
peoples of our country.

Whilst we are satisfied with the state of readiness of departments in terms
of their plans, we must emphasise the need for greater co-operation and co-
ordination between departments. However, the commitment of officials and
staff in all government departments to providing quality services that will
assist in the improvement of the quality of life of our people is
imperative.

As with previous budget policy statements, commentators across the
spectrum, including minority parties here in this Parliament, have
indicated their satisfaction with the way in which the economy is being
managed and the choices being made by government.

This Medium Term Budget Policy Statement includes the commitments made in
the 2004 election manifesto of the ANC and underlines the commitment of the
ANC-led government to create work and fight poverty. We in the ANC support
the 2004 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Speaker, as in die breë na die begroting en die
Minister se prestasies oor die afgelope nege jaar gekyk word, moet die VF
Plus eerlik wees en die Minister gelukwens. Om oor die korttermyn met
sekere finansiële verstellings sukses te behaal, is veel makliker as wat
dit is om dit oor so ’n lang tydperk vol te hou.

Die VF Plus steun die Minister in sy bekommernis oor die abnormale druk wat
op die begroting geplaas word deur die groot toename in sosiale toelaes.
Meer as ‘n 30% toename in ongeskiktheids- en pleegsorgtoelaes is nie
normaal nie. Ons kan net hoop dat dit nie met die afgelope verkiesing
verband hou nie. Uit ons ervaring weet ons dat stemme met sulke toelaes
gekoop word.

Ons steun alle maatreëls om duplisering en korrupsie in die toekenning van
hierdie toelae te beperk. Suid-Afrika se belastingbasis is so klein dat ons
nie die luukse van ’n welsynstaat kan bekostig nie.

Die geld wat die regering aan die verbetering en uitbreiding van Suid-
Afrika se infrastruktuur gaan bestee, word verwelkom. Dit is ’n belegging
in toekomstige groei en versekering van toekomstige belastinginkomste.
Daarom is dit dringend nodig dat ‘n balans tussen welsynsbesteding aan die
een kant, en aan die ander kant die uitbreiding van die infrastruktuur
verkry word.

Die VF Plus is wel baie bekommerd oor senior burgers wat op ’n
verantwoordelike wyse vir hul aftrede beplan het. As gevolg van lae
rentekoerse is daar tans baie finansiële druk op hierdie persone.
Belastingtoegewings op pensioenfondse sou hierdie probleem in ’n groot mate
kon help verlig. Die Minister se belofte dat hierdie saak eers in Februarie
aangespreek sal word, is nie goed genoeg nie. Die VF Plus kan geen rede
insien waarom hierdie saak nie nou reeds volledig aangespreek kon gewees
het nie, aangesien ons dit die afgelope paar jaar al noem by elkeen van
hierdie besprekings. Van hierdie mense se finansiële posisie verswak so
vinnig dat hulle nou ’n las vir die staat kan word.

Die VF Plus wil by die regering daarop aandring dat die geld wat vir
plaaslike besture begroot word - ek dink dit is R 2000 miljard - onder baie
streng kontrole bestee moet word. Hierdie geld durf nie vir die verhoging
van salarisse, veral van plaaslike bestuurders, gebruik te word nie, maar
eerder vir beter munisipale dienste. Die meeste van hierdie bestuurders se
salarisse is reeds buite verhouding met die res.

En ek wil tog die Minister gelukwens met sy vermaning  onlangs  in  KwaZulu-
Natal waar hy nie gehuiwer het om mense aan te spreek wat hierdie  abnormale
salarisse kry op daardie vlak nie. Ek  dank  u.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Speaker, if we take a general  look  at  the  budget
and at the Minister’s achievements over the past  ten  years,  the  FF  Plus
must be honest and  congratulate  the  Minister.  To  achieve  success  with
certain financial adjustments over the short term is much easier than it  is
to maintain this record over such a long period.

The FF Plus shares  the  Minister’s  concern  about  the  abnormal  pressure
exerted on the budget by the large increase in social  grants.  An  increase
of over 30% in disability and foster care grants is not normal. We can  only
hope that this bears no relation  to  the  recent  election.  We  know  from
experience that such grants are used to buy votes.

We support all measures taken to prevent duplication and corruption  in  the
allocation of these grants. South Africa’s tax base is too  small  to  allow
for the luxury of a welfare state.

We welcome the money the government is going to  spend  on  the  improvement
and extension of South Africa’s  infrastructure.  It  is  an  investment  in
future growth and ensures future tax revenue. It  is  therefore  of  crucial
importance to achieve a balance between welfare expenditure on the one  hand
and infrastructure expansion on the other.

Nonetheless, the FF Plus is very concerned about senior  citizens  who  have
provided for their retirement in a responsible way. These  people  currently
experience a lot of financial pressure on account  of  low  interest  rates.
Tax relief on pension funds could help  to  ease  this  burden  to  a  great
extent. The Minister’s promise that this matter will only  be  addressed  in
February is not good enough. The FF Plus can see no reason why  this  matter
should not have been dealt with comprehensively  at  this  stage,  since  we
have raised it at each of these discussions over the  past  few  years.  The
financial situation of some of these people is now deteriorating at  such  a
rate that they may soon become a burden to the state.

The FF Plus urges the government to ensure that the resources  allocated  to
local authorities – I believe it amounts to  about  R2  000  billion  –  are
spent under very strict supervision. This money dare not be used for  salary
increases,  particularly  for  municipal  managers,  but  rather   for   the
improvement of municipal services. The salaries of most  of  these  managers
are already disproportionate to the rest.

And yet I wish to  congratulate  the  Minister  on  his  recent  warning  in
KwaZulu-Natal, where he did not hesitate to address  people  receiving  such
abnormal salaries at that level. I thank you.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Madam Speaker and hon members, the 2004 Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement is tabled at a time when South Africa has shown improved
performance of 3,3% in the first half of the year, after a slowdown in 2003
when the Gross Domestic Product fell to around 2%.

The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement emphasises the commitment of this
government to a policy framework that supports economic growth and
development and improves the quality of life by reducing poverty. The
spending priorities include the stabilising of social security grants.

The UCDP hopes that employees charged with this responsibility will
exercise their duties with honesty, while the department will also be on
the look out and not abdicate its responsibility to control the funds
allocated for this purpose. The time has come for the aged, the infirm, the
poor and all vulnerable groups, such as orphans, to be treated with the
utmost respect and love.

All are aware that the deadline for finalising the land distribution
programme is 2005. Funds for this purpose have been made available in the
Budget Policy Statement and it is hoped that all involved claimants, those
on the land and government, will play open cards so that when the programme
is wound down energies may be directed to other programmes.

Attention has been given, this time, to improving the salaries of the
police and educators. This will surely boost the sagging morale in the
ranks of these public servants, most of whom are already suffering from
stress-related illnesses.

The budget is directed at addressing a whole range of issues in the
provision of and access to education. The nightmare of children being
taught under trees is soon to be a thing of the past. Further, Education
and Training is set to be realigned to meet the needs of the present day.
We hope that the additional funding for the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme will be able to meet the needs of all the students.

May we make this special call to Water Affairs and Forestry to use the top-
up funding provided to them to provide water and sanitation to people. It
is very unfortunate to see people queuing up for water at a communal tap in
a neighbouring residential area because there is no water at their homes,
as is the case in the Lehurutshe area.

As the budget stands, it is a real attempt to address the social and
economic needs of the country. The UCDP supports the Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers and colleagues,
poverty alleviation, social development and a better South Africa are what
our budget serves most of all, to suffice.

It is most encouraging to note the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement’s
positive macroeconomic intentions. The MF takes this opportunity to thank
the hon Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel, and the department for once
again devising a suitable strategy reflective of government’s ambition of
job creation and poverty alleviation.

In view of the medium term expenditure, the MF is pleased with the budget
and policy framework for 2005 that aims at increasing disability and foster
care grants, and salaries of the police and educators; speeding up land
restitution, housing, quality of schooling, health services, as well as
expanding the capacity of water resource management.

The division of revenue amongst spheres has been adequately devised and
sufficiently delegated. However, the MF shares the concern that our social
security net is under strain and that the rapid growth in grant
applications is a major contributor to this. We support the aim to reduce
dependence on social grants, and the increase in employment and the
potential of the economy regarding alleviation of poverty. Further, the
issues of savings and investment need to be earnestly addressed. The MF
supports putting a greater dent in unemployment to attain our desired
annual growth rate.

In terms of the MTBPs, the MF is pleased and hopes that we shall attain our
ends. However, the MF wants the South African citizenry to realise that our
economy and our advancement extend beyond government’s responsibility. The
MF encourages all South Africans to embark on strategies to alleviate
poverty, strengthen our economy and create jobs in order to secure a better
South Africa for all. Once again, we thank you, hon Minister. The MF
supports the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Madam Speaker, Azapo agrees that there are now signs
of some minimum economic growth and job creation in some economic sectors.
Having said this, the questions we should ask ourselves are: Can the
champions of capital sustain the jobs that are being created? Which economy
has experienced economic growth - the first or the second economy?

These questions are important, in view of the fact that champions of
capital create jobs to expand the wealth that they accumulate for
themselves, not for the rest of our society. In fact, the champions of
capital have, despite having had a better economic environment in the new
society and despite having increased their wealth, created very few jobs
over the past years – let alone the fact that they still refuse to invest
in areas that service the people of the second economy.

The reluctance to invest in townships and rural areas as well as not making
funds available for residents of these areas does not change the inherited
economic inequalities. Azapo would like economic growth to be accompanied
by economic changes within the second economy and sustainable job creation
in rural areas. We would like the Setas to train people not only to queue
for the next available job at the mercy of the champions of capital, but
also to train people to be creators of jobs themselves.

Azapo believes that the prerequisite for economic development for people
who depend on the second economy for their livelihood is a programme that
is geared towards making them champions of their own destiny as well as
creating their own jobs. Unfortunately, the training by some Setas, to a
large extent, has tended to focus on training people to queue for jobs
rather than making them job creators for their own ends. I thank you.

Dr S C CWELE: Somlomo, uKhongolose uyayixhasa le nqubomgomo yesabiwomali
sale minyaka emithathu ezayo. [Madam Speaker, the ANC supports the budget
policy framework of the next three years.]

Years of apartheid continue to haunt us with gross inequalities,
underdevelopment and unemployment. This budget is an important instrument
to implement government policy of a better life for all. The developmental
state seeks to build a single integrated competitive and growing economy
that encourages and absorbs greater participation of and benefit to all
South Africans. It also seeks to confront the injustices of the past and
protect the vulnerable by creating safety nets through social transfers.

We further agree with the words of the President in May this year in this
House that the goal of ensuring a better life for all of our people also
rests on increasing the capacity of the state, and ensuring that the public
sector renders services to our people as a critical player in the process
of growth, reconstruction and development of our country.

Our economy is on a growth path under stable macroeconomic conditions and
this brings a real possibility of job creation in the first economy. Public
investments are being realised in the parastatals and through government
programmes such as the Expanded Public Works Programme. In the medium term,
R16,6 billion will be spent on the creation of sustainable human
settlements. The broad-based black economic empowerment is a critical
programme for addressing the challenge of racial and gender inequalities,
and disempowerment of the vulnerable groups.

The learnership and internship programmes are on course. In the Public
Service Seta there are over 4 000 learnership programmes for the unemployed
youth. More than 500 community development workers have been trained and
about 3 000 interns have been deployed to the Public Service in national
and provincial departments. Further positive outcomes have arisen from
departments who have recruited some of these interns to fill vacancies in
the areas of scarce skills.

We have to finalise the implementation of the financing protocol for the
Expanded Public Works Programme in order to co-ordinate the financing of
these programmes by three spheres of government and different departments.
The finalisation of the public property asset register is also urgent.

The ANC welcomes the development of capacity to monitor and evaluate the
implementation of comprehensive government programmes in the Presidency.
This unit identifies the impediments and institutes quick interventions
before they cause the failure of a programme.

Somlomo, sibonga futhi nohlelo lokuqinisa ohulumeni basekhaya olubizwa
ngokuthi i-Project Consolidate olumenyezelwe uMongameli ngesonto eledlule.
Lolu hlelo luzogxila ekuthuthukisweni kwemiphakathi; ekuqiniseni ukusebenza
komasipala; ekuqaleni uhlelo olusha oludidiyele lokwakha izindlu nezizinda
zokuhlala; ekusizeni abantulayo ngezidingongqangi ezinjengamanzi nogesi;
ekuqiniseni ukuthi izinhlelo zokuthuthukisa imiphakathi ziqonde ukwakha
imisebenzi; nokwakha izinhlelo zokwazisa imiphakathi ngokwenziwa uhulumeni.
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[Madam Speaker, we are also grateful for the programme to strengthen local
government, called Project Consolidate, announced by the President last
week. This programme will focus on developing the communities;
strengthening the working of municipalities; starting the new integrated
programme of building houses and shelter; helping the destitute with
necessities such as water and electricity;  making sure that the programmes
of community development are meant to create jobs; and also on developing
programmes that will enable people to know about what the government is
doing.]

The President reminded us earlier this year that economic growth not only
depends on the macroeconomic stability but even more on political and
social stability, as there can be no human development and progress under
conditions of lawlessness and war.

The ANC welcomes the progress made in the establishment of the protection
and security division in the SAPS that will, among other things, bear the
responsibility of protecting national key points. The current pilot
projects are at Johannesburg International Airport, Cape Town rail
transport security, Durban Harbour, Beit Bridge border gate and in all High
Courts.

We welcome the efforts that are directed at improving the administration of
the courts, access to justice and transformation of the judiciary. More
efforts are needed to deal with case backlogs and alternative sentencing.
We need to speed up progress in dealing with the challenge of overcrowding
in our correctional facilities. While the Department of Defence reported
some spending pressures in the military health services, they will get
additional funding for peace operations, repairs and maintenance of defence
facilities and integration of corvettes and submarines.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that despite initial challenges, we are on
track in the implementation of the people’s contract to create work and
fight poverty. There is a need for a greater co-ordination of both action
and purpose in the implementation of these programmes. The challenge is for
this Parliament and its committees to play a meaningful role in mobilising
communities to participate in their development, and ensure effective and
relevant oversight. In this way, we may unite the nation to unleash an
attack on poverty and underdevelopment. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, firstly, I would
like to express my sincere appreciation to hon Nene and all hon members of
the Joint Budget Committee.

I think what we’ve heard here this afternoon reflects a particular point in
the discourse and economical development, and I want to commend the Budget
Committee for the maturity with which they’ve handled the report, not only
as tabled in the house here, but also in the engagement with the various
committees. It is reflected in the way in which this debate has been
handled.

There’s broad agreement on the challenge of democracy and I think that is
to be encouraged, because we are not turning the economy and the challenges
of democracy; it is something that we want to fight about in the House. The
gist of the debate focuses on the means to address the second economy and,
of course, there will be some disagreements in the margin but they must be
seen as disagreements in respect of the detailed implementation rather than
a disagreement about the need to get there as soon as we possibly can.

With regard to some of the issues that were raised in the course of the
debate - firstly the deficit and, again, an appreciation of why the deficit
is enlarged - I think we share the concern of those members who raised a
concern about the quality of the deficit. It’s important that we remind
ourselves that when deficits arise, they should primarily be for expansion
in areas of infrastructure and an expansion of the opportunities for future
growth.

On the issues of infrastructure, again, there is broad agreement and we
appreciate that. The issues of the triggers for growth and jobs were raised
and, again, whether through the private sector or through the Expanded
Public Works Programme, those issues are appreciated. I disagree with those
who’d say that we have jobless growth. We don’t have jobless growth, as the
Labour Force Survey reflects. We aren’t creating sufficient employment, but
it’s not akin to jobless growth.

On the issues of social security transfers, there was a useful debate and I
abstract the comments of the hon Stephens and the hon Schneemann. I think
what we said in the House when we tabled the Medium Term Budget Policy
Statement, which we will say again, is that the fact that poverty exists in
South Africa is not a secret, but we must prevent the social security
system from being abused by people who violate the law.

The concern that we expressed about the disability grants is that many
people who are getting them are not entitled to them. We have
responsibilities as South Africans, as members and as elected
representatives of our people to ensure that those who are entitled should
get them. However, we must at the same time close the system to abuse.
That’s what I’d like to believe is a collective responsibility, and I think
the hon Mulder touched on that issue.

In respect of the issue of pension funds, of course, it remains an ongoing
concern. About 10 days ago Nedlac, as one of its commitments made in the
Growth and Development Summit, had a full day’s debate on the issue of
pension fund trusteeship and, I suppose, under the broad rubric of trying
to preserve for pensioners what they’ve invested as a nest egg.

Tomorrow, the Portfolio Committee on Finance will deal with a very
important subject for discussion, which relates to a report by an actuary,
Dr Rusconi, who did a Ph D thesis on the fees charged by insurance
companies for retirement annuities. So, when we look at the issue of
taxation, I think what we shouldn’t lose sight of is the horrendous fee
that is taken by the institutions from people who frequently find
themselves in positions where they actually have less than what they paid
into their funds.

We’ve got to deal with these issues together, and the two papers that the
Treasury is preparing will deal with both sides - the taxation and also the
need for transparency in the form of respective retirement funds.

I’d hoped that the committee would reflect - and, certainly, members would
have reflected a bit more - on two issues that we raised when introducing
the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. The one is the intergovernmental
system – very prominent, now that Minister Mufamadi has tabled the
Intergovernmental Relations Bill – and also one of the other issues that we
dealt with, which is the capacity of the state. That is something that we
need to ensure that we can continue discussing.

In conclusion, in expressing my appreciation to all members, I’d like to
express a special tribute to the hon Taljaard, whose contributions to the
debate this afternoon I’m responding to for the last time in this House. I
would imagine that the debate between her and I would continue in different
forums publicly, but in this House it’s the last opportunity.
[Interjections.] I want to pay tribute to her for the role she’s played as
a member of the Portfolio Committee on Finance. [Applause.]
I think that, either notwithstanding or because of her youth, she
demonstrated both the curiosity and the confidence that she drew from
Bertrand Russell, this afternoon. I think that it’s very important;
notwithstanding the disagreements we’ve had on issues. They’ve been on
issues and have never been on personalities. I think that her role in the
committee and in this House has defined what I would consider responsible
opposition. This House will be the poorer for your absence. Raenette, thank
you very much for the role that you’ve played here. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.




                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I introduced the Revenue
Laws Amendment Bill on 26 October. The Joint Tagging Mechanism has reviewed
the Bill and is of the view that it does not meet the requirements for a
money Bill in the light of the large number of administrative provisions
contained therein, such as those related to the advanced tax ruling system
and the registration of tax practitioners. This arises primarily because of
amendments to section 77 of the Constitution.

The Bill is therefore being split and I hereby table the Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill, [B24-2004], which excludes these provisions. The second
Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, [B25-2004], contains the remaining provisions
of the original Bill. Members will be relieved to know that the two Bills
are the equivalent of the original Bill, barring some minor corrections. It
seems a good lawyer will always find something to tweak when the
opportunity presents itself.

Deputy Speaker, I hereby introduce the two new Revenue Laws Amendment
Bills.

Bill referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.


CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE ON MEDIUM TERM BUDGET
POLICY STATEMENT


There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

    That the Report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

Mrs R R JOEMAT: Madam Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and hon members, we
are asked to consider a request for funds for the 2004-05 financial year.
These funds are in addition to those appropriated in the Main Estimate that
was tabled in Parliament this year.

This process before us is a normal procedure in any government worldwide. A
budget is approved but during that financial year, needs arise. The budget
is then adjusted upwards, downwards or priorities of spending are shifted.
These adjusted estimates fall within the ambit of the well-known Public
Financial Management Act which generally gives guidelines to government
regarding financial management.

Section 30 of the PFMA allows adjustments to the Budget under specific
conditions, namely, significant economic and financial events affecting
fiscal targets, unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure, emergency
situations in terms of section 16 of the PFMA, expenditure already
announced in the Budget Speech, shifting of funds between and within Votes
in terms of section 42, virement between main divisions within Votes in
terms of section 43, and roll-overs of unspent funds from the preceding
financial year.

With the PFMA in place a much clearer picture emerges and spending
patterns, delivery and accountability can be monitored. The subtotal of the
adjustment before us is, in fact, R7, 8 billion. We then deduct the R3, 5
billion contingency reserves and also deduct the projected savings of R1, 4
billion, bringing the final total to R2, 8 billion that we need to approve.

The majority in this House agrees to the broad outline of this Bill before
us. Therefore, I will not debate each issue that constitutes the amount
that needs to be appropriated. When the Minister tabled this Bill he
outlined the framework for the allocation as indicated in the Bill. I would
like to extract only certain issues under the categories of unforeseen and
unavoidable expenditure, emergency situations, roll-overs and unspent
funds.

The municipal and rates backlog is an example of the unforeseen and
unavoidable expenditure. An amount of R599 million is being allocated to
settle a long-outstanding claim from the Department of Provincial and Local
Government for rates owed to certain municipalities on properties owned by
the state. We would encourage the Department of Public Works to ensure that
the payments for services are done according to the agreements with the
municipalities. We cannot only advocate and promote the Masakhane campaign
to encourage payment for services, we and the departments must lead by
example.

One of the unavoidable expenditure items is that of the Department of Trade
and Industry. The department has R500 million for the Pebble Bed Modular
Reactor Programme. The PBMR company was unsuccessful in securing external
financing, but wants to secure the socio-economic benefit that this project
will bring in developing a low-cost and safe nuclear option to generate
electricity. It will include local industrialisation of component
manufacture and significant job creation. The PBMR is a new type of high
temperature, helium-gas-cooled nuclear reactor.

The first phase of the project, which comprised a detailed feasibility
study and environmental impact assessment has been finalised. The EIA
reports were submitted to the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. The reports available regarding this project are promising. But
we, as government, must take the responsibility to do oversight on these
new types of projects to ensure that they have no negative impact on the
health of our people and that the environment is protected as well.

Two hundred million rand has been allocated to the Department of Land
Affairs to settle targeted land restitution claims in line with the
presidential directive to settle all claims by the year 2005.

Section 30 of the PFMA, I refer specifically to 16 (1), outlines the use of
funds in emergency situations. An amount of R100 million will be used for
drought relief, drilling new and reactivating old boreholes, and purchasing
and transporting fodder to assist farmers in affected drought-stricken
areas.

Regarding provincial and local government, approximately R280 million has
been allocated and should be transferred and then administered by provinces
and local authorities that have been affected by the drought in order to
bring relief to these areas. This allocation is mainly directed
specifically at water for human consumption.

Regarding provincial adjustments, R4,1 billion needs to be distributed to
provinces to provide for the shortfall in social grants that amounts to
R3,27 billion mainly for the disability grant. An adjustment of R847
million will take into account the final outcome of salary negotiations.
Those who will benefit from this salary negotiation can also adjust their
budgets accordingly.

Finally, the roll-over of unspent funds can be divided into two categories:
savings and underspending. The main saving of R1 billion came through the
favourable rate of exchange. Unspent funds from previous years and delays
in delivery schedules resulted in this saving on the strategic defence
package. This is but a general outline of the Bill.

I am sure I speak for all members in the finance committee and wish to
express our appreciation to the Minister of Finance and the National
Treasury for the informed documentation of the adjusted Estimates. We
sometimes do not realise the amount of time and quality of work that is put
into the preparation of these heavy maroon books that we receive, but we do
want to assure them that we appreciate it.

We will always be guided by the Freedom Charter, which says, “The people
shall share in the country’s wealth’’. The ANC supports the Bill.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, hon members, expenditure
provided for by the adjustment of the Appropriation Bill includes the roll-
over of unspent funds from the preceding financial year, unforeseeable and
unavoidable expenditure recommended by the executive, and utilisation of
savings under the main division of a Vote for the defrayment of excess
expenditure. Other aspects are the shifting of funds between and within
Votes, adjustments required due to significant and unforeseeable economic
and financial events affecting fiscal targets set by the annual budget, and
any funds required for emergency situations.

A summary of the adjustments for 2004-05 is appropriations amounting to
R150 million and other allocated funds of R1 billion. Other aspects are
approved roll-overs of R2 billion, additional allocations for unforeseeable
and unavoidable expenditure of R1,6 billion, and the drought-relief of
R4,30 million. Self-financing expenditure amounts to R165 million and black
economic empowerment, R150 million. The DA supports this Bill.

The Adjustments Appropriation Bill must be seen against a significant
improvement in the general performance of the South African economy. The
GDP growth increased to an annualised rate of 3,3% in the first half of
2004. The Medium Term Expenditure Framework for 2005 to 2007 anticipates
GDP growth of up to 4% over the corresponding three-year period. My
personal opinion is that the average annual growth rate of 4% is not
adequate. In order to alleviate the present official unemployment rate of
almost 30%, a growth of at least 6% is required. Allow me to mention that a
number of emerging economies have attained this particular figure.

Economic indications are favourable to economic growth. Our consumer price
index inflation is 4,4% despite a sharp rise in the price of crude oil.
Consumer and business confidence is positive, with real interest rates at
their lowest level in 30 years. The rand rose by 8,2% during the first half
of the year due to a weaker US dollar and high commodity prices. Our gross
domestic expenditure rose by 5,7% in the first half of this financial year
which will, in turn, lead to an increase in revenue.

The Appropriation Bill expenditure is also closely interlinked with section
30 of the Public Finance Management Act. What is of concern, however, is
that social services at present absorb nearly 60% of government
expenditure. To cite one example, the disability grant of R740,00 a month
is received by 1,3 million people. This figure doubled over the last two
years. The latest adjustments in the minibudget bring welfare spending this
year to R4,57 billion. It’s calculated that this figure will rise to R6,46
billion in the forthcoming three years. Seen in the light of future
escalating welfare costs, it is necessary that a balance be retained
between the state’s spending on welfare and economic programmes that could
stimulate future economic growth.

Hon Minister, when you appeared before the finance committee, you expressed
concern regarding the possible misuse and the exploitation of individuals
regarding child support and foster grants. Hon Minister, the DA supports
your concern and appeals to all role-players and departments to enable all
eligible beneficiaries to participate in the welfare system. No stone
should, however, be left unturned in identifying those individuals that
defraud and corrupt the welfare system.

Despite the past four years of rising welfare grants, the levels of poverty
have remained unacceptably high. The Financial Mail of October 2004
mentioned that a staggering 57% of our population live below the poverty
line. For a household of four, this means an income of under R1 300 per
month.

The best way out of this vicious circle of poverty is education to enable
individuals to apply the necessary skills. Public funds are limited. It is
in the national interest that national and provincial inspectors who
investigate whether beneficiaries of grants qualify see to it that they do
not duplicate costs. During a submission to the Joint Budget Committee, it
was mentioned that the province of KwaZulu-Natal spent R80 million in the
past year on investigating corruption regarding grants.

A colleague and friend has just made a farewell speech on behalf of the DA.
Allow me to thank Raenette - it was a privilege to work with you for six
years. Raenette made positive contributions in debates and committees. She
is hard-working, loyal and prepared to do hard work; qualities that made
her an outstanding parliamentarian.

Raenette is ’n dame met geen bang haar op haar kop nie. Sy is bereid om
standpunt in te neem en daarby te staan. Raenette, ons in die DA gaan jou
mis. Ons gaan kontak met jou behou en jou verdere loopbaan met groot
belangstelling volg. Dit is my bede dat die Goeie Gewer jou sal behoed en
bewaar. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Raenette is an absolutely fearless lady. She is willing to take a stand
and stick to it. Raenette, we in the DA are going to miss you.  We are
going to keep in contact with you and follow your future career with great
interest. It is my prayer that the Good Provider will guard and protect
you.]

Usebenze kahle, Raenette. [You did your work very well, Raenette.]

Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the adjustments budget allows for
adjustments due to several factors such as significant economic and
financial events affecting physical targets, unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure, emergency situations in terms of section 16 of the Public
Finance Management Act, shifting of funds between and within Votes in terms
of section 43 of the PFMA, movements between main divisions within Votes in
terms of section 43, and the roll over of unspent funds from the preceding
financial year.

The IFP is, however, concerned about the R599 million adjustments in
municipal services and the rates backlog which is attributed to weaknesses
in the administration. The IFP welcomes the R165,4 million self-financing
expenditure by seven departments and also the declared savings by the
Department of Defence, National Treasury and others. The IFP supports the
R200 million adjustments for land restitution to address rural claims. The
IFP therefore supports the Bill. [Applause.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of my party, allow me also to say to the
hon Taljaard:

Hamba kahle ntombazane! Usikhonzele phambili. [Ihlombe.] [Go well, young
lady! Our greetings go to those who will work with you in future.
[Applause.]]

Mr Y WANG: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and members, the ID supports
the Bill in general but we do have some concerns with some departments,
mainly Health, Defence, Provincial and Local Government, Labour, and the
Department of Trade and Industry. There are actually quite a few concerns,
but I only have 30 seconds left and that time is not enough. So we will
leave some questions for the second part of the consideration. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

Mr K D S DURR: Madam Speaker, Minister, now you see me, now you don’t - one
minute. The great General Erwin Rommel once said that no plan survives a
battle, and that is also true of budgets. A few years ago underspending was
a great problem. Now it seems seven of the nine provinces overspent their
welfare budgets last year thus inducing a squeeze, often on education
budgets when education is the one avenue through which an escape from
welfarism and poverty is possible. We must beware of not being a nation at
welfare but a nation at work.

The figures are alarming and we are on an unsustainable growth path. We
noticed the additional R40 million for improving the integrity of the grant
system, particularly for implementing immediate steps to stem unwarranted
and fraudulent growth in the programme. But, of course, we have to
understand that much of the stability that we have enjoyed in South Africa
has been because of our well-developed social security system, and it must
be right that we police and administer the scheme better. I must caution,
however: Those of us that have been active in the constituencies will know
that we have been through reregistration at least once before recently. It
causes tremendous problems for the disabled, particularly the mentally
disabled who cannot do anything for themselves.

Often reregistration results in months of evaluation delays, with payments
suspended. This forces the disabled to borrow money - sometimes at high
interest rates - from microlenders to stay alive. When payment resumes,
they don’t take into account the payments withheld. It would be better to
target particular categories and areas of concern, and to do the rest with
selected random inspections. [Time Expired.] Because of the improvements,
the ACDP supports the Budget.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Motlotlegi Motlatsa-Sebui, le ditokololo tse di
tlotlegang, ditekanyetso tse di tlhabolotsweng tse tsa ngwaga o, di supa fa
e le gore go ikaelelwa go bakanyetsa dintlha dingwe tse di neng di saletse
kwa morago jaaka di ne di atlanegisiwa ke khuduthamaga. [Hon Deputy Speaker
and hon members, the revised Budget for this year shows the intention to
accelerate where a backlog was experienced, as the executive outlined it.]

This exercise is also meant to seek authority to utilise savings, shift
funds between and within Votes and money that was presented earlier in the
year. It is encouraging that, among other things, black economic
empowerment has been allocated R150 million and drought relief R430
million.

These two allocations will be helpful to those who need help. More blacks
will go into the mainstream economy, while the vulnerable and the
unemployed will be assisted through drought relief projects in an effort to
dispel and repel poverty from the peoples’ doorsteps.

The Adjustments Appropriation Bill will come in handy for members of
Parliament as some R11,993 million meant for their remuneration had been
inadvertently allocated under Administration but has since been redirected,
thanks to this exercise. The R48,182 million roll-over in Education will
assist in inter alia meeting the educational needs of victims identified in
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission process. Surely there could be no
better use for this money. [Time expired.] The UCDP supports the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Speaker, hon members, in full confidence, we passed
the initial Budget Votes for this financial year. Therefore, we must be
consulted when funds are shifted around and the approval of applications
for additional funds is given. The masses of our country have entrusted us
as trustees of state resources and we must not fail them.

The PAC of Azania is extremely aggrieved by people who misappropriate state
funds at any  given opportunity. It becomes a bigger disappointment when
these are people who were entrusted with positions of responsibility. In
the Free State, in Lejweleputswa district, a construction company was paid
R5 million for building only 6 toilets out of the total required.

You must agree with me that our country has a big backlog in development
and cannot afford to lose money through bad financial practices. The PAC
approves the Bill.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The MF supports the
changes that the Adjustments Appropriation Bill serves to accommodate.
Section 32 of the Public Finance Management Act caters and provides for
adjustment of appropriation. In view of the central government
administration most of the sectors have been given an increase, but there
is a decrease regarding Parliament. We would like to know why.

For the financial and administrative services sectors a valued increase is
noted and a decrease in Statistics SA is noted. Further, a valued increase
to social services is acknowledged and it is hoped that it will be utilised
effectively and efficiently for the benefit of the sector. In terms of
justice and protection services, we kindly request substantiation for the
large decrease in defence. As for economic services and infrastructure
development, we question the decrease in housing, noting the shortage and
need in this sector.

The MF supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill and looks forward to the
Estimates of National Expenditure to substantiate most of the above. The MF
also takes this opportunity to wish our colleague, the hon Taljaard, the
best in her future. We enjoyed your debates as well and we hope you will
have all success. Thank you very much. [Applause.]
Mr B A MNGUNI: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Ministers and colleagues, as
already outlined by colleagues, this is a normal, yearly budgetary exercise
to make good where there were shortfalls in the Budget and to redirect
resources to places where they are needed most.
As you are all aware, this is a very transparent process that enables any
member of the public to voice his/her views about the reallocation of these
resources and it is this House that finally takes decisions on the matter.

Further, transparency in the use of public funds is enhanced by a multiyear
budgeting process in which projected government revenue and spending for
three subsequent years is made public for anyone to see. As the Medium Term
Expenditure Framework is a model, it is bound to have some deficiencies in
one way or the other. That is why we have these adjustments today.

What we must take note of is the commitment of Cabinet and government at
large to accountability and transparency with which it is handling public
resources and thus accountability to the people who lay their trust on us.
In real terms we need to approve only R2, 8 billion because R2, 5 billion
of the adjustments is contingency reserves that were budgeted for before.
And there is R1 billion that was unallocated funds.

According to percentages, the amount of R2, 8 billion only amounts to
0,759%. Now, regarding any model, whether spatial or economic, since this
model has still to be refined towards perfection, an error of less than 1%
is not bad at all. In fact, in my view, 0,759% is negligible. We might say
we are almost approaching zero tolerance as far as budget projections are
concerned.

We know that from time to time the opposition likes to argue that there is
no capacity to spend at local and provincial government levels and that
there is corruption, and so on. The fact is that this government is
fighting corruption by all means and at all levels. Colleagues must be
aware that you cannot fight corruption in one fell swoop. There are
officials who are not there to serve the people, but who are there to line
their own pockets. So, it is such people who should take note that to be in
the Public Service is a calling rather than a profession, because you went
there to serve the needs of the people.

These adjustments indicate the level of commitment in fighting poverty and
unemployment by the ANC-led government. In this case I would like to quote
the Minister of Finance at a senior management services conference held on
21 September here in Cape Town when he said:

  The two main thrusts of the budget of a developing state must be how much
  the state spends fighting poverty and deprivation and how much of the
  country’s resources go towards expanding economic opportunities of all
  citizens.

In order to fulfil these commitments, government has allocated, amongst
other things, R500 million to DTI for the pebble-bed modular reactor plant
that has a potential of creating 56 000 direct and indirect job
opportunities in the Western Cape.

The challenge we are facing is a negative perception held by the public
regarding nuclear power. In most cases, it is associated with hazardous
nuclear waste that is not properly disposed of, or people associate it with
the Chernobyl incident in Russia in 1986, where a reactor exploded and
killed a lot of people. The public has to know that this is one of the
cleanest and safest methods of generating electricity without the tons and
tons of carbon dioxide emissions that are generated from burning fuel
fossils.

Another spin-off that we see today is the R1 billion that has been saved
from the strategic defence package, and also the other spin-offs that are
coming from this package from which, today, there are some jobs that have
been created.

Today the social budget is more than 60%. Colleagues have said we must
remember that we have a state that is developmental, where health and
social development are the highest expenditures. We are faced with a lot of
unemployment. Therefore the government is forced to take care of all those
people who are unemployed, otherwise they will go to bed hungry without any
food and that will, at the end of the day, increase the level of crime, and
so forth. When we talk of underexpenditure we should qualify it with the
level of skills shortages we are facing in the public sector and the
absorption of skilled personnel into the private sector.

I usually say to the opposition that suffice it to say - without being
nasty to the opposition – that they should acknowledge the consequences of
the negative effect of their past policies and start doing the right thing
when the time allows them to do so. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL





                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)


The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proceedings will initially take the form of a
question-and-answer session. I shall put each Vote in turn, whereupon
members will have the opportunity to put questions to the relevant
Ministers. Hon members should please wait until I recognise them before
putting their question.

I’ve just been advised that I should go through the time that you have. The
ANC has 34 minutes. The DA has nine minutes, the IFP five, the UDM three,
the ID three, the NNP three, the ACDP three, the FF Plus three, the PAC
three, the UCDP three, the MF three and Azapo also has three minutes.

Vote No 1 – Presidency – put.

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – put.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Dr C P MULDER: Deputy Speaker, I’ll put the first question to the hon
Minister. In the additional budget provision has been made to the amount of
R23,8 million for unforeseen and unavoidable expenditure. We were told
during the last election that it was very expensive to enable voters to
vote overseas. However, I don’t see any amount that provided for this in
the additional budget.

There is R1,589 million that has specifically been allocated for the cost
of allowing prisoners to vote, but I don’t see any amount for people from
abroad, South African citizens. How was this achieved? Was it already
provided for, or was it not that expensive?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, the money allocated by the
adjusted estimate was indeed unforeseen expenditure, money which was
provided to the IEC in order for it to prepare for the elections and to
allow the prisoners to vote.

Yes, you are right. There was no money allocated for people to vote abroad.
We did not ask for such money, because we did not make provision for them,
because in principle there was no agreement on the matter. We could not
provide for that, as no political decision was taken for people who were
abroad to vote. So, we couldn’t allocate such money, because there was no
political decision taken for South African citizens abroad to vote.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to ask the Minister a question
based on the question that was asked by the member over there: Do we have
to put a lot of infrastructure in place and spend a lot of money to allow
people to vote overseas? During the last elections it was just a waste. In
fact, less than 3 000 people exercised their right to vote overseas. Is it
necessary for us to continue to allocate money for that particular task?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, no, hon Chauke, it’s not necessary,
precisely because we have not taken that decision that South Africans who
are abroad during the time of elections should vote, unless they are South
Africans who, of course, are there because they are deployed by the State
to be there. But South Africans who go there for their own leisure or on
business, we’ve not taken that kind of decision, as a government in power,
that they should actually be provided for to vote. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Deputy Chairperson, I was not going to pursue the matter
further, but seeing that the hon Mr Chauke made the point, I’ll have to
pursue it further. Hon Minister, you are not correct. We have amended the
Act to make it possible for South African citizens who are abroad to vote
under certain circumstances. The point I’m making is that despite that fact
you have not made any provisions in these adjustments to pay for those
expenses. And, unlike Mr Chauke from the ANC, I believe that it’s the right
of each and every citizen, regardless of how many, that they should be
allowed to vote. They are citizens and they are entitled to vote.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chair, I heard Dr Mulder saying, ``certain
specific circumstances’’. We did provide for specific circumstances, and in
this case we are talking about people deployed by the South African
government in their missions abroad. We did provide for that. We also
talked about soldiers who are deployed, for instance, in Burundi and we did
provide for that.

So, what circumstances are we talking about? Are we talking about people
who are sent abroad by their companies? It is not government that send
these people on business during that time. We did provide for those people
who were sent abroad by our government and who were deployed during that
time. [Applause.]


Vote No 5 - Provincial and Local Government - put.

Mr L M GREEN: Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, R3,4 million has been rolled
over to complete a reconstruction project in a declared disaster area, due
to delays caused by the involvement of the local communities in the
project. We commend the Department for Provincial and Local Government for
involving the local community, but will the department assist to empower
local communities with the needed project management skills to ensure that
reconstruction projects will be completed on time? I thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, the department will.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Hon Minister, in view of the fact that the Cabinet has
taken the decision to shift the programme from sports to local government
on building for sports, would the department consider ringfencing that
particular vote to make sure that that money is used to build facilities
for sports?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, Madam Deputy
Speaker. [Laughter.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Hon Minister, a number of local municipalities nationally
are unable to provide efficient services due to a number of factors. Do you
think the funds allocated to you will improve the situation?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister is out of order, he was not asked to
respond yet. The hon Minister.

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Yes, Madam Speaker.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just want to make it clear that you are not limited
by the 34 minutes of the ANC.

Mr A HARDING: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. This question does not
require the simple yes or no. [Laughter.] Can the hon Minister please
explain to the House why the funds to the Municipal Demarcation Board, to
finalise ward boundaries in view of the impending national local government
election, was so late?

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT:  Yes, the Municipal
Demarcation Board is within schedule as far as the delimitation of
municipal boundaries is concerned, and the resources which has been
allocated for this purpose in the view of government is adequate.

Vote 6 - Public Works - put:

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Likotsi, I do not know whether you still have time
left but I will be advised. Please do not exhaust your three minutes.

Mr M T LIKOTSI: There is a big backlog with regard to the maintenance of
state assets. How do you think the adjustments in the Medium Term Budget
Policy Statement will ease the challenge?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: For this time around we shall use the money
we have to deal with major issues of maintenance, but we will continue to
ask Treasury in the next budget to make sure that we do.

Vote No 7 - Government Communication and Information System - put:

Vote No 8 - National Treasury - put.

Vote No 9 - Public Enterprises - put.

Vote No 10 - Public Service and Administration - put.

Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission - put.

Vote No 12 - South African Management Development Institute (SAMDI) - put.

Vote No 13 - Statistics South Africa - put.

Vote No 14 - Arts and Culture put.


Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are endless questions one
could, in fact, put to the hon Minister of Arts and Culture in this regard.
But he could perhaps give an explanation why his department totally failed
to spend the R21 million rolled over to next year; why over R9 million was
needed to set up his Ministry; and above all why the National Arts Council
that has to date not only failed to provide audited accounts, but according
to the auditors has also failed to hand out R8, 5 million to our artists,
has now asked for a whopping R44, 6 million more. The amounts are
outrageous, but the department’s seeming inability to deliver to South
Africa’s artists is even more so. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Deputy Speaker, I think the hon member is
aware that this is a new Ministry which was set up this year and therefore
had to be provided with moneys for setting itself up. Well maybe she thinks
I don’t deserve it, but that is her opinion. [Laughter.] It just so happens
that the Minister of Finance agrees with me.

The R44 million, which you see reflected for the National Arts Council, was
voted for the National Arts Council for the financial year ending next
year. So it was voted even before I became Minister. I am not responsible
therefore for that appropriation. [Interjections.]

However, her allegations about the National Arts Council are a complete
exaggeration. I think she is aware of it. There have been problems with the
National Arts Council, but to suggest that the National Arts Council has
not made any provision for South African artists is a complete and
outrageous exaggeration. The National Arts Council spent lots of money on
running the Grahamstown festival and many other festivals. If you have
problems with the National Arts Council, raise the issues properly. Do not
exaggerate. There is no one who does a good cause a greater disservice than
he who exaggerates, and that is the hon member’s problem. [Applause.]

Vote No 15 - Education - put.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, would the Minister so kindly let us
know whether the budget that has been allocated to the Education Department
would provide for feeding schemes in schools, especially in our rural
areas? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, in order to be different
from my colleague in the Department of Provincial and Local Government, my
response is that it will. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, scholar
transport remains a sticky point in our education system, presenting the
most serious barrier to the poor in terms of access to education. With the
elimination of conditional grants to provinces the situation is not made
any better. The question is: What budgetary relief can provinces expect and
hope for in order that learners who walk long distances, often on empty
stomachs, are not denied their rights to basic education? I know that the
department has at some point toyed with the idea of providing bicycles to
learners. Is that all provinces can hope for? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, we have encouraged
provinces to identify ways in which they could assist young people with
transport to school in order to avoid the current situation where many
young children walk very long distances without any form of assistance from
the provincial education departments. I must stress that the provision for
scholar transport would have to come from provincial education departments.
It is not provided by the national department.

However, what has happened is we have seen some improvement. In KwaZulu-
Natal the MEC for Education has begun to provide scholar transport for
children who travel very long distances. In the Western Cape we have also
seen an initiative by the MEC to provide similar transport. We are
discussing this with colleagues in other provinces so that they could make
similar arrangements. These would range from the utilisation of scholar
transport, which is currently not available to children in poor communities
or the rural areas. So the use presently of education department transport
tends to circulate in the urban area for privileged children and doesn’t
address the needs of poor children.

So all of these are areas in which we are trying to find solutions. But the
preference would be to try to have community initiatives where such
transport support is provided and I still remain convinced that perhaps
bicycles might be a good idea for distances that are rather shorter than
the 15 km that some children have to walk. But the situation is being
improved. We are making some progress and all the provinces are trying to
attend, in a limited budgetary context, to that particular challenge.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon Minister, the country is in
the grip of the scourge of poverty, unemployment and HIV/Aids, which has
left millions of children orphaned.  These children are often sent home by
headmasters for not paying their school fees. I can quote two examples from
the 20:30 SABC news broadcast on 3 November: Poor learners from Gaopalelwe
and Thutolore schools in Bloemhof were sent home for not paying their
outstanding school fees and were subsequently not allowed to sit for
examinations.

Given the prevalent economic situation in our country, hon Minister, what
mechanisms have you put in place to increase the education budget in order
to increase the exemption from school fees for poor learners thus making
the budget a meaningful exercise for schools, and thereby affording them
better cash flows and allowing them to operate more efficiently? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon member is, I am
sure, certainly aware that this is a concern of government that we should
find means of relieving the poorest in our society from the burden of
having to pay school fees. The member would be aware that we have exemption
provisions in the current legislation, the South African Schools Act, and
the norms and standards for the funding of public schools.

However, I have found that those provisions are not working in the interest
of poor learners in our schools and therefore further remedies have to be
taken. We are in discussion with the provinces to try and find ways firstly
of improving the current exemption system to make governing bodies more
accountable in terms of indicating the manner in which they are assisting
poor families with applications for exemption. But secondly, we also need
to address whether indeed schools should be forced to charge school fees of
R50 in communities where clearly that R50 is not available.

So we are looking at whether it is possible to exempt schools that are
located within the poorest communities from the need to charge user fees.
So these are some of the elements on which we are currently consulting and
I am hoping that provinces will act in positive support of the approaches
that I wish to advocate.

I think the time has come for South Africa to ensure that indeed all our
children enjoy the right to the basic education promised in our
Constitution and fees is one of the barriers to poor children enjoying such
access. So we are discussing a potential mechanism and I will be publishing
the proposals that I wish to put before the public very soon, once we have
agreement with the provinces. Because the compensation for schools for that
exemption or the non-fee charging would have to come from provincial
budgets.

Therefore we must make sure, if we agree on proceeding with exemption, that
administratively we are organised in a manner that doesn’t then burden
schools with further problems so that we relieve one situation and add to a
problem for schools in another way. So all of these things are being looked
at and I hope, hon member, by 2005 the situation will be rather clearer,
and by 2006 better for our children.

Vote No 16 - Health - put.

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, you will know that the
hospital revitalisation programme is essential if we are going to provide
South Africans with quality care and retain the skills of healthcare
professionals in the Public Service.

The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement makes it clear that Finance is
willing to pay for 36 such projects at a time. But no additional allocation
was made for that, basically because many of the national and provincial
departments do not have the management capacity to implement 36 projects at
the same time.

In light of this, could you please tell us whether that capacity would be
in place in time for next year’s Budget so that we can fund 36 such
projects at the same time, or if not, when the capacity would be in place
so that we can revitalise 36 hospitals at a time.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Speaker, if you look at the moving of funding
from programme to programme, you will realise that indeed we have provided
for that. So, it will be there. Thanks.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Deputy Speaker, Minister, in your budget, can you please
tell us whether there will be nutrition, baby feeding, in all the clinics?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: We have provided for it in next year’s budget. It
will be there. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Minister, the ACDP is concerned about the low level of
spending on HIV/Aids. Now, this is obviously linked to the fact that so few
people are on antiretroviral treatment programmes. What is the real
problem, hon Minister, is it administrative or ideological? Why are we not
able to treat our people?

While the Minister of Finance makes every effort to expand the economy and
ensure a skilled workforce, why are we undermining these efforts by
allowing our skilled workforce to die off? Surely it is in everyone’s best
interest to ensure that South Africans access the treatment that is
available which undisputedly adds years and increases quality of life. Why
are we stalling when it is possible for more people to continue to support
their families financially, for more children to grow up in the care of
their own mummies or daddies or both parents, for hospital bills and
pressures to decrease and our economy to grow? Are we purposely
underspending on HIV/Aids? Surely, this is something we cannot afford.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Deputy Speaker, obviously the hon member of
Parliament has not read the comprehensive plan on HIV and Aids, because
this plan is not just about ARVs. It is about prevention, nutrition and
about improving the whole healthcare system and our laboratories in order
for us to be able to monitor the patients on ARVs. It is about the
information system and doubling up the VCT sites, and about research
regarding traditional medicines. It is about training health professionals
and treatment, yes, indeed, including ARVs.

If the hon member had looked properly at what we are discussing today, she
would indeed have understood where we had not spent all the money and the
reasons are given for that. For example, we had to transfer money to the
national laboratory services. We transferred half of it this year, but we
did not transfer all of it, because we think that would be financially
irresponsible of us to transfer all the money before we can see that there
are deliverables; so that is why we are asking for the roll-over.

You will also see that, in fact, we are asking for the roll-overs, because
in terms of prevention we needed condoms and we order them on a monthly
basis. By the end of the previous financial year, at least by the first of
March, we hadn’t gotten all the invoices; therefore, that money still has
to be paid.

You will also understand, if you read the documents properly, that we also
had to spend money on medicines and the process of ordering the medicines.
Making sure that they are available in the country is a very long process.
But that does not mean that we did not provide for the medicines in the
interim, because we had interim measures in place, and that was to call for
information. We also had to study the information that was presented to us
to make sure that we were getting value for money.

We had to call for proposals, evaluate them and reduce them to a short
list; then we had to interview bidders and announce the successful ones;
and offer tenders thereafter. So, it is indeed a long process. It is not
that anybody is sitting on the money. It is primarily about improving our
healthcare system, which is absolutely fundamental for the provision of
ARVs.

Let me say ARVs are not just aspirins. There are certain things that you
have to put in place to ensure that you provide the quality healthcare that
you are talking about. We are on course. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote No 17 - Labour - put:

Mr V C GORE:  Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, the ID has
noted government’s intention to allocate an additional R22,85 million for
corporate imaging. Although we realise the importance of marketing and
public relations, particularly in a competitive private sector, we question
whether such an amount is justified, especially for a government
department.

Hon the Minister, the question to you today is, can you please explain to
this House the reason for the allocation of R22,85 million for corporate
imaging, and how this money is going to be spent to ensure and enhance
service delivery, especially around unemployment and job creation?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: If you go to a Standard Bank, or a street where
Standard Bank is, you will know where it is because of corporate imaging.
If you go to ABSA and you turn, for example, the corner of Plein Street
into Adderley Street, you will know exactly where ABSA is because you see
the corporate imaging of ABSA. If you go to the ANC office, you will know
exactly where the ANC office is, because you see the corporate imaging of
the ANC. [Laughter.]

Therefore, if you go to a government department like the Department of
Labour, we want our people to know exactly where the Department of Labour
is, in order to make sure that our Batho Pele process is achieved.
[Interjections.] Thank you very much, loudmouth.

Ms O R KASIENYANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, I have observed
that R30,3 million of the total roll-over of R36,9 million, has been as a
result of decisions taken by other departments. Your corporate imaging
programme was put on hold after the GCIS intervention, to ensure uniformity
of corporate imaging in government.

Secondly, all repair and maintenance projects of government departments are
done through the Department of Public Works. By any standard, this is too
much for one department. Now, hon Minister, the issue of the roll over of
funds occasioned by the function residing in one department, while funds of
expenditure thereof is dependent on another department, needs revisiting.
Don’t you think that this House should assist where possible to ensure that
the function, the budget and the decision to spend are kept under the same
department at all times, if possible? In our view this will reduce roll-
overs, and enhance service delivery. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I agree with the hon member. We should probably
look at this matter so that we work much better, because it is a very
tedious process and quite cumbersome to transfer money from one department
to another. However, hon member, there is a hymn in the church hymnal of
the Presbyterian church.

``Wa zi thwala izono yesu, zinge zono zakho’’. [``Jesus sacrificed his life
for our sins.’’]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Are there any further questions on
labour? I put Vote number 18, Science and Technology. Are there any
questions? I see your hand up hon member, are you asking a question? Do so,
please sir.

Vote No - 18 Science and Technology - put:

Mr B T MNYANDU: Thank you, Chair. This morning when the Portfolio Committee
for Science and Technology was briefed by the NRF, it heard disturbing
facts that from every pool of 500 undergraduate students that the country
produces, it only produces one Ph D. This is alarming by any standard.

After 1994, the Department of Education did away with study leave with pay,
which had enabled educators to pursue postgraduate research without
sacrificing their financial responsibilities to their families.

Now the question is, is there any communication or discussion that the
Minister is engaged in with the Minister of Education to ensure that
experienced educators get capacitated through pursuing
postgraduate studies to become researchers, so that they can add to the
pool of knowledge, without actually sacrificing their family
responsibilities? Will those include maybe bringing back study leave with
pay? Thank you.

TONA YA TŠA SAENTSHE LE THEKNOLOTŠI: OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY:
Modulasetulo ke a leboga. Ke nyaka go lebella mokgalabje yola ka mola ge ke
bolela le yena, ka gore ditaba di mahlong. Rena le Letona la Thuto, re
hlakana mehla ye re a boledišana, ka gobane selo seo se dirago gore re šome
mmogo, ke seo e lego gore se nyaka gore re šomišane, ge re sa šomišane,
tema e ka se tšwele pele. Ka nnete tše dingwe tšeo o di bolelago nkabe e sa
le wa di botšiša pele, nakong yela go sa botšišwa Letona lela la Thuto, ka
gore tše dingwe di wela ka fase ga lefapha la gagwe. Eupša, re šomišana
mmogo go dira gore dilo di tšwele pele ka tshwanelo, lefase la rena le tle
le thušege. Ke a leboga mokgalabje. (Translation of Pedi paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson. I want to
face the old man on that side when I speak. The Minister of Education and I
meet every time and talk, because we must work together. If we don’t work
together we will not progress. Indeed, some of the things you are talking
about you should have asked about them then, at the time when people were
asking the Minister of Education, because some of the things fall under his
department. But we work together so that there will be progress in order
for our country to benefit. I thank you, old man.]

Vote 19 - Social Development - put:

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Are there any further questions? I
now put Vote 19 - Social Development. Are there any questions? Yes, hon
member.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Chair. Indications are that the dramatic increase
in disability grant applications are because people with Aids are applying
for it. At the same time, the uptake of the government’s antiretroviral
treatment has been too slow – only 12 000 people have received it so far.
This lack of co-ordination and control between the Department of Health and
the Department of Social development is a cause of overspending.

Since Aids is a treatable condition - and in most cases people on
antiretrovirals live a full and productive life - will it not make more
sense for your department to work with the Department of Health to get
these people into treatment, rather than signing them up for disability
grants? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: They must know that we are working as a
social cluster and we work very closely with the Minister of Health, and
all other departments that are in that cluster. So, there can be no way in
which we could differ on some of those issues. We are working as much as we
can, and we will do whatever is possible. Without any pressure from the DA,
we will be able to do what we are supposed to do with the means that we
have.

Vote No 20 - Sport and Recreation - put:

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, the Auditor-General has issued a disclaimer of
audit opinion on the financial affairs of Boxing South Africa. My two
questions to you, Mr Minister, are: Firstly, are you going to make sure
that their reports are submitted timeously; and secondly, are you going to
make sure that controls and accounting systems are in place to enable the
Auditor-General to verify the accuracy, the validity and the completeness
of their accounting records? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: The question whether or not we are
going to make sure that these things are done timeously in the future is
already obsolete. We have taken the necessary steps to get those things
corrected and that boxing association has already reported on the issue to
the standing committee. The question of whether we will make sure that
these things do not happen again is also answered in the first question.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, can the Minister please tell us whether in
his budget he has provided for better facilities for sports in all schools
in all nine provinces? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Minister, the microphone is
already on for you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, thank you very much, we
do not have microphones in Alice. [Laughter.] The hon members should listen
to this very carefully, because it is not the first time that I am being
confronted with this question, which in fact should be directed to the
Minister of Provincial and Local Government. [Interjections.] The situation
has changed. Can you listen, Mr Gibson? When I was a Chief Whip you used to
listen in this House. I do not know what happened. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr Gibson, the situation is as follows: Infrastructure, be it for schools,
for water, for electricity, for bulk water, for streets and all these
things is now budgeted for under what the government calls the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant, MIG, and it is located within the Ministry of DPLG.

Vote No 21 - Correctional Services - put.

Vote No 22 - Defence - put:

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Sihlalo, bengicela ukubuza – kodwa angazi ukuthi ubani
ozowuphendula umbuzo. Kunemali ewu-R1 billion lapha ebuyiselwe kwa-National
Revenue Fund. Kwathiwa ayikho imali yokukhokhela odokotela abasebenza
ezindaweni zasemakhaya, khona futhi kwezokuvikela. Kwenzeka kanjani lokho?
(Translation of Zulu paragraph follows.)

[MR V B NDLOVU: Chairperson, I would like to ask something - however I
don’t know who is going to respond to the question. The sum of R1 billion
was returned to the National Revenue Fund. It has also transpired that
there are no funds to pay the doctors working in rural areas in the defence
sector. How has that happened?]

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZOKHUSELO: Mhlalingaphambili, unyanisile utata uNdlovu
ukuba ikhona imali, kambe akuyonyani ukuba loo mali ibuyiselwe. Iza kufakwa
kwiakhawunti eyodwa. Laa mali yimali ezelwe kukomelela kweRandi.
Ngokomthetho, laa mali kufanelwe ukuba ibuyiselwa kuNongxowa weSizwe,
iNational Treasury, yaye asinakukwazi ukuyijika loo nto. Yiyo loo nto ke
ngoku sifuna imali yokuncedisa ekuphuhliseni izakhono zoogqirha noonesi
emaphandleni. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, the hon member Ndlovu is
telling the truth when he says there is money available, but it is not true
that money has been returned. It is going to be deposited into a separate
account. That money is as a result of the rise in the value of the rand.
Procedurally, that money is supposed to be returned to the National
Treasury, and we cannot change that. It is for this reason that we want
money for assistance in developing the skills of the doctors and nurses in
the rural areas.]
[Applause.]]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Chairperson, we know that the strengthening of
the rand and unspent funds from previous years have resulted in the savings
of R1 billion. However, these are not the only contributing factors. What
we also know is that delays in the delivery schedules have also resulted in
the saving of R1 billion.

Can the hon Deputy Minister kindly tell this House which part of the SDP,
or strategic defence package, referred to in programme nine of the special
defence account resulted in the so-called saving of R1 billion? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Mr Chairperson, the question that is asked
here has nothing to do with adjustments, but I was trying to answer it, and
now he wants details of how this money was accumulated. I have told him
that this saving was mainly because of the strength of the rand. If he
wants details, I am not able to give him those details now. Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Vote No 23 – Independent Complaints Directorate - put:

Vote No 24 – Justice and Constitutional Development - put:

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you, Chair. Minister, the accounts reflect that R77
million was overbudgeted for goods and services in the courts and other
branches of the department, resulting in transfers in the adjustment
account to personnel, which was underbudgeted for in the state legal
services, court services and administration by the said R77 million.

What is the reason for this? Who were the beneficiaries of these payments,
and why were they necessary? And, what steps have been taken to rightsize
the different components of the Justice budget? According to the chief
financial officer of the department, these problems keep cropping up,
though officials claim they will be rectified. I would like to get the
Minister’s explanation for this and possibly her commitment to the
rightsizing aspect. Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, hon member,
I can only make a commitment. All those who have long served in the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development will know
that this has been a recurring problem.

All I can say is that we have in place a joint task team with Treasury. I
hope that in the next term we will have more definite answers and better
plans. So, yes indeed, there will be changes – we’re committed to that. I
don’t want to go into details about the whole movement of moneys. The truth
of the matter is that we have been underfunded in certain instances, or
that’s what we believe, and the Minister of Finance agrees with me.
[Laughter.] This is a matter that we are unravelling.

Ms F I CHOHAN-KHOTA: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, sometimes the real
issue with regard to the adjusted estimates doesn’t arise from what is
contained in the estimates themselves, but in what is not received and not
approved. In this regard, could you tell us how much the department has
requested to beef up security at courts? Why was this necessary, and what
are the implications of not receiving this amount? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, the matter
of security, broadly speaking, is a very serious one. It is infrastructure
that is required at courts and also other related key points. Part of the
answer will lie with us working together as a cluster, and looking at
static security where it’s necessary with our Safety and Security
department.

Also, we will have to get a budget for infrastructure security. We
requested an amount of R1,2 billion, and the funds allocated were
R17 million. However, as I said, this really is a work in progress, and I
would plead that we be given time to work this out with Treasury. But I am
pleased, hon member, that you brought up this issue as it is a serious one.

Vote No 25 - Safety and Security - put:

Rev K R J MESHOE: Hon Minister, I want to know what the motivation is for
transferring R30 million from the Department of Transport for security
infrastructure for the Cape Town Metro railway pilot project only, while
commuters in Gauteng are subjected to criminal activity on trains on a
daily basis. Not enough seems to be done to eradicate crime on our trains
in that province. I also want to know whether there are any plans to
allocate similar fund amounts to other provinces to ensure that our
commuters enjoy safety.

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: People who are English- speaking have
told me that when you talk about a project which is a pilot project, you
mean that you are starting - that it’s the first step towards a broader
programme. [Applause.] People who are English-speaking have told me that.
Obviously, because it is a pilot project it is the foundation, the
springboard that is going to allow us to learn lessons in the first
instance and ensure, therefore, that when we go out broadly we have a
programme that is going to produce the results we require.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, there is a transfer of an
amount of R246 000 to the Department of Public Works for leasing their
offices. Are we going to do this every year, or is this a once-off thing
and then all the buildings will belong to us, or what?

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Well, these are special circumstances.
We are renting those premises, and for as long as we rent them this is what
we will do. However, we have an arrangement with Public Works. We are going
to get a facility that is going to be one of the facilities that Public
Works will make available to us. So, it’s not going to be perpetual. We are
going to arrive at some accommodation.

Rev K R J MESHOE: I appreciate what the hon Minister has said. I understand
that this is a pilot project. That is why the second part of the question
was whether there were plans to ensure that other provinces also got such
allocations once the government has convinced itself that there was a need
to have such projects throughout the country. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY: Minister for Provincial and Local
Government, may I say, “Yes, that will be the situation”? [Laughter.]

Vote No 26 - Agriculture - put:

Vote No 27 - Communications - put:

Vote 28 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism - put.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairman, my question relates to points three and six of the
items listed, and is: What has the government done to examine the potential
of existing or new small boat harbours so as to unlock their potential for
sailing, sport fishing, leisure boating and attracting small boats from
around the world into our waters? This could be done by providing a series
of small boat harbours within sailing distance of each other along the
coast of South Africa, thus stimulating tourism and economic activity in
often depressed areas, and unlocking economic development relating to the
leisure and hospitality industry.

Minister, all small boat harbours of the world play a direct role not only
in the fishing industry, but also in the leisure and hospitality industry.
Our fishing harbours on our coast are mostly hopelessly underutilised for
most of the year for single interest and not multiple use. I know that the
Public Works department will also have to get involved, but the Department
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism is the planning department, and so I
ask this question – for which I failed to get an answer from the committee
– with respect. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Chairperson, our
tourism branch in the department is in consultation with the marine and
coastal management branch. We have identified and are going to start with
four fishing harbours, and that decision was based on a study that was done
by Deloitte and Touche. Those harbours are Kalk Bay, Saldanha Bay, Lamberts
Bay and Stilbaai. This is to develop the potential of tourism that exists
out there in accordance with the government’s objectives, which are GDP,
economic growth and job creation. Stilbaai was chosen because of its
proximity to the Garden Route.

We have already had our first meeting with stakeholders and communities to
discuss how they can take advantage of the opportunities that come as a
result of people using that route. Kalk Bay, we know very well, is in a
fantastic location and we want to link the community there with tourists so
that a tourism route can be established there, which could include, among
other things, cultural tourism.

Saldanha has a very rich history of whale watching. In fact, we have also
put up an interpretation centre there. Lamberts Bay has got a major tourism
attraction that includes bird watching and harbour tours. We are also
thinking of establishing an information point there. Community members,
especially the youth, will be trained as tour guides and as such can
provide a better service as they know the place better than anyone else.

We are collating all proposals relating to tourism around the harbours to
enhance tourism. We also intend to have a geographic spread so that other
provinces along the coast can benefit as well. Thank you. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Could hon members please lower their voices?
Thank you very much.

Ms E THABETHE: Thank you, Chairperson. I just would like the Deputy
Minister to clarify or elaborate on the broader agenda of transformation
insofar as the previously disadvantaged are concerned, and whether these
changes won’t affect that particular process. Furthermore, will they try to
prioritise the previously disadvantaged in terms of tourism and their
scoreboard, as per the departmental agenda?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM: Definitely! The
HDIs are going to benefit more than the previously advantaged, the Pas, the
previously advantaged. That is the reason we are going to establish a
tourism route that encourages cultural tourism. As we know, these days
there is a great demand for cultural tourism. When our guests come they
want to stay and interact with communities and enjoy their culture. This
will benefit the communities. We have trained a lot of tour guides that
come directly from these communities.

We are also encouraging our communities to participate in the boat
industry. Yesterday I was in the Free State at Xhariep, and we found a
community that builds boats and most of them are being used. Those people
are being trained not only to build boats, but also to use them so that
they are able to ferry tourists. We are going to source funding to make
sure that this dream comes true. Thank you. [Applause.]

Vote No 29 – Housing – put.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Hhayi-ke, sesizwile sonke manje. [Uhleko.][By now, all of
us have heard.[Laughter.]]

Thank you, Chairperson. As we all know we are facing a tremendous backlog
with regard to housing. Can our hon Minister tell us whether an allocation
has been set aside in this budget for building more and better houses for
our homeless? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you, Chairperson. I did not know that there
had been a marriage of convenience between the PAC and the MF. Please don’t
do it. We’re still here for you. My paper reflects the PAC.

Chairperson, the budget that we are considering now unfortunately does not
cater for the plan that we have outlined. We have outlined an elaborate
plan and I’m certain that given an opportunity, I’ll be able to come to
your caucus to explain it to you. The elaborate plan does indeed – I will
be available for you - allow for better quality, better-situated houses and
all those good things that you would like for our people. [Applause.]
The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Ikhona eminye imibuzo? [Are there any
other questions?]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Ngqongqoshe, ngicela ukubuza ukuthi umnyango usubile yini
nomhlangano noNgqongqoshe ophethe ezemihlaba, ngoba sidinga imihlaba ukuze
sakhe izindlu, ukuze siqiniseke ukuthi siyazakha lezi zindlu eziningi,
sakhele abantu abakithi abaswele izindlu? [Minister, I wish to ask if the
department has had a meeting with the Minister for Agriculture and Land
Affairs because we need land to build houses, to make sure that we build
the many houses for our people who need them.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: UNgqongqoshe wezoLimo neMihlaba, udadewethu,
ngiphila naye. Sihlangana onke amalanga siphinde futhi sikhulume isiSwati
naye. [The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs, is my sister; I live
with her.  We meet daily and we also talk siSwati together.]

However, I wanted to indicate to you that within this comprehensive plan we
have an interministerial committee that will allow us as government to work
smart, and the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs is a central part
of that strategy. So, indeed, I will make sure that I consult her on a
regular basis.

Vote No 30 – Land Affairs – put:
Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chairperson. I want to put my question on Land
Affairs to the Minister of Finance because he is the source of the problem.
He knows that to settle all restitution claims by next year we will need
R13 billion. He also mentioned his commitment to significant funds for
restitution five times in the Medium Term Budget Policy Statement, but
could find only R200 Million for the last four months of this financial
year. My question is whether this small amount is a reflection of his
commitment to land reform and restitution for next year’s budget. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE:  Chairperson the answer is no. Thank you.

Vote No: 31 – Minerals and Energy – put:

Mr H C SCHMIDT: Thank you, Mr Chair. Hon Deputy minister, an amount of R1,6
million is being rolled over for purposes of, inter alia, the formulation
of the petroleum policy. In the light of the rising international oil costs
- approximately R1,37 of the final petrol price per litre, which is
approximately 30% of the price of petrol - to state revenue and the
consequent negative effect it has on the economy, particularly on the
inflation rate and the rising food prices, at steps are currently being
considered by the department, acting of course in consultation with
Department of Finance, to protect the public from an exorbitant and ever-
increasing fuel price? Thank you.

USEKELA-MPHATHISWA WEZEZIMBIWA NAMANDLA: Enkosi Sihlalo, Maninzi amalinge
enziwa lisebe lezezimbiwa namandla, ukujonga ukuba ixabiso lepethroli
liyakhuselwa. Njengokuba besele sitshilo, siyadibana kwakhona nebhanki
enguvimba(Reserve Bank) kunye nesebe lezemali. Ikhona imisetyenzana ethile
eyenziwayo, ejonge ukuba sifumane ezinye indlela zokufumana i-oyile.

Sinazo neenkqubo ezizakusinceda ukuba sibone ezinye iindlela zemveliso,
kuqukwa ne-biofuels. Apho sizakube ngaxeshanye sizukube siseka iinkqubo
kunye neentlanganiso ukuqinisekisa ukuba sinazo ezinye iintlobo zamandla
ezenziwayo eMzantsi Afrika. Umbandela we-oyile, ndiyacinga ukuba sonke
siyayazi ukuba ingaphaya kwamamndla ethu. Ixabiso le-oyile lilawulwa
kwihlabathi liphela yi-OPEC. Urhulumente kunye nesebe akanalo ulawulo
lwelaxabiso kungoko ke sisenza ingowa mali ekhethekileyo ukuba ikhusele
elaxabiso kodwa nayo iyakwazi ukuphela.

Ngokoke ikhona imisetyenzana esiyijongileyo, umzekelo sijonge ukuqala
ezinye iintlobo zezibaso(fuel)ezizakuthatha indawo yeparafini nokuba
sijonge ukuba asinikho na ukufumana amanye amazwe enza i-oyile
anokusinceda, ingakumbi apha eAfrika. Ndiyabulela Sihlalo. (Translation of
Xhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Chairperson.  Many
attempts are being made by the Department of Minerals and Energy to ensure
that the petrol price is protected.  As we have already said, we are going
to meet again with the Reserve Bank and the Department of Finance.  Some
endeavours are being made, which are aimed at finding other ways of getting
oil.

We also have programmes which are going to help us to find other methods of
production, including biofuels.  At the very same time we shall be
establishing programmes and meetings, to make sure that we have other types
of energy produced in South Africa.  The oil issue, I think we all know, is
beyond our control. The price of oil throughout the world is controlled by
OPEC.  The government and the department have no control over it, and that
is why we established an exclusive fund to afford some protection with
regard to the latter, but it can also be exhausted.

Therefore, there are other projects that we are aiming for; for example, we
aim to introduce other types of fuel, which will replace paraffin.  We also
aim to check whether we cannot find other oil-producing countries to assist
us, especially here in Africa. I thank you, Chairperson.]

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry – put:

Mr L W GREYLING: Thank you, Chairperson. The ID is very concerned about the
R500 million that is being transferred to the pebble bed modular reactor
project because of unavoidable expenses. This was unavoidable; in fact, we
should not have invested in this in the first place. And the project is
actually going backwards at the moment. And I would like to the Minister to
tell us how much money the government, through its various agencies, put
into this project?

And also, if you could tell us how much money the various foreign partners,
who are essential to the success which you stated in the feasibility study,
have actually invested in this project. I include the one who has pulled
out. How much money did they put into this project? And secondly, British
Nuclear Fuels Ltd - who is in fact bankrupt - have they actually committed
any financial resources to this project? Can you also tell us what
assurance do we have that the Government will not be called upon to
bankroll this project continuously; that a foreign investor will be found
for this project; and that we will not have to bankroll R12 billion, which
is the cost of building this PBMR project. The cost of R12 billion for 110
Megawatts does not sound like cheap electricity to me. And also if it is
such a good job creation project, why is Cosatu so outspoken about it?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Thank you, Chairperson. The work on the
pebble bed modular reactor is work that we are managing as Government in a
very balanced way. We are looking at the potential benefits that it holds
for our energy requirements and also the possibility it offers South Africa
to provide leading-edge technology to the global energy community. We are
in negotiation with potential partners, and so the question about how much
each of them is going to put in I cannot answer right now because these are
negotiations that are on going. So far the Government has spent money as
follows: We are putting in R500 million now and the Department of Trade and
Industry has put in R100 million during the course of this financial year.
And we are going into this with our eyes wide open.

We are not calling for an open-ended commitment even from the Treasury
because there are different phases through which this project is going to
go. And through each of those phases it offers us an opportunity to make
critical decisions about whether we go forward with the project or not, but
all of this under consideration on the part of government. And the
negotiations with the potential partner are also going on at the same time.
Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Vote No 33 – Transport – put:

Mr S B FARROW: Chairperson and Minister, there are two critical transport
issues that I believe are in adequately addressed in the medium-term budget
review. The first relates to the fact that despite the extension of the
primary network by over 2 000km into the hands of Sanrail from provinces,
no increase in funding is reflected despite assurances in your budget
speech that the whole aspect of road classification was under review and,
in terms of the intergovernmental fiscal review, would be reworked in order
to meet its commitments towards maintenance and also the Expanded Public
Works Programme.

The second two aspects relate to the safety of commuters on rail and road.
The much acclaimed national highway patrol unit has not materialised
despite the R5,9 million expenditure on a feasibility study. Yet we sit
with a shortage of thousands of traffic cops, which has a direct impact on
the bankruptcy of the RAF and the effectiveness of the Arrive Alive
campaign. If we had more visible cops we would have less accidents and less
claims submitted to the RAF. Further investments in this quarter are long
overdue, Minister.

The transport police, despite the transfer from your department of R30
million to Safety and Security for the proposed pilot project in the
Western Cape, did not materialise on 1 April as promised. It is being
dogged by a lack of commitment from both departments while rail commuters
have to contend with violent crimes on a daily basis.

Can the Minister explain why this situation still prevails after six years
of my standing here, reporting about these very same issues? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Well, if the hon member was listening carefully
to the Minister for Safety and Security, he would have realised that the
rail police are going to start operating in the Western Cape on 1 January
2005. That is what is going to happen and that is why we have shifted this
R30 million to the Budget Vote for Safety and Security.

The issue of the South African National Roads Agency is an issue for the
next financial year. If you recall, in the policy budget statement of the
Minister of Finance, the issue of the maintenance and construction of road
networks is one of the priorities for the next three years. We are dealing
with the budget adjustment for this year. That issue arises in the next
financial year where the details are going to be indicated.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Are there any further questions?
The DA, I am advised that your time is also up. Are there any further
questions? None.

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry – put.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M DOIDGE): Are there any questions? No
questions. Order! That concludes our question-and-answer session on the
Votes. We shall now proceed to decide on the Votes and Schedule.

Where we have been advised that there will be no objection to a series of
Votes, I shall put these votes together.

Vote No 1 - Presidency – agreed to.

Vote No 2 – Parliament - agreed to.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – agreed to.

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government – agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Public Works – agreed to.

Vote No 7 – Government Communication and Information System – agreed to
(Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 8 – National Treasury – agreed to.

Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises – agreed to.

Vote No 10 – Public Service and Administration – agreed to.

Vote No 11 – Public Service Commission – agreed to.

Vote No 12 – South African Management Development Institute (SAMDI)– agreed
to.

Vote No 13 – Statistics South Africa – agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Arts and Culture – agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 15 – Education – agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 16 – Health – put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


    AYES-265: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
    E; Asmal, A K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O; Benjamin, J;
    Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhoola, R B; Biyela, B P; Bloem, D V; Botha, N
    G W; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I;
    Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I;
    Combrinck, J J; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H;
    Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dipico, E M;
    Direko, I W; Dlali, D M; Du Toit, D C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
    Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E;
    George, M E; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gillwald, C E; Godi, N T;
    Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M;
    Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B;
    Hendrickse, P; Herandien, C B; Hogan, B A; Huang, S; Jacobus, L;
    Jeffery, J H; Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P;
    Joubert, L K; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D;
    Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C;
    Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgoro, M K; Lekgoro, M M S;
    Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Ludwabe, C I; Luthuli,
    A N; Maake, J J; Mabandla, B S; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabudafhasi, T
    R; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M
    M; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M;
    Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Malahlela, M
    J; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S; Manuel, T
    A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Mars, I; Martins, B A D; Maserumule, F T;
    Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, L M; Mashile, B L; Masithela, N H; Masutha,
    T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I
    F; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdladlana, M M
    S; Mdlalose, M M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z
    S; Mlangeni, A; Mnandi, P N; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L
    J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D;
    Mokoto, N R; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D; Morobi, D M;
    Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, M I; Motubatse-
    Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B; Mpaka, H M; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S
    A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndlovu, V
    B; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka,
    E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngema, M
    V; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J; Njobe,
    M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntshulana-Bhengu, N R;
    Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo,
    M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G;
    Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pahad, E G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M
    G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Radebe, B A;
    Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Ramphele, T D
    H; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E;
    Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P
    S; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sibuyana, M
    W; Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sisulu, L N; Sithole, D J;
    Skhosana, W M; Skosana, M B; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
    Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Stofile,
    M A; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J;
    Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Turok, B; Vadi,
    I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vezi,
    T E; Vos, S C; Vundisa, S S; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L;
    Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zulu, N E; Zuma, J G.


    NOES-45: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; De
    Lille, P; Doman, W P; Durr, K D S; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H
    M; Gore, V C; Green, L M; Harding, A; Henderson, R K; Jankielsohn, R;
    Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lee, T D;
    Lowe, C M; Maluleke, D K; Meshoe, K R J; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J;
    Morgan, G R; Morkel, C M; Nel, A H; Nkem-Abonta, E; Ntuli, R S;
    Opperman, S E; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Seremane, W J; Smuts,
    M; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R; Trent, E W; Van der
    Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H; Zille, H.


Vote accordingly agreed to.


Vote No 17– Labour - agreed to.


Vote No 18 – Science and Technology - agreed to.

Vote No 19 – Social Development - agreed to.

Vote No 20 – Sport and Recreation South Africa - agreed to (Democratic
Alliance dissenting).


Vote No 21 – Correctional Services - agreed to.

Vote No 22 – Defence - agreed to (Independent Democrats dissenting).


 Vote No 23 – Independent Complaints Directorate - agreed to (Democratic
 Alliance dissenting)


 Vote No 24 – Justice and Constitutional Development - agreed to.


 Vote No 25 – Safety and Security – agreed to (African Christian Democratic
 Party dissenting).


 Vote No 26 – Agriculture – agreed to.


 Vote No 27 – Communications - agreed to.


 Vote No 28 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism - agreed to.


 Vote No 29 – Housing - agreed to.


 Vote No 30 – Land Affairs - agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).


 Vote No 31 – Minerals and Energy - agreed to.


 Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry - agreed to.


 Vote No 33 – Transport - agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).


 Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry - agreed to.



                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL



                           (Second Reading debate)


 There was no debate.


 Bill read a second time.


 The House adjourned at 17:09


                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS:



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:


1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)


         (ii)    Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         9 November 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 -2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 9 November 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


         (i)     Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 -2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 77)

3.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Close Corporations Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Trade and Industry on 26 October 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee
         on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Intergovernmental Relations Framework Amendment Bill, 2004,
         submitted by the Minister for Provincial and Local Government on 4
         November 2004. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial
         and Local Government and the Select Committee on Local Government
         and Administration.


COMMITTEE REPORTS:



National Assembly:


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Choice on
     Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D - 2003] (National
     Assembly - sec 76), dated 9 November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the Choice on
         Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill [B 72D - 2003] (National
         Assembly - sec 76), amended by the National Council of Provinces
         and referred to the Committee, reports that it has agreed to the
         Bill.

         The Committee further reports that the Democratic Alliance
         abstained and that the African Christian Democratic Party opposed
         the Bill.

     Report to be considered.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert 1ATC1109



