---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 05 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-08-05
---

THURSDAY, 5 AUGUST 2004
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    _____

The Council met at 14:04.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col –000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Hon members, thank
you very much. Welcome back from your constituencies after a long recess. I
hope we’re all ready for a very big job in this session.

Minister, you are also welcome. I am not too sure whether you were in
recess yourself, but you’re most welcome to come and address us on a very
important subject today.

Rev E ADOLPH: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to give notice that on the
next sitting day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council-


     (1)    notes with shock and profound sadness the untimely and tragic
         death of Ms Maud Grové (age 45) who was burnt in her shack this
         morning at 04h45 at No 34 Parkwood Avenue, Parkwood Estate;


     (2)    further recognises that the other three families, namely
         Abrahams, Knight and Button also lost everything during the fire;


     (3)    expresses its thanks to the Red Cross and Woolworths in Tokai
         for supporting the families in these terrible conditions and calls
         on the entire community of Parkwood to render their support
         accordingly; and


     (4)    joins the Grové family and friends in sharing the grief and
         sorrow of this tragic loss.

Ms D ROBINSON: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move:


    That the Council-


       1) notes the ill-considered action of the SAPS in the Western Cape
          in suspending the activities of reservists involved in community-
          funded crime-watch programmes in Milnerton, Table View and
          Doornbach;


       2) believes that community involvement in the fight against crime
          must be encouraged and nurtured;

     (3)    conveys its commiserations to those residents who have become
         the victims of the resulting rise in crime in those areas, and to
         the family, friends and colleagues of police reservist Ian McGowan
         whose tragic death was precipitated by these and related events;
         and


     (4)    calls on the SAPS to reconsider its decision in the interests of
         greater safety for all the people.

                               FARM EVICTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Rev P MOATSHE:  Hon Chair and hon members, I move without notice:

     That the Council-


       1) acknowledges that a number of laws have been passed in this
          Parliament to protect the unlawful eviction of farm workers;
     (2)    recognises that many farmers have accepted this reality and are
         playing a meaningful role in terms of helping the government to
         address past patterns of land dispossession;


     (3)    notes with concern, however, reports of the continuation of farm
         evictions in Brits, ten years down the line;


     (4)    acknowledges that this state of affairs does not bode well for
         our democracy and the process of nation-building and
         reconciliation, which we seek to promote;


     (5)    notes that the victims of the evictions have won one of the
         cases and the other one is still pending in the court of law; and


     (6)    calls on those farmers who have applied for eviction orders to
         display a greater level of tolerance and to help with the
         reconstruction of our country instead of pursuing their own self-
         centred interests.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Ngiyabonga mgcinisihlalo. Ngitsandza
kutsatsa lelitfuba kutsi ngiphakamise kutsi lendlu yemkhandlo wetifundza
yenyule make M N Olifant njengasihlalo wemakomidi. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you,
Chairperson. I would like to take this opportunity to announce that the
National Council of Provinces elected Mrs M N Oliphant as the Chairperson
of Committees. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): As there is no
speakers’ list, I shall now put the question, and the question is that the
motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65
of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads
are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes. Are they all
present? They are. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow
provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they so
wish. Is there any province that wishes to do so? There are none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetic order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the
Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or whether they abstain from
voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Sihlalo, i-Eastern Cape iyahambisana nombono, mhle.
[Chairperson, the Eastern Cape is in favour of this view, it is good.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Free State?

Mr T S RALANE: E ya seketela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA: Se a vuma sehlalo. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: E a vuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re tsamaišana le ona. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: IMpumalanga iyawusekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: The Northern Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke wa rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Western Cape?

Ms K A MQULWANA (Western Cape): The Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): All nine provinces
voted in favour. I therefore declare the motion agreed to. Mrs Mildred
Oliphant is now the Chairperson of Committees. [Applause.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Ngibonge futsi, mgcinisihlalo. Ngitsandza
kutsi ngiphakamise kulesikhatsi sanyalo kwekutsi lesigungu setifundza
sikhetse babe T S Setona njengelisekela sihlalo wemakomidi. Ngiyabonga.
[Thank you once again, Chairperson. At this point I would like to announce
that the National Council of Provinces has elected Mr T S Setona as the
Deputy Chairperson of Committees. Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): As there is no
speakers’ list, I shall now put the question, and the question is that the
motion be agreed to.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present to cast
their votes. I hope you are all present in the House?

In terms of Rule 71, I shall first afford provinces the opportunity to make
their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to do so? There are none.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order in terms of the provinces. Delegation heads must
indicate whether they vote in favour or against, or whether they abstain
from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Iyaxhasa. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Free State?

Mr T S RALANE: E ya seketela. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Gauteng?

Ms N M MADLALA: Se a vuma sehlalo. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal seconds.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo e dumalana le ona. [Limpopo agrees with it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga e o tlatsa go menagane. [Mpulanga totally
supports it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Northern Cape?

Mnr M A SULLIMAN: Die Noord-Kaap steun. [The Northern Cape supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke wa rona. [We support it.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Western Cape?

Ms K A MQULWANA (Western Cape): The Western Cape supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Mr M J Mahlangu): Nine provinces have
voted in favour of the motion. I therefore declare Mr Setona now fully
elected as the Deputy Chairperson of Committees. [Applause.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Before I proceed to the next item on the Order Paper, I wish to
congratulate both the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson. I can only
say you’ve got a mammoth task ahead of you to co-ordinate the work of those
committees and make sure that legislation is processed in time, but also
that quality legislation is produced, not just a large quantity of
legislation.

Managing the work of the committees is quite a mammoth task ahead of you
and I wish you good luck, but you’ve got the support of the presiding
officers and the Chief Whip’s office. If you work as a team, I have no
doubt we’ll all succeed in dealing with the job that has been given to you.

Chairperson of Committees, I’m not too sure whether you want to say a word.
You’ve got one minute if you wish to do so. I wish to be very kind. You
know it’s the women’s month and I wouldn’t like to deny you the opportunity
to say something.

Nksz M N OLIPHANT: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo, okokuqala ngizocela ukubonga
amalungu ale Ndlu ukuthi asekele ukukhethwa kwami njengo Sihlalo wamaKomiti
kanye neSekela uMnu Setona. Ngibonge futhi ebuholini ikakhulukazi be-ANC
nanokuthi ukuxhaswa esikutholile selokhu siqalile kube uxhaso oluhle
nolwemukelekayo nolugqugquzela ukusebenza kwethu ngokubambisana
ikakhulukazi nehhovisi likaSotshwebhu oMkhulu woMkhandlu.  (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ms M N OLIPHANT: Thank you, Chairperson. First I would like to thank
members of this House for supporting my appointment as the Chairperson of
Committees and that of the Deputy, Mr Setona. I would also like to thank
the ANC leadership in particular and that the support we have received
since we started is good, acceptable and such that it encourages us to work
together, especially with the office of the Chief Whip of the NCOP.]




                  WOMEN CELEBRATING TEN YEARS OF DEMOCRACY


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you, hon
Deputy Chairperson, and all members of this august House.

As I lead in this debate this afternoon, I think I need to raise two
issues. I must, firstly, say it was not an easy debate to prepare for, and
the reason it was not easy is that there are so many issues to raise. We
come from a particular history and we are busy with a march into a future,
and that’s what makes it complex. So I will try in the time allocated to me
to reflect on our past, because I think there’s a need to do so; to look at
1994 and to look at where we are at the moment.

I will also share stories and one of those airs what is called shattering
gender stereotyping. In going back in history, I want to reflect on our
past and on the struggles in which the women of this country participated.
I will go back to 1913 and the Orange Free State where there was an attempt
to implement a pass system. African women at that point in time were able
to organise massive demonstrations in protest, to collect thousands of
signatures in petition and to co-ordinate civil disobedience campaigns and
demonstrations until the permit requirement was withdrawn.

In the 1950s – and I now reflect on the province in which this august House
finds itself – as the then regime prepared to designate the Western Cape a
“coloured preference area” thousands assembled in Langa to protest with
Dora Tamana, a member of the ANC Women’s League, declaring:


   We women will never carry these passes. This is something that touches my
   heart. I appeal to you young Africans to come forward and fight. These
   passes make the road even narrower for us. We have seen unemployment,
   lack of accommodation and families broken because of passes. We have seen
   it with our men. Who will look after our children when we go to jail for
   a small technical offence – not having a pass?

Thus a way was paved for what was to become a landmark campaign throughout
South Africa, as preparations began for the first nonracial conference of
women to be held in Johannesburg in April 1954. At that conference the
Federation of South African Women was formed, with the objectives that were
contained in its constitution:

   …to bring the women of South Africa together, to secure full equality of
   opportunity for all women regardless of race, colour or creed, to remove
   social, legal and economic disabilities, to work for the protection of
   the women and children of our land.

It was at this conference that the Women’s Charter was drafted. It called
for universal suffrage, for equality of opportunity in employment, equal
pay for equal work, equal rights in relation to property, marriage and
children, and the removal of laws and customs that denied women such
equality. The charter demanded “paid maternity leave, childcare for working
women and free and compulsory education for all South Africans”. This is a
reflection of the march of South African women. I also want to go to our
Constitution, and the founding provision of the Constitution says in
section 1, entitled “Republic of South Africa”:


   The Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state founded
   on the following values:


a) Human dignity, the achievement of equality and the
        advancement of human rights and freedoms.


b) Non-racialism and non-sexism.
c) Supremacy of the Constitution and rule of law.


d) Universal adult suffrage, a national common voters roll, regular
   elections and a multi-party system of democratic government, to ensure
   accountability, responsiveness and openness.

This is our Constitution, the central law of the land, something many of us
fought for and what I believe not only the women of South Africa, but the
people of South Africa must treasure, must fight for, must believe in.

I stated earlier that in 1994, what we had as part of the founding values
of the Constitution, was demanded by the women of South Africa, so we’ve
walked that road. Where are we today? The 9th of August 2004, the 10th year
into our democracy, the 10th anniversary of South African Women’s Day,
marks the achievements of women of this country in fighting for equality in
the home, equal opportunity in the workplace and a general recognition of
the particular contribution that we have made to intellectual thought, the
struggle against oppression and the raising of the next generation of our
leaders. All our policies, our documents that reflect on the implementation
of the vision of this government point to the commitment of building a
nonracial and nonsexist society.

We and the people of our country have all the right to indicate at times
when we think things are not going as fast as they should. We should also
reflect when we believe that there’s a consolidation of patriarchy that has
the potential of squeezing out what we have fought for and what we are
nurturing, and what we should actually ensure is the central part of our
future.

We can proudly say that the South Africa of 2004 is a more progressive and
empowered place for women and the girl child in which to develop, to learn
and to act. To a large degree we have been true to the spirit and the
values of our Constitution and in the Constitution in particular, from the
Bill of the Rights that enshrines the core basic values of equality and
freedom from discrimination, through the legislation that has brought about
wide changes in basic mechanisms that give effect to this principle of
equality, we have undoubtedly created a society that, in intent and
purpose, is free from discrimination based on gender.

Key to what would determine our success as activists fighting apartheid was
the belief that as a society we would not truly be free until women were
free. And we are proud of the fact that our leadership has remained true to
this principle of liberation.

The success of our transformation can be seen in the following areas – and
I will touch on the challenges, because there are indeed challenges we need
to address. We have seen change in the representivity of elected officials
in Parliament and women holding key positions as members of the executive.
To give one figure: 47% of Cabinet consists of women. More than 50% of
Deputy Ministers are women. President Mbeki has clearly reflected he does
not merely pay lip service to ensuring that women are given a leadership
role in society. South Africa is now one of the most representative
democracies in the world, leading established First World democracies such
as the United States, Britain and Germany, and we are proud of that.

The changing demographics in the Public Service is also something we see as
a major achievement and now, more than ever before, the women occupy senior
and middle-management positions. Let me just remind members where we come
from, lest we forget. In 1994 less than 4% of women were in senior
management, and there was not one black woman, not one. At this particular
point in time the representation of women at senior management level is
about 26%. What have we not done? We have not met the 30% target of women
in senior management positions we have set ourselves. We need to ensure
that we make that happen.

The Public Service is actively encouraging women to enter professions
previously deemed the preserve of men. The fact that we have highly
successful women in positions, such as the Ministers of Minerals and
Energy, of Foreign Affairs, of Home Affairs and for Agriculture and Land
Affairs, to mention but some, positions previously filled largely by male
counterparts, is a key reflection of this.

Women are being actively recruited into the sciences and information
technology, and at Houwteq we have trained women in the highly specialised
use of information technology.

We have introduced legislation to ensure that domestic workers are treated
in accordance with the basic conditions of service. And whilst we take
issue with the fact that the vast majority of domestic workers are women,
we acknowledge that these regulatory improvements are critical in ensuring
that the women of this country, who are effectively raising the children of
others and managing the homes of others, are treated with the respect and
professionalism they deserve.

Amongst other constitutional structures that we have established, we have
the Commission on Gender Equality and the Human Rights Commission that
actively protect the rights of women, while also undertaking educational
programmes to promote awareness and understanding about the different forms
that discrimination can take and how this should be addressed.

Improving health care has greatly improved the life chances of our women,
particularly with regard to providing free primary health care to pregnant
women. We have reduced the numbers of women who die from preventable
conditions in pregnancy and childbirth, making South Africa a safer place
for mothers.

And by providing freedom of choice - and I want to emphasise that – to
women to terminate unwanted pregnancies, we have offered to women trapped
by poverty, abusive relationships, and unfavourable life conditions the
opportunity to choose what happens to their bodies and how. This issue is
emotive and difficult, most specifically for the women who are faced with
such an agonising choice, and we recognise that. There can be no harder
choice to make, but we stand by the freedom of women to make this choice in
the context of safe and sanitary medical care.

Recently Parliament heard once again how many women, particularly young
women, still die as a result of abortions performed by untrained butchers
in dirty conditions. Our women deserve better than this. And we are proud
of the fact that we have given them this choice, difficult as it may be.

Our vastly improved education system has opened up opportunities for women
to learn and develop in a number of ways. Previously the girl child was the
first casualty of poverty, when families believed that they needed their
daughters at home to cook and clean or to work in the field, and if there
was a choice about who to send to school, the son was sent to school,
because he was seen, after all, as the breadwinner or the head of the
household. Now we ensure that all children, including our girls, are being
educated and afforded opportunities to lift themselves and their families
out of poverty.

Allow me to read a story by a 17-year-old girl. If a school blazer is
anything to go by, 17-year-old Charmaine Mahaya is an achiever. Her blazer
is decorated from the lapel to the bottom of the hem with a series of
badges symbolising sporting and academic success at her Johannesburg semi-
public school. The final badge is the one she is proudest of: it says “head
girl”. And for her mum, a single mother, the honour has been doubled,
because Mahaya is also a junior school head girl. Mahaya has a head for
figures. She says:

  I want to be an investment banker, but I don’t know where to go about
  looking for a sponsor for information.

It is precisely for girls like her, those aged between 14 and 18 years,
that one of our cellular phone companies, Cell C, has started a national
take-a-girl-child-to-work day, a concept to shatter gender stereotyping,
and to encourage young schoolgirls to go into different careers. We know
about the young girl from Gugulethu in Cape Town who went to Nasa. She had
a chance that was never there before, for young girls in this country and
especially for African young girls. This is part of the opportunity.

Through vastly extending the net for social grants, particularly aimed at
children and the aged, we have ensured that not only girls and our “gogos”
[grandmothers] have direct access to a means to survive, but that we
lighten the burden of care that often falls on women.

Within Parliament the process of the gender budget has been developed, and
we need to take that forward. The gender budget reviews the extent to which
expenditure is supporting the rights and needs of women. This process is
groundbreaking and has reflected to the international community the extent
to which South Africa has internalised and recognised the need to address
gender-related issues, but we need to do better in this regard.

Expanding our support to small and emerging businesses, we have enabled
women who cannot find sympathetic ears amongst the commercial financing
institutions with the means to become productive and successful
businesspeople, creating employment and enabling economic growth.

The awards given by the Department of Agriculture to women achievers in
this sector are a case in point. These women have ventured into the
traditionally male arena of commercial farming, and show that perhaps it is
not only green fingers but also a woman’s touch that helps crops grow.

At the macroeconomic level, women are a significant force with which to
reckon, but we need to ensure, as we are implementing black economic
empowerment, when we look at the financial charter, that black women also
get the low-hanging fruits that are there from BEE. I said earlier that
patriarchy is universal, and if we are not careful, our brothers will elbow
our sisters out.

Our own first lady, Mrs Zanele Mbeki, has shown by example the vast
contribution women working together can make to uplifting the conditions of
others. Through the Women’s Development Bank, many small businesses owned
and managed by women have benefited. I think many of you know about the
Aconwu project that she has been engaged in.

We also know about the Women’s Dialogue, the Sawid project that goes
forward, and there are many more such examples we can cite of the vast
changes that democracy has brought to the women of South Africa. Hence we
have reason to celebrate.

However, we also need to ask ourselves: Has our democracy, our freedom
impacted on every woman in this country? We have heard earlier about the
woman in Parkwood who died in a shack fire. We also need to look at what it
means for the women in Khayelitsha who are still living in poverty, with
tangible threats of shack fires; for the women of the rural Transkei who,
in some instances, have to pay money they do not have to travel to the
nearest town to access basic services; to the women of Alexandra township
who live with the threat of physical abuse, rape and even death.

So while we acknowledge how far we have come, we acknowledge the challenges
we must confront, and challenges we will confront, and challenges we are
confronting. We must pay careful attention to the women for whom the
benefits must be made even more tangible, the women who are at the moment
in the second economy, who can only aspire to the joys of the benefits that
are there in the first economy. And we cannot and will not tolerate a
society in which our baby girls, such as Tshepang and baby Kayla, won’t get
the opportunity to live normal lives, in which young women are abducted and
abused.

We need to ensure that women have the freedom of their homes, their streets
and their communities, that they have freedom of the day and that they can
claim and own the night. We have the legislative framework in place, we
have the Constitution, and we need to ensure the implementation of those
programmes through the services that we have in place. We need to ensure
that the public sector, the private sector and civil society play the
required role in order to ensure that we own and claim all aspects of our
society.

So we are not going to lament it. We are not simply going to reflect and
throw our hands in the air. Remember, we have been walking this path - I
just went back to 1913 – and women have come out, not as victors, but as
survivors, as participants, as activists, and we walk forward.

I want to close at this point by quoting another woman from elsewhere in
the world, who, in her autobiography They Shall Not Pass stated some things
that I thought we could relate to. Her name is Dolores Ibárruri, and she
was a Spanish communist. She was known as La Pasionaria, and I just want to
read some words from her autobiography. The following is said of her:

  … during Spain’s most critical years, the most hope-filled ones and the
  saddest, Dolores had been at the side of the workers and peasants, who
  yearned to build in freedom a future of peace and democracy. They Shall
  Not Pass is a recollection of a time gone by, miraculously recaptured
  with simplicity and warmth.

I quote her call to the future, to the young people of Spain:

  This youth is our hope. I am sure they will march, as they have already
  begun, down the only road for the ordinary people, the heroes and the
  builders of a new life, of a new world, down the road of the struggle for
  democracy, for peace …

In this book she says:

  I wish to offer testimony to the traditions of struggle of the Spanish
  people and to set forth the truth about our war in answer to the lies of
  reactionary propaganda of yesterday and today. Above all and very
  especially, I wish to show the unwavering heroism of the republican
  fighters, the abnegation, grandeur and the spirit of sacrifice of the
  fighters of the international brigades, of which you were a part, my dear
  esteemed friends, you in whom our people saw the fraternal
  representatives of the people so far from Spain, yet so near in our
  affection and in our hearts. Years and days have passed. The old hatreds
  have abated and time has closed the wounds which the wars opened in the
  bodies and the consciences of millions of men. New generations now step
  into the arena of struggle and there are those who, not having been in
  war or lived through war, raise anew the banner of democracy, of liberty
  and justice, for which the most heroic fighters of our war of liberation
  gave their blood and their lives. And when again in the streets of our
  cities young people devote themselves to the future of our democracy,
  proclaim their desire to make Spain a free country open to progress, in
  which the civil liberties for all Spaniards and the freedom of action of
  all political groups will be possible, we will think our struggle was not
  in vain. After the long fascist night, the dawn of a new day now rises
  over Spain. The fruits of the sacrifices of our people are beginning to
  mature, fruits whose seed was watered by the tears of our women, with the
  blood of our best men, with the sweat of all who fought for Spain, of
  peace, liberty and democracy.


Why did I draw on this quote? It is because I also believe that we have a
new dawn, and as we walk into that, we should allow for the young ones to
walk this path and understand what comes before. We should not take an
approach that many young women and the girl children will simply ignore our
past. They must understand it, in order to understand why we must nurture
and build this democracy. They must understand it in order to understand
why we must build and deepen a nonsexist, nonracial country. We owe it not
only to the past, but to the future, to the beautiful ones who have not yet
been born. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, this is
women’s month. Ten years ago at the opening of the first Parliament of our
democracy, former President Nelson Mandela echoed the goals and visions of
the ANC-led government on women when he said, and I quote:


       Freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from
       all forms of oppression, unless we see in visible practical terms
       that the condition of women in our country has radically changed for
       the better, and that they have been empowered to intervene in all
       aspects of life as equals with any other member of society.

On Monday next week, Chairperson, we will be celebrating national Women’s
Day as part of celebrating our 10 years of democracy. It is then necessary
to take stock of what has been achieved by women since 1994. At the same
time we need to take note of the challenges and obstacles that women still
face. We can learn lessons from our achievements, gains and plans - and how
we can improve on service delivery in the next decade.

Since 1994 great progress has been made in empowering women of all levels
of our society, in political, social and economic life. No one can question
that. The focus of my speech is the improvement of the social life of
women. Let me briefly draw a picture for you of where women were before
1994 so that you can clearly see the achievements of the ANC-led government
during its 10 years in power. I know some of you listen to the bad remarks
in the media about our government and begin to think like the Israelites
who felt that it was better in Egypt under the cruelty of Pharaoh.

During the apartheid period women in South Africa, especially African
women, experienced triple oppression: as women, on the basis of race and
class, and all were vulnerable to various forms of oppression and
discrimination. For a number of women this has manifested in a lack of
education and consequently in illiteracy, lack of employment and poverty.

Women have been subjected to violence in their homes and community, sexual
assault, harassment and discrimination in the workplace. Women were
exempted from decision-making roles and did not have legal power. This gave
men complete power to run our lives. We were treated as minors who could
not even have access to the property of our own husbands when they died. My
son, being male, had more power than I had.

As women we did not take the oppression lying down. A lot of women played
an important role in the liberation struggle as members of the ANC and its
alliance partners. On Monday it will be the anniversary of the Great March
of Women to the Union Buildings in Pretoria in 1956 to denounce the pass
laws. It is therefore fitting that when we celebrate Women’s Day, we should
remember with pride all those women who fought fearlessly for the
liberation of women. I salute all the fallen spears of the struggle that
were not able to taste the freedom that we are enjoying today: Lillian
Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Griffiths Mxenge and others. I also salute the living
great stalwarts of the struggle: Albertina Sisulu, Adelaide Tambo, Gertrude
Shope, Ruth Mompati and Comrade Madikizela-Mandela. We are where we are
today because of the sacrifices of these leaders fighting for the
emancipation of all women.

A lot has been achieved, as the hon Minister has said. The mere fact that
we have achieved a democratic government based on the Constitution, which
respects human rights, guarantees every citizen’s equality before the law
and the elimination of all forms of discrimination on the basis of sex and
gender, is an achievement and a cause for celebration. During our campaign
as the ANC before 1994 we promised women that we would make sure that we
put in place institutions that would specifically look at gender equality
and would create a mechanism for the emancipation and empowerment of women,
both within and outside government.

We have lived up to our promises. Gender machineries for equality were
established in government at all levels: first in the Office on the Status
of Women in the Presidency and then in the Premiers’ offices and in all
departments. Gender focal points were created in all the departments to
ensure that each department takes responsibility for addressing gender
issues in their policies and programmes.

However, in some departments the gender focal points are not fully
functional. This needs to be addressed within the second decade of our
democracy. In Parliament we have the women’s caucus that was never there
before, during the days of the apartheid government. We are seeing to it
that the capacity of women in Parliament is being built.

We have the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of the Quality of
Life and Status of Women that will ensure that sensitive interventions in
legislation encourages the public, particularly women, to participate in
the law-making process. We need to acknowledge the good work of all these
institutions. The Commission for Gender Equality is one of the main
independent statutory bodies that were established to monitor the progress
and achievements towards gender equality. I really congratulate our
government for creating an enabling environment for women’s empowerment and
ensuring that in the first decade of our democracy women are free from the
bondages of the past.

In terms of the representation of women in Parliament, the hon Minister has
said, with regard to the Cabinet and other public offices, that such
representation in South Africa has increased dramatically since 1994 and
this has been influenced by the adoption of the quota system by the ANC.

The approval of programmes to provide basic services of water and
sanitation to millions of people, women in particular, in the rural areas
means that they no longer have to walk long distances to fetch water. We
used to go to the rivers with a child on our backs and a bucket of water on
our heads to go and fetch water.

We have provided electricity through the integrated electrification
programmes and free basic electricity initiatives. Through the use of
electricity the time spent by women in collecting wood for cooking has been
reduced. It also encourages women to use electricity as a source of
economic development in the rural areas, for example by selling meat.

The school feeding schemes are feeding millions of children. Tax law
reforms are removing discrimination against women with regard to income
tax. The introduction of the child support grant ensures equitable access
for all South Africans to social assistance benefits.

I want to share with you that during the constituency period, when we were
conducting imbizos, one energetic old man who works for himself said:
“Today the children are receiving the grants, why can I not get that
grant?” He was demonstrating how the children are really catered for under
the ANC-led government. He made a joke by saying that men must also be
included. This grant ensures equitable access for all South Africans to
social assistance benefits. There was an outcry from women who were
benefiting from maintenance grants when child support grants were
introduced. They preferred the status quo to remain, so as to be the only
ones to benefit from government assistance.

There are challenges, despite the achievements we have made. Women’s and
children’s rights are violated and they are subjected to violence despite
impressive laws. This shows that legislation alone cannot change the
quality of life of our people. They only provide the legislative framework
in which the values of equity and dignity can hold and grow. As the ANC we
call upon the police and all in the justice system to show zero tolerance
with respect to all crimes against women and children. At the same time,
increases in violence against women and children illustrate the need for
radical transformation in gender relations. We need to teach our girls and
boys at home that they are equal.

The major challenge facing our government in the second decade of democracy
is the implementation of our laws and strengthening the monitoring
mechanisms to monitor the progress on women’s emancipation. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Chair, Minister and members, we South African women have
much to celebrate after a decade of democracy. The influence of women,
particularly in the political sphere, has made us one of the leaders in
Africa. No other country in Africa can boast the degree of female
representation in their cabinets.

Many excellent laws have been passed, but in many respects government has
failed to implement laws to improve the life of the ordinary woman. We need
much better law enforcement and policing to reduce the frightening
incidence of rape, abuse and murder of women. Like Ms Themba, I would like
to quote former President Mandela:


       Freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from
       all forms of oppression.

This is the yardstick against which we must judge our situation today. We
are certainly celebrating 10 years of democracy, but we cannot celebrate
freedom from fear and crime - and oppression. News headlines tell a
chilling story. We are bombarded daily with tragic stories of murder, rape
and abuse of women and girl children. A study done by the MRC’s gender and
health group and the Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation
states that every six hours a woman is killed by her intimate partner.
South Africa has the highest rate of femicide.

We read further that courts are losing the battle against rape. This is the
yardstick against which we must measure the government of the day. This is
where we can see what still needs to be done to achieve freedom from
oppression. Women and children are the most vulnerable of citizens. They
are so often the victims of assault and abuse, whether rich or poor.

Although the Family Violence Act is a good piece of legislation, it cannot
be implemented properly because of the enormous backlogs in the courts. The
absence of some legal aid or counselling for civil matters is a
shortcoming. Family violence courts should be established. More female
magistrates and prosecutors who have a greater understanding of the
emotional and physical pain suffered in such circumstances should be
appointed. Family divorce courts were set up about four years ago to
relieve the pressure on the other courts, but the only problem is that
there is only one magistrate to officiate. It takes up to six months to get
a date for a hearing. Better funding is required so that more staff can be
appointed to ensure the proper implementation of the legal system and
reduce delays. Family law centres could advise on maintenance and custody
matters, also the winding up of estates.

While we have an excellent Constitution, many people are ignorant of the
law and their rights, and are often subject to financial, physical and
emotional intimidation. Legal know-how is urgently needed. Attorneys should
be appointed to assist those who cannot afford their own representation.

Women are often marginalised when it comes to senior promotion posts in the
courts and police services. Tokenism should not be tolerated. The role of
social workers should be given far more prominence. The poor salary scales
and the vast caseloads lead to demotivation and do not encourage people to
enter the profession. Yet, their interventions could assist in stemming the
tide of violence, helping to uplift and counsel victims and perpetrators.

We need people to work in the field of conflict resolution and restorative
justice in our schools to empower young people to cope with life. More
centres such as the Saartjie Baartman Centre for abused women and children
are needed. We need to break the spiral of violence and callous disregard
for the sanctity of life.

Inadequate funding for medical services also affects the quality of life of
women. Pap smears and mammograms are available only to those who already
have cancer. No routine preventative checks are available. This is
unacceptable. This, too, needs to be addressed if we are to celebrate
freedom. Serious consideration needs to be given to how state funds are
spent.

Funding also affects the number of DNA tests that are done, and that are
essential to establish the guilt of rapists and getting convictions. There
needs to be a commitment to eradicate the scourge of rape. The police needs
special training and also a willingness to take reports seriously and to
act on them promptly and efficiently. From prosecutors and magistrates we
expect firm action.

Communities are showing their disgust by taking the law into their own
hands through kangaroo courts. The government cannot fail its people. So,
too, communities should be encouraged to assist the police with law
enforcement. Crime watches should not be summarily disbanded and reservists
dismissed. Women and children will bear the brunt of this disregard for
their safety and security. Liberate our women and our children from the
oppression of crime so that we can be truly free in this first decade of
democracy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, Women’s Day is
the story of ordinary women as makers of history. It is also a day to
commemorate women’s struggle for change, and to celebrate the progress
towards improving the quality of life of women. It is a day for reaffirming
our commitment to working towards the liberation of women. While many
aspects of the situation of women have been improved, much remains to be
achieved.

Women need to be in positions where they can make a difference, and we
acknowledge the work that the government has done so far in this respect.
Even though the apartheid struggle is over, women are still involved in a
daily struggle for their rightful place. Women’s roles have changed
dramatically over the past years. Women have to compete in the workplace to
prove their worth, while they have to take care of a family at home. The
gap between the participation of women and men in policy formulation and
decision-making needs to be nonexistent.

Many issues need to be focused on as we celebrate Women’s Day. One of the
things the NNP is very concerned about is violence against women. Violence
against women in South Africa has reached epidemic proportions. The World
Bank estimates that one in four women are in abusive relationships. In
South Africa one woman is raped every 23 seconds and one woman is killed by
her intimate partner every six days. Research has also found that an
average of 80% of rural people are victims of domestic violence, and these
are only reported cases.

Most incidents of domestic violence and rape are not reported to the
police. The global report on human rights states that domestic violence is
a leading cause of female injury in almost every country in the world.

How many more women need to be slaughtered before we take a firm stand
against all types of abuse? A policy of zero tolerance must be followed
against offenders. There must be a strong focus on prevention. We must
protect our wives, mothers, sisters and daughters.

It is incumbent upon each and every one of us to be agents of change to win
the battle against sexism, violence and abuse against women and to shape a
new nation. A historic opportunity exists for us to determine our own
future and to go forward with pride and confidence into a prosperous future
in our country. Let us act true to the ideals of the unsung women who have
made sacrifices throughout the years so that we could reach our destiny of
a truly nonracial and nonsexist democracy. I thank you.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, I am dedicating my speech today to all the
women of the world, those who have passed away and those who are alive, who
are torchbearers of families, even at difficult and trying times.

We meet today on the occasion of women’s month, on the eve of our national
Women’s Day. In celebrating 10 years of freedom, we gather here today to
reflect and give account of how far we have come in creating an enabling
environment for women’s empowerment and ensuring that the first decade of
freedom becomes an embodiment of the emancipation of women.

Our movement has long realised that no meaningful freedom can be achieved
without the genuine emancipation of women. As we reflect on the progress
recorded in the first decade, I stand here with the firm conviction that
there is cause for celebration today. Giant strides have been made in this
country and I, like millions of other women, feel proud to be a South
African. This is not just about addressing past wrongs, but also about
delivering to women in a very meaningful way.

The ANC-led government has, in the first decade, created a platform for
gender diversity and inclusion to unearth the full potential of South
African women. This has resulted in opening up opportunities, not only to
develop women at the top, but also at all levels of the workplace. Gender
equality is now not only about getting numbers right, but about enabling
women to make meaningful contributions to the social, political and
economic aspects of society.

Celebrating 10 years of gender transformation communicates to us that a new
dawn has arrived. Ten years ago the thought of women celebrating 10 years
of freedom was both a dream and regarded as impossible. Within 10 years our
country has undertaken a journey and I say without fear of contradiction
that ours has been a journey towards true humanity, a journey from the
apartheid state to true democracy. Indeed, the picture looks very different
when compared with a decade before. This clearly shows that remarkable
advances towards gender transformation have been registered.

A legislative framework has been established to support gender
transformation. One of the most significant features of our Constitution is
the right to equality. It is upheld as one of the cornerstones of our
Constitution and entrenches a number of different rights that are very
significant to women. National machinery for the advancement of gender
equality has been set up within government, the legislatures and
independently of government. The Office on the Status of Women in the
Presidency has been established to co-ordinate gender units in all
government departments. The Department of the Public Service and
Administration is to promote gender equality within the Public Service.
Provision is also made for gender desks within departments.

Structures in legislatures include the women’s empowerment group, the
parliamentary women’s group and the Joint Standing Committee on the
Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women. There is also the
Commission on Gender Equality that has been established as an independent
body to monitor and evaluate policies and practices of organs of state,
business, statutory bodies, etc.

The achievements of Parliament in relation to women include the support of
finance for the women’s budget initiative, the recognition of 9 August as
national Women’s Day, the provision for ownership by women in land and
housing legislation, and that recess time has been aligned with school
holidays.

In just a decade we have managed to increase substantially the number of
women in the political sphere. As the hon Minister has said, the
representation of women in Parliament has jumped from 27,7% in 1994 to
almost 33% after the 2004 elections. At provincial level the representation
of women has increased from 24% in 1994 to 32,3%. Currently Gauteng has the
highest number of women in their legislature, where 42,4% of all members of
provincial legislatures are women. The number of women in the Cabinet has
also increased, as the hon Minister has indicated. This represents profound
and critical confidence in women by our government that is very much needed
to make a difference in the struggle to promote women’s rights.

This has also been very important in promoting a range of policies and
pieces of legislation that will benefit women. South Africa will now move
up in the global ranking of women in parliament, from 15th to 11th place.
South Africa will now move to first position in the SADC ranking of women
in parliament.

While the ANC is the only South African political party with a quota for
women, ANC women account for 79% of the total number of women in South
Africa’s third democratic Parliament. This further marks the ANC’s
commitment to mobilising women to participate in the struggle for their
emancipation within society as a whole.

This is a direct translation of the strategic objective of a democratic,
nonracial, nonsexist and united South Africa. South Africa has the third-
highest proportion of companies employing women as senior managers and the
eighth-highest proportion of women in senior management posts. The latest
findings of the annual business owners survey reveal that 75% of businesses
in South Africa employ women in senior management positions, in contrast to
the global average of 59%, giving South Africa the third-highest proportion
of companies employing women as senior managers. The survey also reveals
that 26% of the total number of senior management posts in South Africa are
filled by women, which beats the global average by 7% and places South
Africa eighth in the world.

This survey’s results are indicative of the progress made by both
government and women during our 10 years of freedom. The government must
therefore be commended for putting all these measures in place, because
they laid a solid foundation for the meaningful participation of all the
groups that were previously discriminated against in the economy of our
country.

The development of women entrepreneurs in information technology in South
Africa was boosted recently with the launch of a women’s IT academy in Port
St Johns in the Eastern Cape. The initiative will be duplicated across the
country.

Efforts have been made to move women in business from the periphery to the
mainstream of the economy. The acceleration of women’s empowerment and the
development of women-owned enterprises has encouraged women to participate
actively in our country’s socioeconomic transformation.

Recent statistics show that the number of small and medium-sized companies
owned by women in South Africa grew by 39,5% in 2003 and that South African
women now occupy 17% of senior executive management, 25% of senior
management, 24% of middle management and 38% of junior management
positions. A considerable number of women have played a visible role in
economic development and participation in economic forums. However,
performance in this area needs to be broad-based to accommodate ordinary
women.

While SMMEs have grown rapidly, we want to see more women in the decade
ahead breaking the ceiling and entering into micro-oriented business
opportunities. We cannot as government find comfort until we have achieved
the economic emancipation of women and confronted all obstacles facing the
advancement of women in every aspect of society.

The ANC-led government is a caring government and because of that
programmes have been better placed to improve the quality of life and
enhance the status of women. The very fact that significant progress has
been recorded in the first decade proves that ANC policies are a correct
response to the challenges facing our women and the youth.

As we celebrate August as women’s month, it is perhaps appropriate that we
reflect on the progress we’ve made since 1994. This  reflection should also
acknowledge some of the mistakes that we have made as a country and the
challenges that we still face in terms of gender equality.

While I’m speaking of celebration, allow me to acknowledge the significant
role played by Comrade Zanele Mbeki, as displayed by her effort in bringing
together women from different factions in the Congo to a dialogue on the
problems facing their country. This intervention will lay a strong
foundation in building peace and unity in the DRC. This intervention
further demonstrates the practical meaning of women marching together into
the African century.

President Thabo Mbeki once said:

  The recognition by the peoples of the world of the fact that we have
  established ourselves as a winning nation, as a people determined to
  succeed …
[Time expired.] I thank you.

Mrs J N VILAKAZI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, today, and
throughout the month of August 2004, women all over the country are
celebrating ten years of democracy. Celebration means that a lot has been
done, a lot has been achieved to protect and promote the status of women.

Looking back to 1994, the birth of democracy in South Africa, it is indeed
very important that we consolidate the gains of the first 10 years of
democracy. The Constitution of South Africa is one of the most progressive
worldwide, entrenching a number of different rights that are very
significant for the status of women, such as, for instance, the right to
equality, the right to be free from all forms of violence, whether public,
private or domestic; the right to property; the right to social security;
the right to adequate housing, etc. I can mention a lot – there is a litany
of rights.

One of the most significant features of the Constitution is that the right
to equality has been held to be the cornerstone of the Constitution. All
other rights must be interpreted to give effect to equality.

Since 1994, women in higher positions can be found across the broad
spectrum of occupations, as the Minister has said. Through the efforts of
the women of South Africa, acting as agents of change and peace, under the
leadership of Mama Mbeki, women of South Africa contributed to the Congo
women’s peace talks.

They played a tremendous role in negotiating for a Nigerian woman, Amina
Lawal, who was facing the death sentence. This is quite laudable.
[Applause.]

At the present moment Mama Mbeki, as the patron of Sawid SA Women in
Dialogue, is involved in peace negotiations with the women of Burundi. We
highly commend this as women of South Africa. It is indeed an achievement.

Mphathisihlalo ohloniphekileyo, kuyintokozo enkulu kakhulu kuthina
abesimame ukugubha usku lomama inyanga yonke kaNcwaba (August). Kulomgubho
sibukeza iminyaka elishumi uhulumeni wentando yeningi athatha izintambo,
kusukela ngo 1994. Yini esiyizuzile thina besimame na? Kuhulumeni
wobandlululo wayemunye vo owesimame, uHelen Suzman, owayemele iDemocratic
Party. Namhlanje siyinqwaba ePhalamende, kulo hulumeni obusayo wentando
yeningi. Sebeshilo ozakwethu.

Inzuzo enkulu kabi leyo kuthina besifazane. Ukubhekela amlungelo ethu,
luningi ushintsho olwenziwe ePhalamende ukuba sikhuseleke kahle emsebenzini
nasemindenini yethu. Amaholide ezikole ahambisana nawethu, okwakungenzeki
ngaphambili. Sasingekho vele.
Kunemithetho eshayiwe yiPhalamende ukuvikela isithunzi sowesifazane
ekuxhashazweni - amalungelo alinganayo kuwo amazinga. Ukuxhaphaza umuntu
wesifazane noma ngayiphi indlela yicala elibomvu lelo. Ukubhekela isondlo
sabantwana, uhulumeni uvule isandla lapho. Imishado yesintu inamalungelo
agcwele, ukuvikela ukuxhashazwa komuntu wesifazane. Ukwenyuselwa
ezikhundleni eziphakeme akunambandela kulesi sikhathi. Owesifazane
unelungelo elifanayo nowesilisa. Amanzi nogesi afakiwe ezindaweni eziningi,
noma kusasibhedela-ke thina basemakhaya. Siyethemba kuyoze kulunge. Isimo
asilakungi. Kuningi okusadinga ukwenziwa kulezi zindawo. Ukwakhiwa
kwezindlu ezingcono kunemikhukhu kubasizile abantu abaningi. Omama ababa
nenkinga yokukhulisa abantwana babo kukesi simo esisuke sibheda. Siyethemba
uMnyango wezeziNdlu ozokwenza ngcono lesi simo unyaka nonyaka.

UMthethosisekelo wezwe uwabeke aba sobala wonke amalungelo abseifazane.
Kufanele kule nyanga abesimame bagubhe banxuse uMdali ukuthi uHulumeni
aqhubeke nokubhekela amalungelo abo. Kunye nje okuphatha kabi abesimame:
ubudlova nobugebengu emphakathini. Obunye bungaphakathi emndenini.

Kukhona namakomidi ePhalamende abhekele amalungelo abesifazane
ekuhlukunyezweni, nasodlameni olunhlobonhlobo, olunye olungaphakathi
emndenini, njengoba ngishilo. UMthethosisekelo wezwe nemithetho eshayiwe
ePhalamende ikhomba ukubhekelwa kwamalungelo abesifazane. Kufanele sijabule
ezweni lonke, kule nyanga. Impela siyahalalisa. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, it is a great pleasure for us women to celebrate Women’s
Day for the whole month of August. During these celebrations, we review 10
years since the democratic government took the reins in 1994. What have we
women gained? During the apartheid government’s term of office, there was
only one woman in Parliament, Helen Suzman, who represented what is now the
Democratic Party. Today there is quite a lot of us in Parliament in this
democratic government. My colleagues have spoken.

That is a huge gain for us women. To ensure that our rights are catered
for, there are many changes that have been effected in Parliament in order
to protect us in our workplace and our families. Our vacations have been
aligned with school holidays, which is something that never happened
before. Anyway, we were not here during that time.

There are laws that have been passed by Parliament to protect the dignity
of women and to protect them from exploitation – equal rights at all
levels. The abuse of women, in any way, is a serious criminal offence. The
government has taken steps to ensure child maintenance. Customary marriages
are fully recognised in order to protect women from exploitation. Promotion
to higher positions is no longer conditional these days. A woman has rights
that are equal to those of a man.

Many areas now have water and electricity, though we still live in poor
conditions in rural areas. Nevertheless, we hope that the situation will
improve in future. For now, the situation has not yet improved, and there
is quite a lot that still needs to be done in these areas. Many people have
benefited from the houses that have been built, as compared to shacks. It
is mainly women who face problems of raising their children under these bad
conditions. We hope that the Department of Housing is going to try to
improve this situation each and every year.

The Constitution of this country has clearly laid down all the rights of
women. During this month, women should celebrate and pray to God that the
government will continue to look after their rights. Women have one major
concern: violence and crime in communities. Some of that happens inside
families.

There are parliamentary committees whose function is to protect women from
abuse and different forms of violence, some of which happens inside
families – I have already mentioned that, earlier on. The Constitution of
this country and the laws that have been passed by Parliament are
indicators that the rights of women are taken seriously. We should all be
happy throughout the country during this month. We definitely express our
joyfulness. [Applause.]]


Rev E ADOLPH: Madam Chair, hon Minister and members of this House, there
has always been a dichotomy between the contributions of women to a new
democratic South Africa and the challenges they face. On the one hand they
gave their tears and their blood to lay the foundation for our new
democracy, but on the other hand they are still faced with challenges and
numerous obstacles to becoming really free. As the Minister said earlier:
“There is no freedom unless we free our women in South Africa.”

We need to recognise and honour the contributions of women in South Africa.
They were often threatened with harsh brutality, beatings, imprisonment and
sometimes death. They must continue to lobby and advance the cause of women
at every level of society - in business, government and the community - to
ensure that gender issues remain on the agenda.

We set the example in the ID, where we have the first woman political
leader in South Africa’s history. We all know that she consistently fights
for the rights of women. We also have to commend government for creating a
platform to enhance, empower and capacitate women. It is significant that
47% of Cabinet members are women.

But we are not free as yet. The Medical Research Council has proven
recently that sexual and domestic violence is rampant in South Africa. One
in six women who are murdered has been killed either by her husband or a
partner close to her. One in four women in South Africa between the ages of
20 and 24 years old is a victim of HIV or has been affected.

It is sad to note that women comprise 52% of the adult population in South
Africa, but only 41% of the working population, according to the SA Women
Corporate Leadership Census. I am appalled by the fact that one in three
women will be raped during her lifetime in South Africa. We have to expose
this. Please get real, people! Women are still suffering and they are still
the victims of triple jeopardy in terms of discrimination.

Professional black women are still being exploited, even by our own members
at home. Due to the cultural role of women, subordinate roles are being
allocated to them. We need to free women. Government must use its power and
influence to improve the status of women in South Africa. Although women
are equal according to our Constitution, there is no guarantee that their
rights will be equal. We have to commend the achievements and we have to
praise government for the little victories that we achieve, but the
struggle is not over. Aluta Continua! We have to fight until we have a
woman as President. Then only, I believe, we will be free. I thank you,
Madam Chair.

Mrs M VANTURA (Western Cape): Madam Chair, let me start by thanking this
House for inviting us to participate in this important debate. Our
department and indeed the Western Cape provincial government feel honoured
to participate in this debate in one of the highest institutions of our
country.

Celebrating national Women’s Day immediately conjures up memories of
sadness and pride for the majority of South Africans. This is the day when
we march down memory lane as we take stock of the history of our country.
We are celebrating our national Women’s Day just as we are rejoicing about
10 years of democracy and freedom in our country. Let us also note at this
point that these significant events are taking place when we are also
celebrating the International Year of the Family.

Women around the world, and in South Africa in particular, have been at the
forefront of the struggle for recognition and liberation. They have been
the most affected by apartheid and they had to endure triple oppression –
at home, in the workplace and in terms of race and gender. South African
women, the mothers of struggle heroes and heroines such as Solomon
Mahlangu, Hector Peterson, Sparrow Umkontho, Ruth First and many others,
suffered the pain of witnessing their children die under the ruthless and
evil hand of the apartheid empire. Because of their determination and
commitment, today we proudly gather in this important House of the national
legislature to look back at the road travelled in order to give birth to
the new South Africa we all fought for.

We note with pride the recent statistics revealing that our country, South
Africa, was rated number 12 in the world when it came to the representation
of women in cabinets. We should further applaud government for having made
significant strides in bettering the lot of women in positions of decision-
making. Recent research shows that women represent just below 28% of the
South African Public Service management. But this is not enough, as
government’s 2014 vision targets women’s representation at 30%.

Statistics released by the British Broadcasting Corporation show that
Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Iceland, the Netherlands and Germany had
all reached the 30% goal of parliamentary seats taken by women by the end
of 2002. Along with Argentina, Costa Rica, South Africa and Mozambique,
these countries met the target through quota systems. Despite these gains,
however, women still have to work hard to ensure that they advance on all
fronts of social, economic, political and academic life.

Whilst we acknowledge the important developmental initiatives by both the
private and the public sectors in improving the positions of women, in
rural areas the picture is totally different. The imbizos our department
held in rural areas around the Western Cape recently revealed the
disturbing picture of women still living under bondage and oppression on
farms.

These women narrated compassionate and painful stories of how some farm
owners forced them to work abnormal and lengthy hours under harsh
conditions. One of these wives and mothers, Rita van Staden, a farm
labourer in De Doorns in the Boland, told us how a certain farmer had
forced her son, who was completing his matric, to choose between going to
university and working on the farm. The farmer threatened to chase the boy
away from his land if the student continued with his studies. He wanted him
to work on the farm. The mother told us how she had to see her son leave
the farm as he refused to work for the farmer. This is a typical case study
of life on farms in South Africa.

Let us bear in mind that as we celebrate our 10 years of democracy and
liberation in our country, many poor people in poor communities, farms and
rural areas have nothing to celebrate yet other than just being able to
vote for the party of their choice. They are still living in squalor, are
beaten up and ill—treated by some farmers, and have to go through their
daily lives with their heads bowed down as they fear for their lives.

Yes, Chairperson, many women are facing violence and fear in their lives
every day, but unless there is a change in the mindsets of our men and
society at large, this will take place. We can have hundreds of policemen
on patrol past a house during the day or at night, or when it is twilight,
but once those curtains are drawn no one will know, not even those hundreds
of policemen patrolling, that the father is raping his daughter, abusing
his wife physically, emotionally or in whatever way.

We can have hundreds of family courts, we can have hundreds of places of
safety, we can have hundreds of Saartjie Baartman Centres, but unless our
society changes, unless we undergo that paradigm shift, things will
continue. We have to tackle that. Policemen can patrol, like I said, but
the battering will go on unless the community takes charge of it, and
unless men in particular address the violence in our community as well.

As women we salute those men who speak out against violence against women
and children. We thank those men who treat their women as equal partners in
their relationships. We respect those men in business who recognise the
potential of women colleagues and create the space for them to reach their
potential, and do not use them as tokens.

Not only do South African women leave their indelible mark in the public
sector, but also in the private sector. Statistics released in July this
year reveal that the number of small and medium-sized companies owned by
women in South Africa grew from 30,5% to 35,5% in 2003. According to
information released by the Businesswomen’s Association South Africa, women
now occupy 17% of senior executive management, 25% of senior management and
24% of middle management positions. South Africa has the third-highest
proportion worldwide of companies employing women as senior managers and
the eighth-highest proportion of women in senior management positions.

Today we can proudly look back at the road travelled by our stalwarts, our
struggle heroines such as Lillian Ngoyi, Adelaide Tambo, Albertina Sisulu,
Winnie Mandela and others. Because of their sacrifices South Africa boasts
one of the world’s most highly recognised constitutions.

This Constitution protects, most importantly, the most vulnerable in our
society, which are the children, the disabled, the elderly and the women.
This very House in which we are speaking, was part of a process that
produced one of the best pieces of legislation aimed at protecting the poor
and advancing the democratic values enshrined in our Constitution.

Our government has been playing a leading role on the continent and around
the world. Our involvement in the establishment of the Pan-African
Parliament has seen many war-torn countries begin negotiations, and our own
Deputy President, the hon Jacob Zuma, is leading peace talks in Burundi. We
have seen our President, the hon Thabo Mbeki, lead discussions on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development. This is a blueprint strategy aimed at
attracting international investment for the improvement of the continent’s
infrastructure and economy.

Our own Minister of Foreign Affairs, the hon Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
leads very successful foreign diplomatic talks in the continued strive to
establish foreign relationships around the world. Our government not only
saw fit to increase the number of women Ministers and Deputy Ministers, but
a significant number of them have also been appointed to strategic
positions such as Home Affairs, Housing, Minerals and Energy, Social
Development, Provincial and Local Government, Trade and Industry, and
Public Service and Administration.

Our government, through continued strategic engagement with communities,
nongovernmental organisations, religious organisations and the private
sector, continues to seek solutions to our political, economic and social
problems. We believe that it is only through working together as one that
we will achieve a prosperous, nonracial and democratic South Africa.

We are indeed a very long way away from that cold winter’s day in 1956.
South Africans are now a free people, but we have to be wary of complacency
as we continue to seek solutions and answers to developmental questions
facing our country. Malibongwe! [Praise!] Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Madam Chair, hon Minister Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi, hon
members, I would first like to express my deep disappointment at the low
attendance in this House for this very important Women’s Day debate.

As we celebrate 10 years of democracy as a nation, women in particular have
specific reasons to celebrate on Monday, 9 August. They could celebrate 10
years since all women in this country could have a say at the voting polls.
They could celebrate the increased number of women in Parliament
representing them, as well as the number of women that are Ministers and
Deputy Ministers in this third Parliament.

The other side of the coin is that in certain areas discrimination against
women still exists, and that still has a profound impact on the lives of
women.

As mothers of the nation, women should be treated with respect and as
equals in all spheres of society. One specific area that is close to my
heart is the effect that the HIV/Aids pandemic has on women. Through my
involvement with the Hospice Potchefstroom and the Amapelo School for
children infected and affected by the virus, I have realised that a lot of
work still needs to be done to empower women to know their rights,
especially their rights in respect of their own bodies and sexuality.

As I am speaking, there are 83 children at the Amapelo School. Forty-four
of those children are infected with the virus, and of those only 37 still
have their biological mothers to take care of them. Fourteen children’s
names are already on the wall of memoriam at the school, 14 too many, if
taken into account that the school only opened two years ago.

According to a report released in July this year by the joint United
Nations programme for HIV and Aids, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, and the United Nations Population Fund, 48% of all adults living
with HIV/Aids are women. Of the 37,8 million people infected worldwide, 17
million are female. It is even worse in Sub-Saharan Africa, where women
make up 57% of those living with HIV. Young women between 15 and 21 are
three times more likely to be infected than their male counterparts.

Critical areas for empowering women in this respect are HIV prevention
treatment, care-giving, education, gender-based violence and women’s
rights.

Women have the right to education and information needed to protect
themselves. They have the right to demand condom use. They also have the
right to say no. As many women said before me, culture and tradition should
not be used as an excuse to abuse women’s rights.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton, 1815-1902, said:

  Women’s degradation is in man’s idea of his sexual rights. Our religion,
  laws and customs are all founded on the belief that women were made for
  men.

I also quote UN FPA executive director Thorya Obaid:

  Abstinence is meaningless to women who are coerced into sex. Failed
  faithfulness offers little protection to wives whose husbands have
  several partners, or who were infected before marriage.


She further states that social and economic empowerment is key.

In a worldwide study done in 2002 it was found that women comprised more
than 50% of the world’s population, did about 60% of all the work, earned
20% of the income and owned 5% of the property. It is thus appropriate to
ask: Are we doing enough to educate women about HIV and Aids and to empower
them to defend themselves against violence and abuse? We should do more to
ensure that government’s commitments to gender equality on paper are
implemented in practice.

Also, we need many leadership positions to speak out, like Secretary-
General Kofi Annan did on 11 July, addressing the Aids conference in
Bangkok. What is needed is real positive change that will give more power
and confidence to women and girls, change that will transform relations
between women and men at all levels of society.

I also want to celebrate the husbands and partners who have the emotional
strength, the vision and the wisdom to recognise that women are their
equals, and to grant them the space and opportunity to take up leadership
positions in society. I salute you.

In conclusion, “Wathintabafazi, wathint' imbokotho.” [If you touch a woman,
you touch a rock.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, hon Chair. I want to express my
sincere congratulations to you on your unanimous election as Chairperson of
Committees. I want to commit my office, as Chief Whip, and say that we will
work together and support the work that you are doing.

May I say to our brand new hon Chairperson of Committees that I would like
to take this opportunity to say that I felt it was necessary for me as
Chief Whip to participate in this debate, not only as Chief Whip but also
as a male member of the House, because issues relating to the emancipation
of women do not belong only to the female forum. They are very important.

We also agree with and echo the sentiments of the hon Ms Terblanche
regarding the disturbing absence of other members of this House. Our hon
Minister should not be discouraged when we say that she should come to this
important debate, only to find that some of us are not present.

Equally, I must say that it was very disturbing to note that as she was
addressing the House, other women members of the House were engaged in
conversation. I will not say that they were from the DA corner, because we
do not have a corner for any party in this House. However, it becomes a
challenge for me as a man to say to our fellow countrymen that they should
respect the dignity of women when some of them do not show that respect
when a senior woman Minister of our country is speaking.

May I say that the ANC’s objective as an organisation and as a government
is to transform our country into a nonracial, nonsexist and democratic
South Africa. Our goal of a nonsexist society derives from our particular
history, which has been characterised by the triple oppression of women. It
is also informed by our vision of human rights, which recognises that women
and men have equal rights. This year’s national Women’s Day provides us
with the opportunity to reflect on the progress we have made in our first
decade of liberation.

In assessing the progress we have made towards the creation of a nonsexist
society, we need to reflect on the impact that our policies and programmes
have made on the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. We
need to establish the extent to which our policies and programmes have
contributed towards achieving gender equality and transforming gender
relations in our society. However, it is difficult to appreciate properly
the progress we have made in engendering our society without reflecting on
the legacy we inherited.

As we know, under apartheid women’s life roles were laid down at birth, in
the first place by skin colour, in the second place by sex, and in the
third place by economic class. African women in particular carried on their
backs a vast superstructure of discriminatory laws and customs, which
condemned them to the bottom of the pile of humanity. Addressing this
legacy was one of the key challenges when the ANC took over the reins of
government, and remained very much at the centre of our national agenda
during our first decade of liberation.

Gender equality is not a buzzword for the ANC, as it is for some other
parties. It is one of the fundamental principles that define our
organisation. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in the various policy
and pragmatic approaches that we have elaborated on since 1994. To mention
a few: we have a progressive Constitution that prohibits discrimination on
the basis of, amongst other things, sex and gender; the promulgation of
laws such as the Maintenance Act, the Domestic Violence Act, the Choice on
Termination of Pregnancy Act, the Employment Equity Act and the Promotion
of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, all of which are
cornerstones of gender equality; the institutionalisation of gender
equality through the establishment of national machinery consisting of the
Office on the Status of Women, gender units in all government departments
and, as was mentioned earlier by the hon Mrs Vilakazi, the Joint Standing
Committee on the Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women.

We also need to mention the ratification of conventions and agreements such
as the Beijing Platform of Action, where hon Minister Geraldine Fraser-
Moleketi also actively participated in its formulation and adoption.
Through these interventions women are progressively regaining their dignity
and taking responsibility for their lives.

Under the leadership of the ANC our country has also emerged as a beacon of
hope for women all over the world, and especially in Africa, because in our
country women are seen as not only participating in, but also actively
shaping, the nature and form of our democracy. Other speakers have alluded
to the good work that our first lady, Mrs Mbeki, is doing by taking Women
in Dialogue to all the countries in Africa that are experiencing conflict.

During the Codesa talks, for example, the ANC Women’s League spearheaded a
major campaign by mobilising women and organising a huge demonstration at
the World Trade Centre, demanding that all political parties in Codesa
should have women representatives. The campaign was supported by the ANC,
and as a result all the parties were forced to send women representatives
to the negotiations. Their presence around the negotiating table ensured
that women’s concerns were integrated into the discussions that were
defining the nature and form of our democracy. It also ensured that the
empowerment and emancipation of women was acknowledged as a central concept
in the reconstruction and development of our post-apartheid society.

The question of gender equality is central to our programme of
reconstruction and development in our country. We are saying that the basis
on which to judge the liberation of our country is to note the extent to
which its women are free, because we will agree that while there are
challenges, better conditions have been created for our women than was the
case ten years ago. This was acknowledged by our President, Thabo Mbeki,
when he said:


  The progress we make in the genuine emancipation of women in our country
  should therefore serve as a litmus test of the advance we are making
  towards fundamental social transformation. Failure to move forward
  towards gender equality can only mean that we are not advancing
  significantly towards the creation of a new South Africa.


There is enough evidence which suggests that the policies and programmes of
the ANC are beginning to have an impact on women. One of the most
significant changes is the increased participation of women in governance.
This has also moved us ahead of many established democracies in terms of
the participation of women in Parliament, many of whom have been appointed
as Ministers and Deputy Ministers, as the hon Minister has already stated.

Also, our presiding officers in this Parliament, as deployed by the ANC,
are women in leadership. We may also look throughout our provinces. Most of
the provincial Speakers deployed by the ANC are women, and the ANC has
deployed many women to be district and local municipality mayors, as well
as Speakers.

In the Cabinet women are no longer appointed to the usual women-related
portfolios, but are now being appointed to portfolios that are critical to
the reconstruction and development of our country, such as Trade and
Industry, Minerals and Energy, Foreign Affairs, Justice, Education, Health,
Agriculture and Land Affairs. I will leave it to hon members to count the
other departments that are led by women Ministers that I have not
mentioned.

I must say that during the second decade of liberation we must consolidate
and deepen the gains we have made in promoting gender equality in our
country.

As I am aware that I still have four minutes left, Madam Chairperson, may I
say that women need to ensure that they use their numerical increase in
structures of government also to change the lives of other women. As MPs we
are strategically placed to play a leading role in advancing gender
equality in decision-making. We are decision-makers who can directly
influence policies and the programme of government. We can ensure the
identification and amendment of laws discriminating on the basis of gender
and pass gender-sensitive and empowering laws. As part of our oversight
role we must monitor the implementation of national, regional and
international commitments on gender equality. In our constituencies we must
sensitise our constituents to the fact that gender equality is a human
right and a democratic imperative.

I wish to conclude by issuing a clarion call to all our fellow countrymen
to stop exploiting, abusing, raping, killing and maiming women, because we
believe that God created us to live harmoniously. Let us do so. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you very
much, Madam Chair of Committees. I also want to add my voice to those who
have congratulated you on your appointment. I think we could not have
chosen a better month to do so, because this is also the path of ensuring
that we do indeed reflect, through the face of Parliament, our
determination to build a nonsexist society. We are also confident, Madam
Chair of Chairs, that you will ensure that those women in the remotest part
of our country will feel the impact of your role in this House.

Having said that, I think it is appropriate to conclude this debate with a
poem written in 1913 by a certain Mrs A C Dube, called “Africa: My Native
Land”. I think if we listen to it carefully, we will hear the importance.

  Africa: my native land
  How beautiful are thy hills and dales
  I love thy very atmosphere so sweet
  Thy trees adorn the landscape rough and steep
  No other country in the world could with thee compare
  It is here where our noble ancestors experienced joys of dear ones and of
  home
  Where great and glorious kingdoms rose and fell
  Where blood was shed to save thee, thou dearest land ever known
  But alas, the efforts were all in vain for today others claim thee as
  their own,
  No longer can their offspring cherish thee,
  No land to call their own, but outcasts in their own country
  Despair of thee I never, never will,
  Struggle I must for freedom, God’s great gift
  Till every drop of blood within my veins shall dry upon my troubled
  bones,
  O thou dearest native land.

This was 1913, three years after the promulgation of the Land Act, the
infamous land Act. And we had an African woman who wrote so profound a
poem. I think it is still profound for us today.

The reason I thought I should raise it is that I believe the inputs from
everyone to this very important debate were that, as everyone reflected, we
should not forget our past. Look at our present in order to build on it for
the future.

I listened very carefully to the inputs and contributions that were made,
and I think we saw very clearly the tracing of our history. We had the
acknowledgement of heroines from our history, who clearly contributed to
our present. I think we all dealt with the issue of, yes, we have an
enabling environment; yes, we have a profound Constitution, but let’s look
at implementation. But I want to join those who said, as we look at the
issue of implementation, and as we look at the role of the government and
state, that we should also bear in mind the need and importance of the role
of community.

Now I want to make a few points here today, and I am going to make some
very direct points, having thanked everyone for participating. I want to
raise some points in which I would like to challenge some members in this
debate. I want to challenge, very pertinently, Mrs Robinson as well as Ms
Terblanche. The reason I want to issue the challenge is this. My
understanding of your party is never really so much one of appreciating the
centrality of the role of government and state. It is my party that talks
about the centrality of that role, and yet, in your input, Mrs Robinson,
you suggested that the role of government would be tested in terms of the
extent to which we have achieved freedom from fear.

Surely that is not the role of government alone. It cannot be, because if
we see it solely as the government’s role, I think we are missing the point
completely. I think there is a need to ask ourselves: What is the role of
every component of society? Let me make it even more personal to us. All of
us in this House today, what role models are we giving our sons and
daughters? Are we developing our families and providing guidance in such a
manner that each of our sons will understand that when a young women says
no, that that is indeed no? Are we playing that role, or do we expect
someone else to do that? Do we expect the government to do that?

I think a second point I want to make is a question I have asked. To what
extent have we taught our children, or are we teaching our children, to
understand the importance and the value they add in the family, in the
community, in broader society? Have we assisted them to understand the
importance of appreciating what is raised in this Constitution of ours that
says that everyone has the right to bodily and psychological integrity,
which includes the right to make decisions concerning reproduction, to
security in and control over their body, and not to be subjected to medical
or scientific experiments without their informed consent? Or do we ensure
that in the family we teach our sons and daughters to understand human
dignity, as captured in the Constitution, and the fact that everyone has
inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and
protected?

Do we also teach in our homes, and in the varying roles we play in the
community, the fact that equality includes the full and equal enjoyment of
all rights and freedoms, to promote the achievement of equality,
legislative and other measures designed to protect or advance persons or
categories of persons disadvantaged by unfair discrimination?

Do we also inform them that no person may unfairly discriminate directly or
indirectly against anyone on one or more grounds in terms of section 3. Let
me just remind us what section 3 says. It states very clearly that there is
a common South African citizenship, that all citizens are equally entitled
to the rights, privileges and benefits of citizenship and equally subject
to the duties and responsibilities of citizenship, and that national
legislation must provide for the acquisition, loss and restoration of
citizenship. Do we do that, or do we assume that this education must be
undertaken by someone else?

If we have listened to the inputs today, and if we have heard about the
practices that still take place in our country, there were examples of
farms and what happens on farms, don’t some of us have relatives who own
farms, or know people who own farms, whilst others among us may have
relatives who are actually farm labourers or farm workers?

What are we doing to contribute to the transformation of society, or do we
grumble like that hon member over there, who says, how relevant is this?
The relevance is that if we celebrate, we should also ask: What is our
responsibility as members of this House in order to ensure that we as
legislators contribute to building a nonsexist and nonracial society?

We have a responsibility to understand what is in this Constitution,
because I think many of us forget this document. It is there, and we may
not even remember it or sometimes do not know or appreciate that as
legislators we have a responsibility not only to live out this document,
but also to make this Constitution a reality of our country. It is
sometimes an easy cop-out to say: Well, someone else should do it. But yes,
Government will play the role that is required in respect of implementation
and, yes, it is your responsibility to remind us where that role is not
played.

That is why we have various programmes, such as the Batho Pele programme. I
would like the NCOP to study this programme very closely and say: In this
month of August, what of Batho Pele, and the Batho Pele programme and
principles, will make gender equality a greater reality in all corners of
our country? How will we make that happen? How can we ensure that we take
it forward?

So let us not just look at what others should do, or what the various
services must do; let us also look at what contribution we are making and
how we actually make a difference. I think that too often we are outward-
looking, and we forget to be inward-looking. We also think that, as we
challenge and oppose, we should look for someone else to fix the problem,
and we are not like Mrs Dube, who said:


  Despair of thee I never, never will
  Struggle I must for freedom, God’s great gift
  Till every drop of blood within my veins shall dry upon my troubled
  bones, o thou dearest native land …

We should do so proudly. I want to join all those, and in particular the
Chief Whip, who has said the struggle for the emancipation of women is not
a struggle of women alone, but a struggle of both men and women. I want to
say to one or two of those individual men who today spoke about “liberating
women”, that liberation is not done “for” women, but “with” women. The
freedom of women will not be achieved by others “for” women, but we will
fight for our freedom together, because it is after all men and women who
will make this beautiful country of ours indeed an emancipated country, a
truly nonsexist country, a truly nonracial country, and one that is a
united country. I think we should see how we can make that happen.

So, yes, we do want freedom from fear, freedom from want, and we want all
the freedoms that our Constitution captures and enshrines, but we are not
going to be spectators in achieving that. We will make it happen in every
area possible. We will make it happen in the shrines where we worship, in
the mosques where we worship, in the synagogues where we worship, in the
churches where we worship, and also where we engage in worshipping our
traditional religions.

We will ensure that we make a difference in our homes and indeed, as was
stated earlier, no number of policemen and -women will be able to prevent
the crime of violence against women that happens within the private and
personal sphere, within the home. We as a country have taken the bold step
actually to commit ourselves to the convention on discrimination against
women, which also says that even within the personal sphere we should try
to prevent violence taking place there. We need to ensure that we build the
foundation stones, that we contribute towards men and women in this
country, that we contribute in the upbringing of our children indeed to
make a difference so that they will assist in ensuring that we build a new
culture.

We come from a society that has been very traumatised, and overcoming the
trauma is not something that will happen in a flash of light, or simply by
wiping clean the blackboard. It is going to require a cultural change. If
we truly want to build ubuntu in South African society, we all need to make
that happen.

We will give no inch on the Public Service, the parastatals and all other
state machinery playing the role required. We just need to ensure that we
take it forward, because the challenge is much beyond us.

So let me say today: Let us as legislators take forward our responsibility
and say that we have come a long way in terms of the emancipation of women
in South African society. We have much to be proud of. But we have an even
longer road ahead and the challenges ahead are even greater than the
challenges that we have overcome. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, hon Minister. I want to take this
opportunity to thank all hon members who have participated in this debate,
and the hon Minister for participating in the debate, as well as for
highlighting the achievements of the government, particularly for women.

I think we also need to thank the women of this country who have been part
of the liberation struggle, who fought for their rights. They have shown
that by voting for the government of their choice during the general
elections.
Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 16:06.
                                 __________




                           THURSDAY, 01 JULY 2004


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 663 published in Government Gazette No
         26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires in
         open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
         maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns Vhembe District Municipality (formerly Soutpansberg areas),
         in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

     (b)    Government Notice No 664 published in Government Gazette No
         26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires in
         open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
         maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns Mopane District Municipality (formerly Letaba and
         Pietersburg Districts), in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No
         122 of 1984).

    c) Government Notice No 665 published in Government Gazette No 26407
       dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires in open air,
       the destruction by burning slash and clearing or maintenance of
       firebelts by burning and the execution of block-burns: Districts of
       (a) Ermelo, Eerstehoek, Carolina and Waterval-Boven, (b) Piet Retief
       and Wakkerstroom, in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of
       1984).


      (d)   Government Notice No 666 published in Government Gazette No
         26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires in
         open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
         maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns: Districts of Nelspruit, White River, Pilgrim's Rest,
         Lydenburg, Belfast, Waterval-Boven, Carolina and Barberton, in
         terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

     (e)    Government Notice No 667 published in Government Gazette No
         26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires in
         open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
         maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
         burns: KwaZulu-Natal, in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122
         of 1984). Clearing or maintenance of firebelts by burning and the
         execution of block-burns:  KwaZulu-Natal, in terms of the Forest
         Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

                                    ____

                            THURSDAY, 8 JULY 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (i)     Energy Regulator Bill [B 9 - 2004] (National Assembly -
              sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 25994 of 6
              February 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 9 July 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Energy Regulator Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister of
         Minerals and Energy on 2 July 2004. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.


     (2)    Sterilisation Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister of
         Health on 28 June 2004. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Health and the Select Committee on Social Services.


National Council of Provinces


1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services
              Board on the Road Accident Fund - 10th Report for 2002-2003.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for
              2003.

         (c)     Government Notice No 423 published in Government Gazette
              No 26203 dated 31 March 2004: Amendment of the Rules of the
              Government Employees Pension Fund in terms of the Government
              Employees Pension Law, 1996 (Act No 21 of 1996).

         (d)     Government Notice No 445 published in Government Gazette
              No 26219 dated 31 March 2004: Supplementary adjustments to
              local government allocations for 2003-2004 in terms of the
              Division of Revenue Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

         (e)     Government Notice No 446 published in Government Gazette
              No 26220 dated 1 April 2004: Local Government allocations for
              2004-2005 in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act
              No 5 of 2004).

         (f)     Government Notice No 444 published in Government Gazette
              No 26230 dated 1 April 2004: Allocations made to the provinces
              in terms of section 7 of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004
              (Act No 5 of 2004).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance and to the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:

         Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Division
         of Revenue Bill for 2005-2006, tabled in terms of section 9 of the
         Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Report of the Judicial Inspectorate on Prisons and
              Prisoners for 2003-2004 [RP 72-2004].

         (b)     Draft Directions by the National Commissioner of the South
              African Police Service, in terms of section 34(3)(c) of the
              Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 2004 (Act
              No 12 of 2004).


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
         and Environmental Affairs:

         Government Notice No 732 published in Government Gazette No 26295
         dated 30 April 2004: Request for written comments are invited from
         the public on the Draft Water Services Amendment Bill and
         Explanatory Memorandum.




                                16 JULY 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


         (i)     Companies Amendment Bill [B 10 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
              introduction published in Government Gazette No 26506 of 25
              June 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 15 July 2004.


     (2)    The Minister of Home Affairs


         (i)     Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              26507 of 24 June 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
         Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160, on 15 July 2004.

     In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
     Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary working
     days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Companies Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister of
         Trade and Industry on 8 June 2004. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Trade and Industry and the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs.

National Assembly

1.    Appointment of Whips of the National Assembly

     African National Congress

         Baloyi, Mr M R
         Bapela, Mr K O
         Fihla, Mr N B
         Frolick, Mr C T
         Gumede, Mr D M
         Jacobus, Ms L
         Kannemeyer, Mr B W
         Kondlo, Ms N C
         Lekgoro, Mr M M S
         Louw, Mr S K
         Maloyi, Mr P D N
         Malumise, Ms M
         Manie, Mr M S
         Masutha, Mr T M
         Maunye, Mrs M M
         Mentor, Ms M P
         Mnandi, Ms P N
         Mngomezulu, Mr G P
         Mofokeng, Mr T R
         Moloto, Mr K A
         Montsitsi, Mr S D
         Motubatse-Hounkpatin, Ms S D
         Mthethwa, Mr E N
         Mzondeki, Mr M J G
         Ngaleka, Ms E
         Olifant, Mr D W A
         Oliphant, Mr G G
         Sefularo, Mr M
         Sekgobela, Ms P S
         Sosibo, Ms J E
         Tshwete, Ms P
         Van den Heever, Mr R P Z

         With effect from 17 June 2004

     Democratic Alliance

         Ellis, Mr M J
         Kalyan, Ms S V
         Lee, Mr T D
         Maluleke, Mr D K

         With effect from 23 April 2004

         Doman, Mr W P
         Schmidt, Mr H C

         With effect from 24 May 2004

     Inkatha Freedom Party

         Mpontsane, Mr A M
         Seaton, Ms S A
         Van der Merwe, Mr J H

         With effect from 4 May 2004

     United Democratic Movement

         Madikiza, Mr G T

         With effect from 23 April 2004

     Independent Democrats

         Harding, Mr A

         With effect from 5 May 2004

     New National Party

         Greyling, Mr C H F

         With effect from 4 May 2004

     African Christian Democratic Party

         Green, Mr L M

         With effect from 3 May 2004

     Freedom Front Plus, United Christian Democratic Party, Pan Africanist
     Congress of Azania, Minority Front and Azanian Peoples' Organisation

         Mfundisi, Mr I S
         Mulder, Dr C P

With effect from 5 May 2004

2.   Referrals to committees of papers tabled
   The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
   relevant Committees as
    mentioned below:


      (1)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services
              Board on the Road Accident Fund - 10th Report for 2002-2003.

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for
              2003.

         (c)     Government Notice No 445 published in Government Gazette
              No 26219 dated 31 March 2004: Supplementary adjustments to
              local government allocations for 2003-2004 in terms of the
              Division of Revenue Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

         (d)     Government Notice No 446 published in Government Gazette
              No 26220 dated 1 April 2004: Local Government allocations for
              2004-2005 in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004 (Act
              No 5 of 2004).

         (e)     Government Notice No 444 published in Government Gazette
              No 26230 dated 1 April 2004: Allocations made to the provinces
              in terms of section 7 of the Division of Revenue Act, 2004
              (Act No 5 of 2004).


     (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
         Administration:

         Government Notice No 423 published in Government Gazette No 26203
         dated 31 March 2004: Amendment of the Rules of the Government
         Employees Pension Fund in terms of the Government Employees
         Pension Law, 1996 (Act No 21 of 1996).


     (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Arts and Culture and to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
         for consideration:

         Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture to the Speaker of the
         National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public
         Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the
         delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of the National Library
         of South Africa for 2002-2003.


     (4)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and to the Joint Budget Committee for consideration:

         Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the Division
         of Revenue Bill for 2005-2006, tabled in terms of section 9 of the
         Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Correctional Services:

         Report of the Judicial Inspectorate on Prisons and Prisoners for
         2003-2004 [RP 72-2004].


     (6)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Safety and Security:

         Draft Directions by the National Commissioner of the South African
         Police Service, in terms of section 34(3)(c) of the Prevention and
         Combating of Corrupt Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 12 of 2004).


     (7)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water Affairs and Forestry:

         Government Notice No 732 published in Government Gazette No 26295
         dated 30 April 2004: Request for written comments are invited from
         the public on the Draft Water Services Amendment Bill and
         Explanatory Memorandum.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committee as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No 663 published in Government Gazette
              No 26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
              in open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
              maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
              burns Vhembe District Municipality (formerly Soutpansberg
              areas), in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

         (b)     Government Notice No 664 published in Government Gazette
              No 26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
              in open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
              maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
              burns Mopane District Municipality (formerly Letaba and
              Pietersburg Districts), in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act
              No 122 of 1984).

         (c)     Government Notice No 665 published in Government Gazette
              No 26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
              in open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
              maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
              burns: Districts of (a) Ermelo, Eerstehoek, Carolina and
              Waterval-Boven, (b) Piet Retief and Wakkerstroom, in terms of
              the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

         (d)     Government Notice No 666 published in Government Gazette
              No 26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
              in open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
              maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
              burns: Districts of Nelspruit, White River, Pilgrim's Rest,
              Lydenburg, Belfast, Waterval-Boven, Carolina and Barberton, in
              terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No 122 of 1984).

         (e)     Government Notice No 667 published in Government Gazette
              No 26407 dated 28 May 2004: Prohibition on the making of fires
              in open air, the destruction by burning slash and clearing or
              maintenance of firebelts by burning and the execution of block-
              burns: KwaZulu-Natal, in terms of the Forest Act, 1984 (Act No
              122 of 1984).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Decisions of the 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union
         (Final Text of the Acts signed at Beijing), tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Decisions of the 1999 Beijing
         Congress - Universal Postal Union.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     (a)    The following statement has been submitted to the National
         Council of Provinces by the MEC for Housing and Local Government
         in the Northern Cape in terms of section 106 of the Local
         Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

         Committee of Inquiry into the affairs of Sol Plaatje Municipality,
         Northern Cape.

         Referrred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

         Copies of the statement are available from the office of the Clerk
         of Papers.


     (b)    Notice received from the MEC for Local Government and Housing in
         the Province of the North West regarding the intervention in the
         Mamusa Local Municipality, in terms of section 139(4)(a) and (b)
         of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No
         108 of 1996).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

         Copies of the statement are available from the office of the Clerk
         of Papers.


     (c)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter,
         dated 2 July 2004, to the Chairperson of the National Council of
         Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
         the South African National Defence Force:

  EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN SUDAN IN
  FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
  AFRICA TOWARDS THE AFRICAN UNION

              This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
              authorised the employment of the South African National
              Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to Sudan as part of the
              African Union Observer Mission in Sudan.

              This employment was authorised in accordance with the
              provisions of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with
              section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

              A total of 10 members are employed for an initial period of 21
              months. The members will be rotated after 12 months.

              The African Union will provide air tickets and a daily
              subsistence allowance to cover meals, accommodation and
              expenses of the Military Observers. The total estimated cost
              to be borne by South Africa for the deployment of personnel to
              the mission until 31 March 2006 is R 2 044 602,00 to cover the
              standard Republic of South Africa allowances for foreign
              deployments and mid-term home visit air travel.

              The Department of Defence will accommodate the expenditure
              within its current allocation for Peace Support Operations.

              I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
              Assembly and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee
              on Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents
              hereof to the notice of the National Council of Provinces.

              Regards

              SIGNED
              T M MBEKI

                                29 JULY 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 40 - 2003] - Act No 33 of 2003
         (assented to and signed by President on 9 July 2004).


     (2)    National Health Bill [B 32D - 2003] - Act No 61 of 2003
         (assented to and signed by President on 18 July 2004).


     (3)    National Environmental Management Second Amendment Bill [B 56B -
         2003] - Act No 8 of 2004 (assented to and signed by President on 9
         July 2004).

         NOTE: The name of the Act is the National Environmental Management
         Amendment Act, 2004.


     (4)    Communal Land Rights Bill [B 67D - 2003] - Act No 11 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 14 July 2004).


     (5)    Appropriation Bill [B 3 - 2004] - Act No 15 of 2004 (assented to
         and signed by President on 22 July 2004).


     (6)    Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 8 - 2004] - Act No 16 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 22 July 2004).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    International Arbitration Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister
         for Justice and Constitutional Development on 10 June 2004.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Appointment of a Chairperson and Members to the Financial and
         Fiscal Commission (FFC), in terms of section 221(1) of the
         Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), section 5 of the
         Financial and Fiscal Commission Act, 1997 (Act No 99 of 1997), and
         section 5 of the Organised Local Government Act, 1997 (Act No 52
         of 1997).

     (b)    Government Notice No R788 published in Government Gazette No
         26521 dated 30 June 2004: Exemption in terms of section 74 of the
         Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

     (c)    Government Notice No 722 published in Government Gazette No
         26510 dated 25 June 2004: Commencement dates of certain sections
         of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003
         (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1261 published in Government Gazette No
         26513 dated 28 June 2004: Draft Treasury Regulations published for
         public comment in terms of section 78 of the Public Finance
         Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     (e)    Government Notice No 773 published in Government Gazette No
         26511 dated 1 July 2004: Delays and exemptions in terms of section
         177 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,
         2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

     (f)    Government Notice No R749 published in Government Gazette No
         26487 dated 21 June 2004: Exemptions in terms of section 74 of the
         Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

     (g)    Proclamation No R24 published in Government Gazette No 26231
         dated 1 April 2004: Commencement of the Government Employees
         Pension Law Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 35 of 2003).

     (h)    Government Notice No 569 published in Government Gazette No
         26324 dated 31 April 2004: Statement of the National and
         Provincial Governments' revenue, expenditure and national
         borrowing as at 31 March 2004 in terms of the Public Finance
         Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) and Division of Revenue
         Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

     (i)    Proclamation No 36 published in Government Gazette No 26522
         dated 30 June 2004: Commencement of section 46(2) of the Financial
         Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).

2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the Clanwilliam
         Irrigation Board, Magisterial district of Clanwilliam, Western
         Cape Province, into the Clanwilliam Water User Association, Water
         Management Area Number 17, Western Cape Province in terms of
         section 98(6) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No 825 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Vanderkloof Water
         User Association, Magisterial districts of Philipstown, Hopetown
         and Herbert situated in the Province of the Northern Cape and
         Fauresmith situated in the Province of the Free State, Water
         Management Area Number 13 in terms of section 92(1) of the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 826 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the Koppies Irrigation
         Board, Magisterial districts of Koppies, Heilbron, Province of the
         Free State, into the Renoster River Water User Association, Water
         Management Area Number 9, Free State Province in terms of section
         98(6) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 827 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Stella Water User
         Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North West Province,
         Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of section 92(1) of the
         National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 828 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Tosca/Molopo Water
         User Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North West
         Province, Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of section
         92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (f)    Government Notice No 829 published in Government Gazette No
         26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Louwna/Coetzersdam
         Water User Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North
         West Province, Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of section
         92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson


     (a)    Report on the Investigation in Kannaland Municipality in terms
         of section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,
         2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

         Copies of the report are available from the office of the Clerk of
         Papers.


     (b)    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
         dated 21 July 2004 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
         Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment of
         the South African National Defence Force:

              EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN
              FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC
              OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI

              This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
              authorised the employment of the South African National
              Defence Force (SANDF) personnel to the Republic of Burundi to
              provide protection services to Burundian political leaders.

              This employment was authorised in accordance with the
              provisions of section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the
              Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with
              section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

              A total of 475 personnel are employed until after Burundi
              general elections, but not later than 31 December 2004. The
              said elections are envisaged to take place at the end of
              October 2004.

              The total estimated cost to be borne by South Africa for the
              deployment of personnel to the mission until 31 December 2004
              is R 39 million.

              The Department of Defence will accommodate the expenditure
              within its current allocation for Peace Support Operations.

              I will communicate this report to the Members of the National
              Assembly and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee
              on Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents
              hereof to the notice of the National Council of Provinces.

              Regards

              SIGNED
              T M MBEKI

                           -----------------------

                                2 AUGUST 2004

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and Diversity
     Agency (MDDA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 108-2004].


                                5 AUGUST 2004

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Ms J M Masilo has been elected Chairperson of the Select
         Committee on Social Services with effect from 4 August 2004.


     (2)    Mr T S Ralane has been elected Chairperson of the Select
         Committee on Finance with effect from 4 August 2004.


     (3)    Rev P Moatshe has been elected Chairperson of the Select
         Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs with effect from 4
         August 2004.


     (4)    The following changes have been effected to the membership of
         Select Committees, viz:

         Economic and Foreign Affairs

         Discharged: Van Rooyen, Mr C J (Free State)
         Appointed: Mabe, Ms E S (Free State)

         Labour and Public Enterprises

         Discharged: Van Rooyen, Mr C J (Free State)
         Appointed: Mabe, Ms E S (Free State)

         Land and Environmental Affairs

         Discharged: Mabe, Ms E S (Free State)
         Appointed: Van Rooyen, Mr C J (Free State)

         Public Services

         Discharged: Mabe, Ms E S (Free State)
         Appointed: Van Rooyen, Mr C J (Free State)

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs and to the Joint Monitoring
         Committee on the Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of
         Women for consideration and report. The committees to confer and
         the Joint Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of the Quality
         of Life and Status of Women must report:


         (a)     Decisions of the 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal
              Union (Final Text of the Acts signed at Beijing), tabled in
              terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Decisions of the 1999
              Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union.


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Appointment of a Chairperson and Members to the Financial
              and Fiscal Commission (FFC), in terms of section 221(1) of the
              Constitution, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), section 5 of the
              Financial and Fiscal Commission Act, 1997 (Act No 99 of 1997),
              and section 5 of the Organised Local Government Act, 1997 (Act
              No 52 of 1997).

         (b)     Government Notice No R788 published in Government Gazette
              No 26521 dated 30 June 2004: Exemption in terms of section 74
              of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
              2001).

         (c)     Government Notice No 722 published in Government Gazette
              No 26510 dated 25 June 2004: Commencement dates of certain
              sections of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
              Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (d)     Government Notice No 1261 published in Government Gazette
              No 26513 dated 28 June 2004: Draft Treasury Regulations
              published for public comment in terms of section 78 of the
              Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

         (e)     Government Notice No 773 published in Government Gazette
              No 26511 dated 1 July 2004: Delays and exemptions in terms of
              section 177 of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
              Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).

         (f)     Government Notice No R749 published in Government Gazette
              No 26487 dated 21 June 2004: Exemptions in terms of section 74
              of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
              2001).

         (g)     Proclamation No R24 published in Government Gazette No
              26231 dated 1 April 2004: Commencement of the Government
              Employees Pension Law Amendment Act, 2003 (Act No 35 of 2003).

         (h)     Government Notice No 569 published in Government Gazette
              No 26324 dated 31 April 2004: Statement of the National and
              Provincial Governments' revenue, expenditure and national
              borrowing as at 31 March 2004 in terms of the Public Finance
              Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999) and Division of
              Revenue Act, 2003 (Act No 7 of 2003).

         (i)     Proclamation No 36 published in Government Gazette No
              26522 dated 30 June 2004: Commencement of section 46(2) of the
              Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Government Notice No 824 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the Clanwilliam
              Irrigation Board, Magisterial district of Clanwilliam, Western
              Cape Province, into the Clanwilliam Water User Association,
              Water Management Area Number 17, Western Cape Province in
              terms of section 98(6) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No
              36 of 1998).

         (b)     Government Notice No 825 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Vanderkloof
              Water User Association, Magisterial districts of Philipstown,
              Hopetown and Herbert situated in the Province of the Northern
              Cape and Fauresmith situated in the Province of the Free
              State, Water Management Area Number 13 in terms of section
              92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (c)     Government Notice No 826 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Transformation of the Koppies
              Irrigation Board, Magisterial districts of Koppies, Heilbron,
              Province of the Free State, into the Renoster River Water User
              Association, Water Management Area Number 9, Free State
              Province in terms of section 98(6) of the National Water Act,
              1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (d)     Government Notice No 827 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Stella Water
              User Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North West
              Province, Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of section
              92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

         (e)     Government Notice No 828 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the Tosca/Molopo
              Water User Association, Magisterial district of Vryburg, North
              West Province, Water Management Area Number 10 in terms of
              section 92(1) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of
              1998).

         (f)     Government Notice No 829 published in Government Gazette
              No 26552 dated 16 July 2004: Establishment of the
              Louwna/Coetzersdam Water User Association, Magisterial
              district of Vryburg, North West Province, Water Management
              Area Number 10 in terms of section 92(1) of the National Water
              Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following
              letter dated 2 July 2004 to the Chairperson of the National
              Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the
              employment of the South African National Defence Force in
              Sudan.

         (b)     The President of the Republic submitted the following
              letter dated 21 July 2004 to the Chairperson of the National
              Council of Provinces informing Members of the Council of the
              employment of the South African National Defence Force.


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
         Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 108-
         2004].


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Annual Report of the South African Reserve Bank - Bank Supervision
     Department for 2003 [RP 20-2004].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Convention between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Cabinet of
     Ministers of Ukraine for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 4
     August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Convention between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Cabinet of Ministers of
         Ukraine for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
         Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Convention.

     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Agreement between
     the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
     the State of Kuwait for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, dated 4
     August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
         approval by Parliament of the Agreement between the Government of
         the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the State of
         Kuwait for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
         Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, referred to it,
         recommends that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the
         Constitution, approve the said Agreement.

     Report to be considered.

