---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 October 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-10-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2004
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.




                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
this Council, I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the Council –

  (1) notes that four people were to appear in court in Alberton yesterday
        on 18 October, following their arrest over the  weekend in
        connection with drugs;

  (2) further notes that the use of drugs, which are easily accessible and
        readily available, is a problem currently plaguing South Africa and
        harming the many people who use these illegal substances;

  (3) acknowledges that in order to curb the distribution and availability
        of drugs, we need to find ways of stopping and arresting the people
        who illegally produce and import them; and

  (4) agrees that if drugs are found on business premises, the trading
        licence of that business should be confiscated.


                           VARIOUS SPORT VICTORIES


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU:  Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council —

    1) notes that the United Cricket Board, in a spring-cleaning exercise,
       showed the exit to Eric Simons, the beleaguered coach of the Proteas,
       and appointed a new coach, Ray Jennings, former charismatic
       wicketkeeper and batsman of the formidable then Transvaal Cricket
       Eleven;


    2) wishes to record its approval of this change in stewardship of the
       national cricket team, hoping that this long overdue change is the
       harbinger of better things to come in one of our national sporting
       codes;

    3) notes with joy the victory gained by Bafana Bafana in the crucial
       away match against Uganda at Kampala last weekend; and


    4) furthermore salutes South Africa’s World No 2 golfer, Ernie Els for
       his magnificent sixth win at the World Matchplay Golf Championship
       just completed at Wentworth, England.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                    DA VICTORY OVER THE FF PLUS AND ACDP


                             (Draft Resolution)


Mnr D A WORTH:  Agb Voorsitter, hiermee stel ek sonder kennisgewing voor:


  Dat die Raad—

  (1) kennis neem dat die Demokratiese Alliansie tydens ‘n onlangse
        tussenverkiesing in Wyk 24 in Bloemfontein ‘n oortuigende
        oorwinning, met 424 stemme, teen die VF+ en die ACDP behaal het; en

  (2)  voorts  kennis  neem  dat   die   uitslag   weereens   bevestig   dat
        opposisiekiesers ‘n tuiste in die DA gevind het.
(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr D A Worth: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council -

  (1) notes that the Democratic Alliance achieved a convincing victory with
        424 votes in a recent by-election in Ward 24 in Bloemfontein against
        the Freedom Front and the ACDP; and

  (2) believes that this result once again confirms that  opposition  voters
        found a home in the DA.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                 POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council —

  (1) acknowledges the commitment of the ANC-led government in Limpopo
        towards alleviating poverty and promoting social development in the
        province;


   (2)      further acknowledges that the pursuit of these objectives has
        been the key focus of our provincial government during the first
        decade of freedom;


  (3) welcomes the recent successful Growth and Development Summit between
        the provincial government, business, organised labour and
        development organisations as another significant milestone in our
        pursuit of these objectives; and


  (4) commends all stakeholders involved in the Growth and Development
        Summit for the consensus they have built to collectively confront
        the urgent challenges facing the people of our province,
        particularly the poor.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                              PUBLIC AUDIT BILL


     (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Finance
                                  thereon)
Mr Z S KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson and members of this House, I stand to take
members through the Public Audit Bill. I think the first question would be:
Why the new Public Audit Bill? The Bill before this House does the
following: It aligns the Auditor-General Act and the Audit Arrangements Act
with the Constitution and other legislations like the Public Finance
Management Act, the Labour Relations Act, and the new Municipal Finance
Management Act. It consolidates all of these Acts into one Act and provides
a modern framework for governance and financial management. It aligns the
functions of the Auditor-General with the Constitution. It also clarifies
the relationship between the Auditor-General, Parliament and the Audit
Office. It employs domestic law, international legislation best practice,
and corporate governance as guiding principles and benchmarks. Members of
the NCOP would also be pleased to learn that various stakeholders were
consulted in its drafting process, as well as some structures like the
Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, the Audit Commission, the
National Treasury and the state law advisers.

More importantly, the Bill gives the Auditor-General powers to conduct
searches of properties, premises, vehicles and persons. It also deals with
audits by the Auditor-General, audits of institutions by auditors in
private practices and investigations, and special audits by the Auditor-
General. And the Bill specifies the powers and duties of auditors appointed
to conduct audits of listed institutions.
The Select Committee on Finance also raised a concern that, in terms of the
Bill, the Auditor-General accounts to the National Assembly only. The
select committee was of the view that the Auditor-General should report to
the NCOP as well. The select committee received the following response
later that, in terms of the Constitution, the Auditor-General accounts to
the National Assembly. The Bill had to comply with the Constitution, and
hence it states that the Auditor-General accounts to the National Assembly.
In practice, however, we are quite aware that the Auditor-General also
accounts to Parliament as a whole.

In terms of the current oversight duties of the Select Committee on
Finance, in relation to municipalities and municipal entities, the
Municipal Finance Management Act makes it mandatory for municipal entities
to be audited by the Auditor-General.

In fact, the constitutional arrangements in the preamble of this Bill
requires the Auditor-General to submit audit reports to any legislature
that has a direct interest in the audit, and to any authority prescribed by
national legislation, and that all reports be made public.

The Select Committee on Finance currently enjoys a healthy working
relationship with the Office of the Auditor-General, and with the
additional mandates issued by the Municipal Finance Management Act. One can
expect such a relationship and association to break new ground. The Select
Committee on Finance appeals to the NCOP to endorse this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That concludes the debate. I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with
Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties the opportunity to make
their declaration of vote, if they so wish.

Declaration of vote:

Ms D ROBINSON: Thank you, hon member. This Bill gives effect to the
provisions of the Constitution establishing the signing functions to the
Auditor-General to provide for the auditing of institutions in the public
sector. It also provides for accountability arrangements of the Auditor-
General. In addition, it enables the Auditor-General to repeal a number of
obsolete pieces of legislation such as Act 12 of 1995, Act 122, and
sections 58, 59, 60, 61 and 62 of Act 1 of 1999. This is a technical Bill
and the DA supports this Bill.

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.


                     PUBLIC INVESTMENT CORPORATION BILL


     (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Finance
                                  thereon)

Mr E M SOGONI: Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, hon
Chief Whip, hon members and our visitors, I would like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the presence of the senior management of the
Public Investment Corporation or Commission – or the soon-to-be Corporation
- Dr Dan Matjila, who is the Risk Manager and Acting CEO in the absence of
Mr Brian Molefe; Ms Swazi Matthews, the Legal and Complaints Manager; and
Mr Deon Botha, the Senior Manager of Special Projects.

Today marks the culmination of work that was started little more than a
year ago to restructure and gear up the Public Investment Corporation so
that it could participate as a senior player in the tough world of
financial markets.

The Investment Commission was established in 1911 to invest, at that time,
in government bonds and the government deficit, but that role has been
expanded over the years to include portfolios such as asset management and
equities, and developmental investments through the Isibaya Fund. Surely it
cannot exist or operate in the way it did 90 years ago when it was
established, especially in the modern, global capital markets.

So, the Bill provides for the change from the current Public Investment
Commission to the Public Investment Corporation, which will be established
as a juristic person with counter-party ability in financial transactions,
be subjected to corporate governance, as with all other private companies,
and to attract scarce investment management talent, which it is unable to
do currently.

The total funds under management of the PIC, as at 31 March 2004, was
R378 billion, whilst Old Mutual manages R252 billion and Sanlam manages
R200 billion, thus making the PIC the largest asset manager in the country.


To manage risks associated with financial markets the Bill proposes that
the Minister of Finance appoints a board of directors that will adopt
investment strategy and policy, although he will also have a representative
on that board of directors.

Clause 6(4) states that the Minister may issue directives to the board to
guard the interests of the state, because the state is the only shareholder
of the corporation. The corporation will therefore be accountable to the
state and be subject to the Public Finance Management Act.

The concerns of civil society, including Cosatu and a few other role-
players, were addressed, though there seemed to be a misunderstanding on
their side in terms of what the Bill sought to achieve.

The Financial Services Board will have oversight of the PIC’s operations,
and that should contribute to a more stringent, financially controlled
environment. The current PIC does not fall under any regulatory
legislation, so this Bill seeks to bring the PIC in line with players in
the financial markets.

On behalf of the Select Committee on Finance, I therefore propose the
adoption of the Public Investment Corporation Bill, Bill 6 of 2004. Thank
you.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question. The question is
that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow
political parties an opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they
so wish.

Ms Robinson, I hope that is a declaration and not a speech in support,
because we can’t create a debate if the committee has agreed that the
statement will be made from the Bill that has been agreed to by all
political parties in the committee. [Interjections.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Before the Secretary reads the Third Order of
the Day, I just want to alert members to the fact that we have before us a
lectern, a podium, which we actually want all members to test to see
whether it is working. So, as the Secretary reads the next Order, the next
speaker must come to the podium. [Applause.]


                   NATIONAL PAYMENT SYSTEM AMENDMENT BILL


     (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Finance
                                  thereon)

Mr D J BOTHA: Chair, I think that the Limpopo province, as usual, is making
history today for being the first to use the podium. I am indeed very
honoured to be in that position.

It is once again a pleasure to not only address this House, but also to
deliver a fundamental historic motion on the National Payment System
Amendment Bill.

There are four reasons for amendments to the original National Payment
System Act of 1989. Firstly, the most important amendment is to allow
inclusion of the South African Rand – the SA Rand - in multicurrency
Continuous Linked Settlement, widely known as the CLS and operated by the
CLS Bank in the United States.

Secondly, the amending Bill c1arifies the role of the Reserve Bank and the
payment system management body, currently the Payment Association of South
Africa.

Thirdly, the Act is being amended to allow for smaller financial
institutions to, for example, collect payments that are due on behalf of
third persons such as city councils. This amendment will also enable second
and third-tier banks to participate in the payment system.

Finally, wider powers are granted to the South African Reserve Bank. These
powers will further enable the Reserve Bank to include second and third -
tier banks, that have the correct system, to participate in the payment
system.

South Africa’s financial system is generally described as robust, highly
developed, sophisticated and well regulated. We boast a particular stable
banking system as compared to most other emerging markets. Our banks are
well managed and most have sophisticated risk management systems and
corporate governance structures in place. South Africa is effectively
compliant with all the basic core principles for effective banking
supervision.

Maintaining a stable financial system is, however, an ongoing task. The
National Payment System Amendment Bill currently before the NCOP seeks to
contribute to this objective of improving the financial stability of South
Africa’s banking system.

The Select Committee on Finance urges the House that the Bill agreed to in
accordance with the procedure established by section 75 of the Constitution
of South Africa. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question in respect of the
Third Order. The question is that the Bill, subject to the proposed
amendments, be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow
political parties the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if
they so wish. We shall now proceed to voting on the question.

Agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.




               GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES PENSION LAW AMENDMENT BILL


     (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Finance
                                  thereon)

Mr N M RAJU: Hon Chairperson and hon colleagues, the Government Employees
Pension Law Amendment Bill makes provision for the correction of errors
that occurred at the time of proclamation of the Government Employees
Pension Law (Proclamation 21 of 1996). Furthermore, the Bill provides for
amendments to the benefit structure negotiated in the Public Service Co-
ordinating Bargaining Council, PSCBC. The amendments are of a technical
nature. The Bill does not appear to have any financial implications.

The purpose of the Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill is to
make provision for an increase in pensions payable to certain pensioner
services within the nonstatutory forces. Section 224(2) of the interim
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, Act 200 of 1993, provides for
the integration of seven former forces that constituted the SA National
Defence Force.

In terms of Schedule 6, item 24(1) of the new Constitution Act No 108 of
1996, the said section 224 continues to apply as if the interim
Constitution had not been repealed. Former nonstatutory force members have
not had the opportunity to obtain membership and contribute to a pension
fund prior to the integration. This creates disparity between members of
the former statutory forces and former nonstatutory forces regarding the
recognition of pensionable services.

The aim was to place members of former nonstatutory forces in the
Department of Defence in a similar position to that of the former statutory
force members regarding the recognition of previous services for pension
purposes.

The total costs amounts to R766 million of which the employer’s portion
amounts to R501 million and that of the members to R265 million. About R501
million of the fund set aside under the PSCBC Resolution 7/98 will be used
to finance the employer’s responsibilities.

Affected employees will be responsible for a part of the additional costs.
For members who are unable to pay their share of the costs, additional
pensionable service granted will be reduced accordingly. Affected employees
will be excluded from any benefits other than those received as dependants
payable under the Special Pensions Act, Act 69 of 1996.

Members who have already received benefits under the Special Pensions Act
will repay such benefits or have their pensionable services granted
reduced.

The Bill gives effect to section 224(2) of the interim Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa. This section provides for the integration of
seven former forces that constituted the SANDF. In terms of Schedule 6 to
the new Constitution, Act 108 of 1996, the said section 224 continues in
force as if the interim Constitution had not been repealed.

The Select Committee on Finance approves the Bill. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: I shall now put the question in respect of the
Fourth Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to. In accordance
with Rule 63 I shall first allow political parties the opportunity to make
their declaration of vote if they so wish. We shall now proceed to the
voting on the question.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

   LOCAL GOVERNMENT AS A VEHICLE FOR THE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
                       SOCIAL CONTRACT TO CREATE JOBS

   (Consideration of Report on Provincial Week of 6 to 10 September 2004)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson,
Deputy Chairperson and members of the NCOP, I’ve been requested to come and
lead this debate in the NCOP on how best local government, as a vehicle for
successful implementation of the social contract, can create jobs.

As we consider the report on Provincial Week of 6 to 10 September 2004
under the theme, local government as a vehicle for the successful
implementation of the social contract to create jobs, allow me to start
from the point that guides all the government’s decisions around economic
growth and development.

The Freedom Charter clearly stipulates that people shall share in the
country’s wealth, and that there shall be work and security. These noble
words were not mere wishful thinking, but rather reflected a sincere
commitment by our visionary leadership to improve the quality of lives of
our people. Therefore, it is these very words that form the basis of
government’s policy today.

The Freedom Charter does not just represent a check list of things to be
done, but also a vision that drives today’s government in its work for
fundamental transformation of our society. I believe that all of us here
today recognise and understand clearly that the political freedom we gained
in 1994 provides the foundation on which to build South Africa’s economic
emancipation, without which our people will not be truly free.

When the Freedom Charter talks about sharing in the country’s wealth, we
know that this is intricately linked to the imperative for economic growth
and development. As we celebrate 10 years of our freedom, and as we
celebrate the growth of our economy, we should take special cognisance of
the fact that the growth of our economy does not undermine development and
that it creates jobs and a better life for all our citizens. This is what
we meant by signing a social contract with our people. As government
departments we should ensure that the terms of this contract are realised.

In this tenth year of South African democracy, I want us to pause and
reflect on how far we are as a nation in building our economy. In 1994, the
economy was in an advanced state of decline due to political isolation,
inward-looking economic policies and the legacy of racial exclusion. There
was a stagnant GDP growth until 1994; saving and investment rates were
declining; and employment within the formal sector was falling. In terms of
human development, the weakness in the economy resulted in declining living
standards; high levels of racial, gender and geographic inequality as well
as absolute poverty.

This bleak picture would have spiralled out of control if the historic
event of 27 April 1994 had not occurred. It is not that somebody suddenly
actually had a good heart and 27 April just happened, but it happened
against the backdrop of people’s struggles and people’s lives.

Our new democratic government had to institute a number of policy and
institutional reforms to transform South Africa into a growing economy and
expand economic opportunities. The first priority was to create
macroeconomic stability and macroeconomic reforms, which resulted in the
stabilisation of the major macroeconomic aggregates such as reduced budget
deficit as a percentage of the GDP, a decline of inflation and real
interest rates, improved transparency and predictability of monetary and
fiscal policies, and the successful reintegration of our government into
the global economy. Furthermore, the creation of sound macroeconomic
fundamentals enabled more targeted microeconomic reforms to generate
economic growth levels to sufficient levels in order to address South
Africa’s policy goals.

However, although the growth of the South African economy has ranged
between 2% and 3% for the past few years, what is still needed is an
impetus to stimulate higher levels of growth, investment and employment. We
believe that this is where local government can play a significant role.
Government’s intentions for local sphere of government are clear and
unequivocal: Local government must impact upon the lives of millions of
people whom apartheid denied democratic choice, economic security and
social justice.

Our cities and towns, from the largest metropolitan conglomerates to the
deep rural hamlets, are weapons on the front line of a war against poverty.
These municipalities are instruments for participatory, responsive and
accountable governance, and offer us an opportunity to develop local
leaders who will have the capacity to build the political, economic and
social partnerships that are needed to fight and win this war.

Therefore, our White Paper on Local Government introduces the concept of
developmental local government. It describes this concept as,
      ... local government committed to working with citizens and groups
      within the community to find sustainable ways to meet their social,
      economic and material needs and improve the quality of their lives.

The White Paper goes further and says that municipalities need to have a
clear vision for their local economy, and work in partnership with local
business to maximise job creation and investment.

However, the White Paper warns that local government is not directly
responsible for creating jobs. Rather, it is responsible for taking active
steps to ensure that the overall economic and social conditions of the
locality are conducive to the creation of employment opportunities. And,
this does not contradict the theme of today’s debate.

We need to remember that our new municipal system has increased the
economic development responsibilities of local government. Therefore, local
government has greater responsibilities for, firstly, the economic welfare
of its citizens; secondly, its own fiscal health; and thirdly, the
management of its assets.

Municipalities have to play a key strategic facilitation role as agents of
local economic change and development. This role encompasses a strategic
approach that goes way beyond the marginal role municipalities have been
playing up to now in respect of developing their local economy. It focuses
on enhancing revenue generation and identifying key triggers to spur
economic activity, growth and job creation.

It is through economic strategies at a local level that meaningful
empowerment of communities can take place. This empowerment has to be based
on systematic skills development, expanding entrepreneurship, embarking on
sound business ventures, acquisition of assets and most importantly,
greater ownership of economic processes by the majority of citizens.

Therefore, there is a number of key strategic facilitative measures that
local government has to embark on to ensure that meaningful empowerment of
communities can take place. Allow me to mention but a few. Firstly, and
probably most importantly, local government has to render the local socio-
economic environment operational in order to facilitate the creation and
development of local economic activities. The bylaws, basic infrastructure
and services delivered must be of such a nature that they do not create
barriers to economic activities that local and external investors have
embarked on. Nearly as important as the first measure is that local
government should determine what the comparative and competitive advantage
of its locality is. It then has to market the area based on its findings,
and provide marketing assistance and support to businesses of the area, and
attract inward investment.

The development of human capital is also an important factor in the
creation of sustainable jobs. However, the skills development strategy
should be focused on the needs of the local economy so that skilled
individuals are retained in the locality. The development of social capital
should also be in tandem with the development of human capital. Local
government should therefore encourage and develop the presence and capacity
of all relevant collective stakeholders in the local economy, for example
chambers of commerce, co-operatives, NGOs, CBOs, development agencies etc.

A huge emphasis should be placed on community economic development. Local
government should encourage community-based initiatives targeted at
community businesses and co-operatives, and municipal-community
partnerships, especially in respect of infrastructure and service delivery.
I think we need to put an emphasis on this paragraph, that is, we need to
begin to make a dent on that second economy. We need to begin to transfer
resources from the first economy to the second economy.

Local government should also play a leading role in organising a network of
local actors who will prepare and elaborate on projects and initiatives
that can have access to the provincial, national and international
resources that are available. Local governments must prepare and implement
technically appropriate, viable and sustainable local economic development
components for their integrated development plans, in alignment with the
provincial growth and development plans.

These are some of the numerous measures that local government can take to
ensure that sustainable jobs are created in their localities. These
measures need to be effected in a way that enhances co-operation between
different regions and is based on a people-centred approach. And, what we
need most are the IDPs in our local areas. It therefore pains me when I
realise that there are certain municipalities who still operate outside
government’s box.

It pains me to find out that wherever we go, our people continue to
complain about basic services that are not rendered to them. And, in most
cases, I will argue that that is not due to the lack of infrastructure for
providing those services, but I would think that it’s a lack of political
will. It pains me to realise that we continue to receive reports about
councillors who do not do their job, and that they treat such a mammoth
task of providing services to people as a part-time job. On this note, I
would like to commend the NCOP for having taken the rather difficult but
necessary decisions to dissolve those dysfunctional councils.

Finally, I want to emphasise that a people-centred approach to economic
development recognises that local government co-ordinates and facilitates
an environment in which economic growth can take place, while it is
communities and entrepreneurs with the appropriate skills and commitment
that would drive economic growth. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SHICEKA: Madam Chairperson, I am privileged to be standing here today,
because I am amongst the first cadre that is able to occupy this podium,
and for some it might still take a while to get here.

It is an honour to present the outcome of the report on the state of our
municipalities across the lengths and breadths of our country. The outcome
is a result of a democratic process undertaken by all the members of the
Council under the able leadership and stewardship of our Chairperson and
her deputy.

This process was undertaken in response to the call made by the President
in his state of the nation address in May. The process further advanced our
cause of implementing the Council’s “Vision 2009”.

This input is against the background of celebrating 10 years of democracy
for provincial and national spheres of government, whilst municipalities
have been in their current state for almost four years. Therefore, our
fledgling democracy is still young and fragile.

Municipalities are a very important sphere of government as they are at the
cockpit of service delivery. In terms of Chapter 3 of the Constitution, the
NCOP is an embodiment of corporative governance. It is a sphere better
positioned and poised to conduct an audit of experiences, challenges and
constraints facing municipalities.

We believe that the information obtained in this report will be used by the
NCOP as a framework for the development of a monitoring tool for
municipalities across our country in different provinces. There may be a
need for external capacity to be mobilised in the development of a
monitoring mechanism, and where necessary, to augment the skills within the
NCOP with additional expertise.

The overwhelming findings following that democratic process is that,
despite the enormous challenges and constraints, significant progress has
been registered in delivering and expanding services where they never
existed before.

Throughout the country municipalities are found to be functioning and
delivering services of high quality and making a real contribution in our
quest to bring a better life to all in our country. However, there are
areas of grave concern and weakness that were recognised within these
municipalities. Therefore, we say that there is room for improvement
amongst them.

My input will touch on various aspects, particularly the recommendations.
The deepening of democracy by means of ensuring that in real terms people
govern in our country is a cornerstone of our people’s government.
Therefore, community participation is a critical component of local
government.

Although municipalities indicated that ward committees have been
established and that they are receiving support, it appears that many are
not functioning adequately for various reasons. These include, amongst
others, a lack of proper financial and administrative support and the fact
that ward councillors are working on a part-time basis, and therefore
unable to give attention to the functioning of ward committees.

In some municipalities the provision of free basic services is still a
challenge as these services are not provided by municipalities themselves,
but by Eskom and other entities. In other municipalities there are still
problems with the installation of water metres, thus casting serious doubts
on claims that free basic services are being provided.

Outside the metropolitan areas, and particularly in informal settlements
and rural areas, households continue to use ventilated pit latrines, and
some of them are still using the bucket system. It is, therefore,
recommended that a national policy, to establish minimum standards for the
provision of sanitation, must be developed as a matter of urgency.

The Department of Provincial and Local Government, at national level, and
provincial departments must, as a matter of urgency, meet with the
Department of Minerals and Energy to ensure that agreements in relation to
the provision of free electricity by Eskom are implemented as a matter of
urgency.

All local government departments at provincial level should co-ordinate and
carry out an audit with regard to the extent of infrastructure backlogs and
ensure that infrastructure is costed. This should be done so that there is
a programme for implementation and so that we know how much it will cost
the fiscus of the country to implement our programmes around service
delivery.

We must also encourage the establishment of committees in various
municipalities, particularly tender and audit committees. Audit committees
must work towards the goal of ensuring that municipalities receive
unqualified opinions from the Auditor-General. We must also ensure that
IDPs are linked to budgets and that they reflect the will of our people on
the ground.

The Skills Development Act and the Growth and Development Summit
resolutions must be applied to learnerships. Some problems are being
experienced in getting approval for projects around development because of
legislation on the environment, particularly the environmental impact
assessment, which causes some delays, and that we believe are unintended
consequences of environmental legislation.

Therefore, we recommend that the Department of Provincial and Local
Government meet with the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
as a matter of urgency, to ensure that these matters are addressed, because
they have the adverse effect of making our country and our municipalities
unattractive to investors.

In conclusion, we must encourage and ensure that these resolutions are
implemented by the departments affected. Committees should convene meetings
with their relevant departments to discuss programmes for the
implementation of these resolutions with their counterpart departments.
Provincial governments should also follow suit by ensuring that issues
raised in provincial reports are attended to and that they are addressed.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr D A WORTH: Madam Chair, the crisis in local government is being tackled
on several fronts, but we wonder as to who has the courage to tackle the
central issues. Violent uprisings, notably in the Free State, point to
severe problems. The popular uprising started at Intabezwe township,
outside Harrismith, and the protests have spread to the neighbouring towns
of Warden, Vrede and Memel, where residents, who live in dire poverty, took
to the streets. Taps are not working, and latrine buckets have not been
collected for weeks.

Councillors not accounting to their constituencies appear to be a common
complaint amongst the residents of the township. In many instances ward
committees were not working, or those protesting were not involved in the
committees.

The finances of too many municipalities are in disarray. These
municipalities do not collect enough revenue to provide proper services and
are incapable of spending, in an efficient manner, what little they have.

Capacity constraints represent the biggest obstacle to service delivery.
Many small towns have deteriorated as middle-class people move to the
cities, and economic life in these smaller towns have collapsed. The
residents of towns like Vrede are desperately poor and are unemployed
without capital or resources. On top of this comes the arrival in local
government of people without much managerial experience or training.
Disgruntled residents refuse to pay for inferior services. There are
municipalities where thousands of people are permanently in arrears.

Various types of debt write-offs have merely postponed the inevitable,
without instilling a culture of payment. There is often no uniform policy
regarding credit control or collection of revenue. There are problems with
billing, collection of money for rates and services provided by the
municipalities. Many municipalities depend largely or exclusively on the
equitable share as their source of revenue.

The national Department of Provincial and Local Government undertook a
study to profile all the municipalities in the Free State province in order
to determine their capacity to deliver basic services. Some of the findings
reflected the following: 18 municipalities have a high unemployment rate of
around 48%; 8 municipalities have no access to refuse removal, over 50%
have access to sanitation facilities in any form, and in 6 municipalities
50% of the population have no access to electricity. The study came to the
conclusion that most municipalities in the Free State are in dire need.

As a result of these findings the provincial government has an increased
number of municipalities, from the present five to now 10, that need
assistance.

Veel meer sal gedoen moet word om die toestand in ’n munisipaliteit soos
die van Maluti-A-phofung, Qwaqwa of Phuthaditjhaba in die Vrystaat reg te
ruk. Kommerwekkende feite oor die munisipaliteit waar die onluste weens
inwoners se griewe voorgekom het, het in die munisipaliteit se voorlegging
aan die komitee aan die lig gekom.

Ek noem enkele voorbeelde: sowat 50% van alle huishoudings in die gebied is
sonder toegang tot veilige water, en 75% is sonder sanitasiegeriewe,
elektrisiteit en telekommunikasiedienste. Die munisipaliteit moet nou ook
geld terug betaal nadat hy homself verkeerdelik as ’n kategorie vyf
munisipaliteit gegradeer het, en personeel gevolglik te veel betaal het.

Nie al die probleme is die munisipaliteit se skuld nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Much more will have to be done to rectify the state of municipalities  such
as  Maluti-A-phofung,  Qwaqwa,  or  Phutaditjhaba   in   the   Free   State.
Distressing facts about the municipality where rioting occurred  on  account
of  the  inhabitants’  grievances,  came  to  light  in  the  municipality’s
submission to the committee.

I want to mention a few examples: Roughly 50% of all households in the area
have no access to potable water, and 75% have no sanitation facilities,
electricity, or telecommunication services. The municipality must now also
pay back money after it had wrongly classified itself as a category five
municipality, and subsequently overpaid staff members. Not all the problems
are the municipality’s fault.]

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Madam Chair, on a point of order: Is the speaker speaking
on behalf of the Free State province, or is he speaking for his party?

Mnr  D  A  WORTH:  Voorsitter,  blykbaar  is  nie  al   die   probleme   die
munisipaliteit  se  eie   skuld   nie.   Regeringsdepartemente   skuld   die
munisipaliteit  nie   minder   nie   as   R37   miljoen   in   agterstallige
diensterekeninge.  Die  twee  grootste  sondaars  is  die  Departemente  van
Onderwys en Openbare werke. Van die geld is langer as twee jaar  uitstaande.
Hoe kan die publiek oor wanbetaling betig word as  provinsiale  departemente
se huis nie in orde is nie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, apparently not all the problems are the
municipality’s fault. Government departments owe the municipality no less
than R37 million in arrears service accounts. The two greatest culprits are
the Departments of Education and Public Works. Some of the payments are
more than two years in arrears. How could the public be reprimanded for
nonpayment if the provincial departments don’t keep their house in order?]

Since the advent of democracy a decade ago, the country’s municipalities
have been battling to come to terms with their primary function, namely
delivering services to the people. Residents expect efficiency and
competence from councillors and the officials in return for paying their
rates and service charges.

There are also allegations of corruption relating to procurement or
awarding of tenders within municipalities, since many of them do not have
effective anticorruption policies. Indigent registers are often not
updated, nor is an indigent defined. We need to get rid of incompetent
officials so that the many officials who are dedicated can go on with the
job. We need to get rid of political office bearers who abuse their
positions of power.

We need to work out a system whereby municipalities can work together to
solve mutual problems and learn from each other. Decisive action must be
taken to ensure that local government becomes an effective instrument of
delivery. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, the report we have before us is a consolidated
report of nine provinces. It stems from local government as a vehicle for
the successful implementation of the social contract to create jobs and
alleviate poverty. The content of the report reflects a variety of issues
that seek to address a number of pressing basic needs.

It would therefore be premature to start criticising the implementation of
policies of both national and provincial government. Having said that does
not suggest that there are no issues that need to be addressed as speedily
as possible. These issues can be addressed by interacting more with both
the provincial legislatures and local authorities.

The evidence in the report has proven that considerable progress has been
made at some municipalities in relation to fully performing their
functions. But, as you are aware, the report has also highlighted a number
of urgent issues relating to service delivery at some municipalities.
Capacity constraints, institutional weaknesses and limited revenue have
been highlighted as some of the hurdles in the way of the smooth delivery
of services.

In this respect, legislation should not be handed down to provinces without
first inspecting and assessing the capacity of municipalities to implement
such legislation. In this regard, it has also become evident that
implementation cannot take place effectively without setting up the
necessary infrastructure to meet implementation needs.

Statutory compliance in municipalities is a critical point of departure to
ensure that the needs of our people, especially the poorest of the poor,
are met according to the legislation we pass.

In terms of capacity-building and service delivery, local government should
not be regarded as a remote institution that functions in isolation. If we
are committed to this notion of delivering services, we need to capacitate
all municipalities in order to allow them to bring much needed services to
the people.

In this regard, it is important to note that this Report on the Provincial
Week has laid the foundation that will allow us to put the necessary
mechanisms in place to deal with the pressing problems still encountered by
certain municipalities, as is stated in the report.

In terms of the above, the NCOP now has to embody adequately its oversight
function by monitoring local government and continually holding them
accountable. Service delivery needs to be made a priority by ensuring that
those responsible are able to perform their functions with all the
necessary support whenever such support is needed.

We also need to harmonise the oversight function of the NCOP over both
provinces and municipalities in order to remove the reception that members
of Parliament are being seen as the police or inspectors when conducting
oversight visits, which is part of our mandate in various select
committees. People need to understand that these processes can only assist
them to improve and excel in performing their functions.

Overall we support the report with the suggested amendment and correction
made during the deliberations at the select committee meeting on 18 October
this year. The report has definitely laid the foundation for progress and
improvement by highlighting what the problem areas are that we need to
improve. In conclusion …

… Sihlalo, iqembu leNkatha likubona kusobala ukuthi singenza zonke izinto
ngokufisa nokuthanda kwethu ukuthi izidingo zabantu zifezeke ngokwemigomo
kaHulumeni.

Ezinye zezinto ezivele obala ngukwabiwa kwezimali ngokwezinhlelo
zikaHulumeni. Omasipala bathi izidingo azifezeki ngenxa yokwesweleka
kwezimali kanti yibona abasondelene nabantu. Izilinganiso zezimali
kuyadinga ukuthi zibuyekezwe ukuze sinqobe. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the IFP feels it is clear that we can do all things as we
please, as long as the needs of the people are met according to the
government’s plans.

Some other things came into the spotlight, like the allocation of funds
through the government’s plans. The municipalities say they cannot meet the
needs of their people because of a shortage of funds and they are the ones
who are closest to the people.

Budget measures need to be reviewed for us to be able to overcome. Thank
you.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, I would like  to  start
my speech  by  quoting  our  former  President,  Comrade  Nelson  Rolihlahla
Mandela, who once said:

  Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is  that
  we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our  darkness,  that
  most frightens us. We ask ourselves, who am I to be brilliant,  gorgeous,
  talented and fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are  a  child
  of God. Your playing small doesn’t serve the world.


  There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other  people  won’t
  feel insecure around you. We are all meant to shine, as children  do.  We
  are born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It  is  not
  just in some of us; it is in everyone. And as we let our own light shine,
  we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same. As  we  are
  liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.

Contextually, in terms of the sentiments expressed above,  in  a  developing
country such as South Africa where a large proportion of  the  labour  force
is poor, unskilled and marginalised, job creation and  skills  training  are
essential to resolving the problems of poverty,  unemployment  and  lack  of
skills.

Therefore, our  ANC-led  government  always  recognises  the  complexity  of
poverty, its root causes,  symptoms  and  ramifications,  and  has  waged  a
struggle against poverty, apartheid, racism and oppression,  which  predated
1994.

It should further be borne in mind that the  multifaceted  interventions  of
the ANC-led government, which were in direct response to the nature  of  the
problems, led to, among other things, the  intention  to  invest  more  than
R100 billion in infrastructure development in the next five years,  part  of
which is to be used to create a massive amount of jobs  for  the  unemployed
and poor sectors, resulting also in the birth of the Expanded  Public  Works
Programme,  which  has  as  its  core  objectives   job   creation,   skills
development and improved social services.

During our visit it was pleasing to note  that  many  municipalities  –  and
also those close to them - had made great strides in  implementing  Expanded
Public Works-related projects. Further, it was also  heart-warming  to  note
that there was accelerated progress  in  the  municipalities  of  the  areas
declared nodal areas in terms of the implementation of the projects  and  in
accessing funds.

Members will understand that it is in these areas where the poorest  of  the
poor of our people reside, and  that  their  putting  the  nodal  areas  and
renewable areas high on the list of priorities is a relief.

It is very important for  the  effective  and  efficient  success  of  local
government, as an implementation vehicle of the social contract,  to  create
jobs and alleviate poverty so that co-ordination among the three spheres  of
government can be strengthened to ensure that  the  national  Department  of
Public Works  plays  its  role  of,  amongst  other  things,  conducting  an
awareness campaign on the objectives and expected  outcomes  of  the  social
contract  programme,  while  municipalities  establish  steering   committee
representatives  of  the  necessary  sector   departments   to   drive   the
implementation of this noble programme.

It is because of this intervention that  South  Africans  made  progress  in
building a caring society  and  committed  themselves  to  becoming  one  by
working together to turn ideals into  practical  realities.  We  have  bound
ourselves together as a united nation in a people’s contract to create  work
and fight poverty.

As the people have given this government the mandate it  has,  it  is  vital
that the sector education  and  training  authorities  conduct  training  on
labour-intensive methods to capacitate  municipalities  to  implement  fully
the  Expanded  Public  Works  projects.  As  such,  training   is   also   a
prerequisite for compliance with the EPWP projects and serves as a  catalyst
for smaller municipalities that are dependent on institutional grants,  such
as the municipal infrastructure grant, for survival.

Cognisance should be taken of the fact that the centrepiece of the  Expanded
Public Works Programme is a  large-scale  programme  using  labour-intensive
methods to upgrade provincial and municipal  roads,  pipelines,  storm-water
drains, paving and fencing, as well  as  community  supply  and  sanitation,
among other things.

This is therefore in line with what the President said in his state  of  the
nation address in that  the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme  integrates,
amongst  other  things,  the  objectives  of   the   social   and   economic
infrastructure with human resource development, enterprise  development  and
poverty alleviation.

The observed and often reported lack  of  capacity  in  our  municipalities,
especially in the small and rural ones, indicates beyond any doubt  a  shift
from the spirit and letter of the contents of the President’s state  of  the
nation address, more especially in  relation  to  the  finalisation  of  the
financing protocol relevant, in particular, to the Urban  Renewal  Programme
and Rural Development Programme, which were supposed to have been  finalised
by at least the end of July this year.

It  should  be  noted  that  capacity  is  a  precondition  for  the  proper
functioning of local government and for the  effective  discharge  of  their
constitutional and legislative mandates of quality and  sustainable  service
delivery.

It was also pleasing to note, as is still the case, that our  municipalities
are providing basic services to their  and  our  communities,  and  this  is
informed by the existence of an indigent policy and a register.  Significant
progress has been made in the provision  of  basic  services  in  compliance
with  Cabinet-adopted  policy  to  assist,  in  particular,  the  very  poor
households in the country. These services, commonly referred to as a  basket
of services, are solid waste, water, sanitation and electricity.

To avoid problems experienced and likely to be experienced  in  other  areas
with the installation of functioning water metres, a call  is  made  to  all
relevant sector departments at both the national  and  provincial  level  to
closely monitor the provision of basic services by municipalities to  ensure
that these services meet national norms and standards.

Added to that, the Department of Minerals and Energy and the  Department  of
Local and Provincial Government  must  also  ensure  the  implementation  of
agreements  with  Eskom  to  provide  free  basic   electricity   to   those
communities where Eskom is the service provider.

We realised, when we were in the provinces,  that  municipalities  sometimes
prioritise Eskom to electrify villages, or they electrify the villages  with
the hope that Eskom will refund them or ensure that they get  something  out
of that, but this is not the case. So we need to ensure  that  an  agreement
is entered into between municipalities and Eskom  before  they  get  into  a
project  that  won’t  ensure  electricity  for  the  people.  I  thank  you.
[Applause.]

Mr J A AULSEBROOK (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Madam Chair. This provincial
week by the NCOP permanent delegates to KwaZulu-Natal, which took place
from 6 to 10 September, was a most productive and essential visit. It was
essential for two aspects. Firstly, it gave the KwaZulu-Natal permanent
delegates a far better understanding of what was taking place in the
province at the local government sphere, in respect of governance and
delivering. Secondly, it gave those at the local sphere of government an
opportunity to interact with the national sphere of government. They used
that opportunity to express their concerns at the people’s expectations
versus the available resources to deliver on those expectations.

Let me deal with some of the concerns expressed by our provincial local
government department with regards to local governments. Firstly, the debt
collection issue was becoming a major handicap to service delivery, which
should be the noncollection of debt. Secondly, councillors’ allowances were
being increased to the detriment of service delivery and with no
consideration to the rates base. Thirdly, funds for municipal management
assistance may not be available in the next financial year and this could
have a drastic effect on certain municipalities that were being supported.
Fourthly, we were given R3 billion to provide for the implementation of
infrastructure to ease the backlogs in the province. We greatly appreciate
and welcome that, but the concern now is that no provision has been made
once the infrastructure is in place for the maintenance thereof and
certainly the sustenance of the development.

We also heard from the KwaZulu-Natal local government association who
expressed their concerns and these were: Firstly, that the equitable share
was used for operational purposes and thus jeopardising the free basic
service delivery. In other words, there was indiscriminate use of the
equitable share. Secondly, the lack of capacity among councillors, which
resulted in poor decisions being taken, and which led to the detriment of
service delivery. Some of these councillors have been in office for four
years, if not two terms, and what is of concern is that they have not
developed their capacity yet.

Let us examine the views that were expressed by the councillors themselves:
Firstly, nearly all spoke of the financial constraints caused by a low
rates base on which they operated, which was exacerbated by the high rate
of unemployment in the areas. And, some of the areas we went to spoke of a
60% unemployment rate and the scourge of HIV/Aids, which is ravaging some
of those municipalities, which in turn compounded this. All municipalities
that we visited were making progress with the free basic services in spite
of the challenges they were facing with regard to financial constraints.

It is also encouraging to see the progress being made in the development of
an indigent policy and the implementation of those policies in certain
municipalities. One municipality that deserves a compliment is the
Newcastle municipality, which had made terrific progress with regards to
the indigent policy and its implementation.

Communities were also given an opportunity to interact with the delegation
and their views can be summed up by saying that their expectations far
exceeded the capacity of any municipality and that expectations of service
delivery in the short to medium term is certainly not going to be met. And
that is a crisis which municipalities across the country face, if one reads
the national report.

Finally, it will be amiss of me not to mention the issue of municipal
officials’ remunerations, which in many cases is disproportionate to the
available resources. We in KwaZulu–Natal supports the report tabled here. I
thank you.

Mrs A N D QIKANI:  Madam Chair and hon members, the report before us is the
result of the provincial week that took place from 6 to 10 September. We
travelled to various provinces and interacted with local governments to
assess their readiness and capacity to participate in the delivery of job
creation programmes initiated by the national government. Many local
governments are experiencing severe human and financial resource
constraints, whilst most local governments enthusiastically expressed their
willingness to participate in the job creation programme.

As the report recommends, various actions have to be taken as a matter of
urgency. Many of these actions resort with the national and provincial
department responsible for local government and Salga. We must urge these
institutions, as a matter of urgency to address the financial and human
constraints experienced at local government.

In conclusion, allow me to highlight a specific concern that was raised
during our tour of the province, namely, the capacity of councillors and
ward committees. This matter requires urgent attention.

Sihlalo, kunganjani xa iikomiti zeewadi bezingabonelelwa kakhulu ngemali
kuba zizo eziphakathi kanye ebantwini ikwazizo nezizisa imicimbi kooceba?
Enkosi, Sihlalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, how about providing ward committees with adequate funds as
they are nearer to the people and it is also they who refer matters to the
councillors. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]



Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister en kollegas, tydens ons
parlementêre besoek aan die Oos-Kaap was dit duidelik dat daar baie goeie
werk gedoen word in sommige rade, maar dat daar ook ernstige probleme by
talle rade ondervind word. Ek is oortuig dat elke persoon in hierdie Raad
sal saamstem dat plaaslike bestuur die voertuig is wat vir ons óf welvaart
óf armoede gaan bring. Plaaslike bestuur is ook die voertuig wat
dienslewering aan die mense van Suid-Afrika moet verseker.

Waaroor ons nie saamstem nie, is die toestand van hierdie voertuig, en dit
sal jammer wees as my oordeel van ons voertuig gesien gaan word as negatief
en sonder hoop op herstel. Ek wil dit ook duidelik stel dat baie van ons
huidige probleme beslis die resultaat is van wanbestuur, selfsug en
rassisme in die tydperk voor 1990. Dekades lank is die behoeftes van
anderskleuriges net eenvoudig geïgnoreer. Dit het tot gevolg gehad dat die
meeste van ons inwoners in krotbuurte feitlik sonder basiese dienste moes
klaarkom. Groot agterstande, veral wat infrastruktuur betref, het ontstaan,
en natuurlik moet ons in ons oordeel van die huidige situasie die verlede
deeglik in aanmerking neem. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues,
during our parliamentary visit to the Eastern Cape it was obvious that very
good work is being done in certain councils, but also that serious problems
are being experienced by many councils. I am convinced that every person in
this Council will agree that local government is the vehicle that is going
to bring us either prosperity or poverty. Local government is also the
vehicle that must ensure service delivery to the people of South Africa.

What we do not agree about is the condition of this vehicle, and it would
be a pity if my assessment of our vehicle is going to be seen as negative
and without hope of reparation. I also want to clearly state that many of
our present problems are definitely the result of mismanagement,
selfishness and racism in the period before 1990.  For decades the needs of
persons of colour were quite simply ignored. This resulted in most of our
inhabitants of shantytown having to manage virtually without any basic
services. Immense backlogs, especially regarding infrastructure, arose and
naturally, in our assessment of the present situation, we need to take the
past thoroughly into account.]


I would like to focus on a few issues that need to be taken into account to
avert a total breakdown of local government. [Interjections.] Somebody is
trying to phone me, Madam Chair.[Laughter.]


During the struggle years, people were instructed … [Interjections.] We are
busy with a very serious debate now. During the struggle years, people were
instructed not to pay for services. This trend has not been turned around
and, as you all know, over R30 billion is outstanding for services
rendered.

The DA fully supports free basic services for people who just cannot pay,
even if they want to. We have an indigent policy in place, but thousands of
ratepayers who can afford to pay, simply do not. This is a party-political
issue and the ANC must take the responsibility of turning this culture of
nonpayment around.

No business can survive if clients do not pay for services, and local
government cannot survive if it must deliver services to residents who can
pay, but simply refuse to do so.

Secondly, we come to the issue of capacity. The DA has stated over and over
that we support affirmative action and black economic empowerment. I am
sure that every proud South African is aware of what harm was done during
decades of apartheid and that this damage must be repaired.

At present, however, municipalities are judged on how quickly they can get
rid of white faces, and, when gross mismanagement occurs, this is fobbed
off as challenges. It is true that in the metropolitan areas the capacity
problems are not as acute as in rural and smaller councils.

Mr S SHICEKA: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask the member, as a point of
order - because he keeps very quiet in the committee and accepts everything
that is raised in the committee – whether he is representing the views of
the committee here, his own views or the views of his party. Thank you,
Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Shiceka, Mr Le Roux is speaking
as a DA member. So continue, hon member.

Mr J W LE ROUX: Thank you very much, Chair. [Laughter.] I would like to say
to our chairman that I have the greatest respect for him, but for him to
stand up in this Chamber and say that I usually keep quiet in the committee
is just not true.

It is true that in the metropolitan areas, where we don’t have the capacity
problem that we have in the smaller towns, we demand that councils do a
wide range of important delivery functions, yet we know that the capacity
is often not there. It can never make sense to replace competent workers if
you have a capacity problem and your training programmes are ineffective.

As far as municipal managers are concerned, it is my opinion that a
competent manager is worth his weight in gold. But to pay an incompetent
manager R700 000 per year, when his only claim to fame is mismanagement, is
totally disgraceful.

This brings me to the Auditor-General’s report on local government. The
report makes for very unpleasant reading. If we believe the Auditor-
General, I am afraid, then local government is on the verge of collapse.
The Auditor-General warns that, broadly speaking, there are four stages of
collapse: firstly, depleting the operating account and, fourthly, using
long-term loans to fund service delivery. To quote the Auditor-General:

  The current situation from the limited information available indicates
  that municipalities are at stage three, that is the use of liabilities to
  fund current levels of service delivery.

To rely on central government to rescue local government can, at best, be a
very short-term solution and can never be sustained over the long term.
Robbing Peter to pay Paul has never been the solution to financial
problems.

Wat werkskepping betref, is dit die privaatsektor wat hier die hoofrol moet
speel om permanente werkgeleenthede, rykdom en groter inkomste vir
plaaslike rade te skep. In ’n ontwikkelde land soos ons s’n is dit egter
noodsaaklik dat die staat ook ’n belangrike rol sal speel, en ons verwelkom
die miljarde rande wat nou vir infrastruktuurskepping bewillig word. Die
feit dat dit merendeels arbeidsintensiewe projekte gaan wees, sal beslis
help om agterstande uit te wis en armoede te verlig. Omdat daar geweldige
druk is op plaaslike rade om dienslewering te verbeter wil dit voorkom asof
rade nie genoeg aandag skenk aan ekonomiese groei en werkskepping nie. Dit
is noodsaaklik dat plaaslike rade aan die sogenaamde LED-programme
prioriteitsaandag moet gee. Eerstens sal rade alles moontlik moet doen om
kapitaalinvestering aan te moedig en veral om buitelandse beleggers te lok.
Tweedens moet rade sorg dat oormatige regulering nie voornemende
entrepreneurs afskrik nie. Derdens moet plaaslike rade sorg dat medium- en
kleinsake-ondernemings maklike kan vestig en floreer. Die inkomstebronne
van plaaslike bestuur kan slegs gevoed word deur ’n florerende sakesektor.
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Regarding job creation, it is the private sector that must play the major
role in creating permanent job opportunities, wealth and greater income for
local councils. In a developed country such as ours it is, however,
essential that the state will also play an important role, and we welcome
the billions of rands that are now being appropriated for creating
infrastructure. The fact that the majority will be labour intensive
projects will definitely help to eradicate backlogs and alleviate poverty.
Because of the tremendous pressure on local councils to improve service
delivery it appears as if councils do not devote enough attention to
economic growth and job creation. It is essential that local councils give
priority attention to the so-called LED programmes. Firstly, the councils
must do everything in their power to encourage capital investment and
especially to attract foreign investors. Secondly, councils must ensure
that excessive regulating does not scare off  prospective entrepreneurs.
Thirdly, local councils must ensure that medium and small business
enterprises can be easily established and prosper. The sources of income of
local government can only be fed by a flourishing business sector. I thank
you.]

Mr M A KUBHEKA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, I am sure you have gotten used
to the fact that everything that comes from KwaZulu-Natal comes in pairs:
the name KwaZulu-Natal, and, as I have noticed on the speakers’ list, we
even have two special delegates from KwaZulu-Natal. [Interjections.] We are
working on that, I can assure you.

It is our belief in the province that the visit by the NCOP permanent
delegates to the four municipalities in the province during the provincial
week assisted, as my colleague has said, not only in providing necessary
information to the NCOP and ultimately to the Minister for Provincial and
Local Government, but also to the municipalities themselves.

There is no disputing the fact that the morale of municipalities has
received a boost in that interaction of this kind helped them realise the
centrality of their role in dealing with the legacy of the past and in
implementing the national policies and programmes.
The interaction during that week gave an opportunity to all involved – the
NCOP, the provincial portfolio committee, organised local government,
traditional leadership and municipalities – to reflect on the challenges
confronting us in the campaign to create a better life for all.

It gave us an opportunity to assess our ability as government in all
spheres in relation to our core function of ensuring integrated and
sustainable delivery of public goods and services, increased access to
services and the effective implementation of policy and legislation. These
are, of course, some of the general principles and objects of co-operative
government and intergovernmental relations, which I hope the NCOP was also
hoping to promote during the provincial week.

It is our belief that the general picture, and therefore our conclusion, is
that whilst there is an improvement in the way in which some, if not most,
municipalities are doing their operational duties, a number of challenges,
as they appear in the report, attest to the fact that there are critical
issues that should be given priority attention.

These are, amongst other things, refocusing municipalities on issues of
basic service delivery; capacity-building within each municipality; shaping
the institution of local government focusing on the implementation of the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act; and the ability to
produce recovery plans to ensure that financial policies conform to the
provisions of the newly adopted Local Government: Municipal Finance
Management Act.

With regard to grappling with the question of municipalities with no tax
base - something other members have already alluded to - the fact is that a
number of municipalities in our province, which may be the case in other
provinces, depend on intergovernmental grants. It is our hope that the
experience of the provincial week will help us make the necessary input to
assist the relevant departments nationally and provincially to come up with
strategies to ensure that all our municipalities become self-sustainable.

The input from the communities also points to the need for the cleansing of
local government; the need to develop mechanisms and a ruthless approach in
dealing with corruption, fraud and maladministration, which include the
need to regulate the remuneration of municipal officials; and the need to
develop relations and confidence between ratepayers and municipalities.

There is also the need to undertake a campaign to ensure that the
institution of traditional leadership in our province develops a synergy so
that there is no standoff between this institution and local government.

There are, of course, a number of challenges raised in the report. We hope
that these will receive continual attention from the NCOP and, of course,
from provincial legislatures, as we continue the consolidation of the
people’s contract to create jobs and fight poverty so as to rid our people
of want and underdevelopment. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister en agb lede, plaaslike
regering se rol sluit plaaslike dienslewering en die bevordering van ’n
veilige en gesonde omgewing in. Die bevordering van ontwikkeling in
plaaslike regering is ’n integrerende deel van die drie vlakke van
regering.

Vordering met die verbetering van lewensgehalte vereis funksionering as ’n
volledige eenheid. Koördinasie, beplanning, begroting en implementering is
dus nodig binne ’n samewerkende regeringsraamwerk.

Ondanks die stadige begin en talryke uitdagings is munisipaliteite besig om
bo die uitdagings uit te styg met werkskepping, alhoewel arbeidsintensiewe
werkskeppingsprojekte nie op ’n groot skaal in gebruik is soos dit behoort
te wees nie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and hon members, the role
of local government includes local service delivery and promoting a safe
and healthy environment. The promotion of development in local government
is an integrating part of the three levels of government.

Progress in the improvement of the quality of life requires functioning as
a complete unit. Co-ordination, planning, budgeting and implementation are
therefore necessary within the framework of co-operative government.

Despite the slow start and numerous challenges, municipalities are
beginning to rise above the challenges with the creation of jobs, even
though labour-intensive job creation projects are not being used on as
large a scale as they should be.]

While progress with the Urban Renewal Programme and Rural Renewal Programme
in the Western Cape has, within the last year, made up for the late start,
there is still a need to ensure greater integration between the various
communities. The Urban Renewal Programme and Rural Renewal Programme can
make a considerable contribution in terms of job creation and in addressing
some of the social problems experienced in the communities.

Although it is recognised that community participation should be a key
element of the URRP, progress in developing community forums is still not
of the standard it is supposed to be. The municipalities also face
considerable challenges in ensuring that their financial resources are
adequate to render the necessary services to communities.

The considerable number of vacancies and limited progress with the
performance management systems suggest that not much progress has been made
in human resource development. However, despite all the challenges,
municipalities do appear to be heeding the President’s call for job
creation and socio-economic development.

Voorsitter, in ’n vennootskap met plaaslike regering moet ons
verantwoordelikheid aanvaar vir suksesvolle dienslewering in ons land. Ek
dank u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, in partnership with local government we must accept
responsibility for successful service delivery in our country. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Agb Voorsitter, werkloosheid is sonder die minste
twyfel sekerlik een van die grootste probleme in hierdie hele land van ons;
een van die grootste probleme waarmee die regering te kampe hê. Dit vorm
die grondslag van verskeie ander probleme en een van die ander probleme wat
daarmee saamgaan, is die kwessie van misdaad.

Agb Voorsitter, as mense nie werk het nie, dan is hulle bereid om hul
vryheid op die spel te plaas om aan die lewe te bly. Dit is ’n baie
ernstige situasie en ons kry helaas te doen met bestaansmisdaad wat
ongelukkig onwettig is en derhalwe ook swaar gestraf word. So ’n persoon
word sy vryheid ontneem. So ’n persoon word opgesluit. Dit word ’n las op
die staat, en dit word ook ’n las op sy familie waar so ’n persoon dan nie
die geleentheid het om met beperkte middele vir sy familie te sorg nie.
Sodoende ontstaan ook ’n tipe ekonomie wat ‘n skadu-ekonomie genoem word –
ekonomie wat ontwikkel in die skadu van misdaad. En hulle ontglip dan ook
die wakende oog van die Ontvanger van Inkomste.

’n Verdere probleem is armoede wat gepaard gaan met werkloosheid. Daar is
ook ander verwante probleme, te wete die hele kwessie van gesondheid,
ondervoeding, wanvoeding en maatskaplike ellende wat volg op die kwessie
van werkloosheid.

’n Verdere probleem wat aan werkloosheid gekoppel kan word, is die gebrek
aan behuising. Dit is logies dat mense stroom van plekke waar daar nie werk
is nie na plekke waar daar moontlik werk is. En dit plaas ekonomiese druk
op die plaaslike owerhede. Dit verhoog die druk op daardie plaaslike
owerhede. En die hele proses moet omgekeer word in die sin dat daar
ontwikkelings moet kom in daardie gebiede waar daar nie werk is nie. Dit is
waar die plaaslike owerhede ’n baie, baie groot rol het om te speel en waar
die regering dan met sy beleidsdokument oor plaaslike ekonomiese
ontwikkeling bepaald ’n baie groot rol het om te speel.

Hoe kan plaaslike owerhede hierdie bose kringloop stopsit? Deur eenvouding
eers hul eie huis in orde te kry. En hoe doen hulle dit? Hier is vandag ook
na belaglik hoë salarisse van munisipale bestuurders verwys. Bo en behalwe
dit is daar skuldinvordering. Ander kollegas het ook daarna verwys. Daar
moet ’n klimaat van ekonomiese ontwikkeling geskep word. Dit is nie die
taak van die plaaslike owerhede om werkskepping … (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Hon Chairperson, unemployment is certainly without any
doubt whatsoever one of the biggest problems in this country of ours; one
of the biggest problems that the government faces. It forms the basis of
various other problems and one of the other concomitant problems is the
issue of crime.

Hon Chairperson, when people do not have work they are prepared to put
their freedom on the line in order to stay alive. It is a very serious
situation and we are unfortunately dealing with subsistence crime, which is
illegal unfortunately and therefore carries heavy penalties. Such a person
is deprived of his freedom. Such a person is locked up. It becomes a burden
to the state and a burden to his family when such a person does not have
the opportunity with limited means to care for his family. Consequently a
type of economy comes into existence that is called a shadow economy – an
economy that develops in the shadow of crime. And they then also escape the
watchful eye of the Receiver of Revenue.

A further problem is poverty that accompanies unemployment. There are also
other related problems namely the whole issue of health, nutrition,
malnutrition and social misery that follows after the question of
unemployment.

A further problem that can be linked to unemployment is the shortage of
housing. It is logical that people stream from places where there is no
work to places where there may possibly be work. And this puts economic
pressure on local authorities. This increases the pressure on those local
authorities. And the whole process must be reversed in the sense that
developments must take place in those areas where there is no work. This is
where local authorities have a very, very big role to play and where
government with its policy document for local economic development
certainly has a very big role to play.

How can local authorities end this vicious cycle? Simply, by first getting
their own house in order. And how do they do this? Reference was also made
here today to the ridiculously high salaries of municipal managers. Over
and above this, there is debt collecting. Other colleagues have also
referred to this. A climate of economic development must be created. Is it
not the task of the local authorities to create jobs …]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order, hon member. Hon Shiceka?

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, the member is out of order, because he is not
speaking on the subject for discussion today and he is not giving his
maiden speech. I would request your ruling, Madam Chair.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, could you please focus on the
subject for discussion.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Yes. Well, the whole question, Madam Chair, as far as I
see it, is the social contract to create jobs, which was on the billboards
of the ANC. This is the situation in which local governments must be
involved in creating jobs. That’s the issue, with great respect, Madam
Chair. If you just look at point number five. [Interjections.] Was that the
hon Whip saying now, Madam Chair? Was that the Whip speaking or was that
you speaking? [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, your time has expired.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Thank you so much.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson … [Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon Chief Whip, unfortunately the member has
finished so he won’t take the question.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: No, Chairperson. I was rising on a point of
protecting the Chairperson, because I see there was now a kind of de facto
coup when Dr Van Heerden was presiding. [Laughter.] But I understand that
he is still new at using the podium, so he thinks that that is procedural.
[Laughter.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Thank you, Chief Whip. I now call the
chairperson of the standing committee on local government, Eastern Cape, Ms
T Xasa. I hope I pronounced your surname well.

Ms T XASA (Eastern Cape): Thank you, hon Chairperson. Members of the
National Council of Provinces, representatives from Salga and Deputy
Minister, in line with the objectives of the NCOP provincial week, as
agreed upon by the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration,
provincial portfolio committees and Salga in July here in Cape Town, I wish
to present to you a report from the Eastern Cape portfolio committee, which
is still to be tabled in the legislature.

We visited seven municipalities. My report will seek to highlight some of
the issues concerning each of the municipalities that are of interest, and
those that present challenges that are forwarded forthwith for
consideration, with possible recommendations.

Before that, I wish to highlight that it is acknowledged that a lot of work
was done prior to this exercise to determine the state of our
municipalities. However, this particular exercise took a step further and
obtained this information from politicians and other stakeholders in the
presence of technocrats so that areas that require information and
immediate implementation get this done then and there.

This exercise also went further to give the NCOP and portfolio committees
some basic education on local government and in that way enhances our
oversight capabilities. Furthermore, a partnership was developed that needs
to be taken further so that the NCOP, the legislatures, the Department of
Local Government and Salga do not only engage during intervention periods.

Chairperson, can I also indicate that the exercise, together with the
information it came up with, is not in accordance with Mr Le Roux’s
statement that our local government is on the verge of collapse. Instead,
there are areas where there is a lack of capacity and it is our
responsibility to suggest ways of trying to assist in such areas.

I then come to the respective municipalities. The first area we visited was
the O R Tambo District Municipality. There we found structures and systems
in place. There was maximum support for and co-operation between both the
provincial government and the national department. Both councillors and
officials understood their roles and responsibilities with regard to public
participation generally and programmes of integrated rural and sustainable
development. The Expanded Public Works Programme and the Urban Renewal
Programme can be singled out as best practices for other municipalities to
follow. It is suggested that such best practices be copied so that
municipalities can begin to use such models, as we wish for participation
in programmes at local government level.

What was not very clear there was how the district municipality makes
annual allocations to the smaller municipalities, but there is a programme
at the district municipality that is directly related to Category B
municipalities. However, there is no flow of money to those local
municipalities.

Also, the allocation of functions was a problem. It is clear that there are
certain functions that have been allocated to the district municipality. I
will look at one of the functions, such as the provision of water, for
example. Water provision has been one source of revenue for category B
municipalities, but it resides with most district municipalities, and this
poses a problem for category B municipalities. Sanitation programmes – as
part of water and sanitation - are also vested with the district
municipality, which robs smaller municipalities of a source of revenue.

In terms of prioritisation of IDPs, smaller municipalities relied on the
district municipality because the funds reside with the district
municipality. Apart from public participation, the identification of
priorities is done jointly with the smaller Category B municipalities. So
the process of financing such IDPs does not assist the ailing
municipalities in putting finance in their coffers so that they are able to
finance the priorities within their areas.
This also affects their constitutional responsibilities in that they have
to wait until a district municipality is able to attend to their
priorities. So you find that there are municipalities that do not perform
certain constitutional responsibilities because certain functions reside
with the district municipality.

We found situations where municipalities await a district municipality that
is piloting a sanitation project in one of the municipalities and not in
others.

The question of salaries of councillors was also an issue. Allowances were
cited in respect of the councillors of the district municipality, which
does not take into consideration the geographic spread of the district
municipality. For instance, in terms of the determination, the grade of the
district municipality is equal to the biggest municipality within that
area. A Category B municipality takes a small portion of the district
municipality. And we are bringing this matter to the attention of the
Deputy Minister for her to look into.

There is a section 21 company that has been established to perform certain
functions for the district municipality. Our recommendation was that co-
operative governance works well when municipalities themselves recognise
their incapacities and become decisive in accepting support. Such best
practices must be used as models for other municipalities, as I have said.
The provincial department should put together such information and it
should be used in other municipalities.

We are saying that concerning these section 21 companies, it is always
important to ensure that such entities account to district municipalities
or to the respective municipalities.

Furthermore, the establishment of these section 21 companies does not take
away their constitutional responsibilities. They should be co-ordinated so
that we do not have them mushrooming throughout the municipalities, which
would drain the finances because there are staff to be paid and accounting
to be done.

With regard to the other municipality, that is the King Sabata Dalindyebo
Municipality, we are saying that intervention there was clearly a necessity
as systems and service delivery were reportedly chaotic. When we got there
the councillors and stakeholders had not yet been briefed on the
intervention and the department was immediately tasked to attend to that,
which it did immediately.

Besides intervening there, we are calling upon the national department to
look into the prioritisation of two key programmes within that area that
indicate a serious backlog on infrastructure, which is not of our own
making, but yours, Mr Van Heerden and Mr Le Roux. But we agree that it is
now our responsibility.

We do not know what the department can do about the backlog in
electrification infrastructure in the area. However, considering that there
is the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, the King Sabata Dalindyebo
Municipality needs to be assisted to have such infrastructure revived in
order for it to have a source of revenue.

The Ntabankulu Municipality is an example of a municipality that has no
revenue base at all. They have employed a number of managers who consume a
big portion of the Equitable Share Fund. These section 57 managers have not
even signed performance contracts, but one positive area was good public
participation. This municipality really needs assistance and it is an area
where there needs to be a follow-up.

I now come to the Umzimvubu Municipality, which is one municipality with a
very good best practice programme of provincial support. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr R J TAU: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, hon members and guests, if
present, I think the report presented to us today for engagement raises
serious challenges which we, as members of this respectable House, need to
address honestly and with integrity. It is a report that reflects on a very
important sphere of government; a sphere conceptualised as closest to our
people and committed to working with citizens and groups within our
communities to find sustainable ways to meet their economic and material
needs and to improve the quality of their lives.

The report makes the point that it is not the sole responsibility of local
government to create jobs and fight poverty, municipalities have a role to
play as well. They have an important, active role to ensure that they put
in place overall economic and social conditions in the localities they
serve. They must make sure that those conditions are conducive to the
creation of employment and opportunities to address the widening skills gap
that exist in our society.

The report further notes that South Africa is a highly divided society with
a dual economy that co-exists, and seeks to locate the role of local
government in closing that particular gap. The report does that honestly,
because it recognises the fact that local government is part of a broader
economic environment. By so saying, the report further engages us to note
the contribution of various local economies to the national economy. It has
to be fully recognised, as it has been recognised as a point.

It is sad also to note that some members in this House fail to recognise
the fact that macroeconomic growth and development and the improved
functioning of the first economy and its integration with the second
economy are dependent on the contribution of the functioning of the various
local economies in the country. In turn, the local economy of a
municipality is made up of various sectors and the proper functioning of
these local sectors will directly impact on the growth of the local
economy, and therefore the national economy.

Our function is to improve the capacity of these local economies or
municipalities so that they are able to intervene in these particular
sectors so as to be able to grow and therefore improve the quality of their
contribution at national level. Through this we will then be able to
broaden the thinking of municipalities and their approaches to local
economic development beyond just LED projects, because economic development
does not exist in a vacuum.

We need to urge our municipalities to ensure that whatever they harness and
deliver impact directly on their local economic development, and as such we
need to look beyond that particular aspect, and that is in terms of their
participation in the global economy.

This brings us back to the point of participation of our people by paying
for services. This should not merely be reduced to an ANC issue, but we
have to recognise the fact that the rent boycott came as a result of and as
a direct response of our people to an unjust system. It is not a system or
an approach that seeks to bring down the very same government that we have
fought so hard for.

Informed by our 2014 vision, our President, hon Thabo Mbeki, launched the
Expanded Public Works Programme. Its fundamental objective is to fight
poverty through labour intensive programmes. Of course, at its heart is to
increase the skills capacity of our people in order to allow them an
opportunity into the first economy.

We have, however, noted that not all our municipalities have started with
the implementation of the programme, due to various reasons as provided in
the report. The report makes the point that most of the municipalities that
have their systems in place to implement the EPWP are those that have been
declared nodal points, or that have been identified as future nodal points;
and further notes that smaller municipalities are falling behind because of
that. Of course this point was made earlier on the independence of the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant.

While we know that the situation presents itself as a serious matter of
concern to us, it is also equally important to consider the fact that the
programme has just been launched in the country and in all the provinces,
and therefore we should avoid a situation of being alarmists as we engage
with this issue of the Expanded Public Works Programme and the capacity of
municipalities. Our role should rather be to look at the best possible ways
of assisting our municipalities in having their systems in place and to let
our people benefit from the programme.

We also note the lack of capacity amongst the stakeholders that must
participate in this particular programme. One key area that has been raised
by municipalities about the programme is the lack of understanding by
stakeholders, in particular, on the matter of skills transfer as a core of
the Expanded Public Works Programme. Having observed some of these
challenges it therefore, as noted and stated before, becomes important for
this House to call on the sector education and training authorities to
conduct training for our municipalities to be able to monitor the
implementation of the programme.

We also wish to advise municipalities to establish Expanded Public Works
Programme steering committees representing all relevant stakeholders,
departments and senior municipal officials from the district local
municipalities near municipal areas to drive the implementation of the
programme.

It is my contention that by doing the above, we will enhance the
participation and skilling of women and young people in rural areas through
the Expanded Public Works Programme. In the process we will marginalise the
unscrupulous stakeholders who are out there waiting to mislead our people
and gain from the wonderful programmes that our government has put in place
for the benefit of the ordinary and the poor. We also raise these matters
understanding that not only shall the urban municipalities be able to
implement the programme, but also the rural municipalities, once there are
enough capacity resources injected in this particular process.

We note that often the rural municipalities face skills shortages,
insufficient infrastructure to support economic opportunities and income
leakage. Many of these areas display little economic potential in the
traditional economic sense. However, with indigenous local economic
development and appropriate support to the people residing in these areas
there can be significant improvements and positive changes.

The thrust of the report reaffirms the developmental character and mandate
of our local government and highlights the key role municipalities are
supposed to play. Since our national economy is characterised by a
dualistic nature, municipalities should engage in local economic
development strategies that seek to promote self-sustaining economic growth
and the development of vibrant localities within an integrated economy.
Municipalities need to co-ordinate and integrate its municipal functions
and activities.

The decisions and actions of the municipalities will inevitably affect the
performance of any of their localities. Therefore, municipalities must be
hands-on and in control of their administrative systems. Accessibility to
the municipality, the turnaround time of applications for plans and
rezoning, leasing of land for agricultural purposes, addressing the issue
of food security and the social character and economic relations built with
local producers, local service providers and consumers are what make
development a reality.

I want to take this opportunity to move for the adoption of the report.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Chairperson, members of the NCOP and members of Salga, I would just like to
take this opportunity to thank all those who participated in the debate.
The participants also identified many a challenge in the various areas at
local municipalities. I therefore think that our task is to go out and
assist our local communities in these various endeavours, because we cannot
afford to be armchair politicians whilst Rome is burning.

I would like to make just a few responses to the various participants who
aired their views on how they think local municipalities and all government
programmes function at local level. Let us just take the response of the
chairperson regarding these various visits to municipalities that have been
reported here and which are, in fact, the subject of discussion of the
debate today. My recommendation is that, perhaps, as the NCOP, we need to
change or restructure our provincial visits and say: “We can’t be embarking
on local visits year by year without timeframes.”

We must be able to say: “These are the problems identified in a particular
municipality”. We should then say to that particular municipality: “By when
would this problem be addressed?” So that the next time you go back to that
particular municipality that problem would have been attended to. You
cannot be going backwards and forwards while the same problems occur in the
same area. I think we need to restructure. In fact, I think we need to
highlight many of the urgent matters that need to be addressed in the
various local municipalities. Perhaps this will come out later on when I
respond to some of the inputs given here.

To the hon member Mr Worth, I would like to say, yes, I think we welcome
criticism. We surely welcome criticism. That is the only way we can move
forward and know in which direction we are going. But, certainly, we don’t
like people who use scarecrow tactics. We don’t take very kindly to the use
of scarecrow tactics. You spoke about the profiling of municipalities; yes,
we are busy profiling the municipalities. That’s the only way we will be
able to tell how far we are, and whether we are moving forwards or
backwards.

By profiling those municipalities we check what is really taking place in
those municipalities, what services are being provided and which services
are not being provided in those areas. In fact, I think the hon member
should have introduced his input in this House by saying that the reason we
are using the bucket system still in 2004 was not their fault. Whose fault
is it that people are still using the bucket system? That should be the
introduction of the debate and then tell us where we come from and move
forward. Today, we would no longer be having the bucket system if Mr Worth
had addressed the bucket system in those days. [Interjections.]

Regarding the profiling of these municipalities, we must know how to
equally distribute this piece of cake amongst everyone when we do get it
from national or provincial government, because, you see, in many of the
areas some never even receive these services. They never got the share of
this piece of cake.

I will tell you a story about the place where I grew up. I grew up using
the bucket system. Where I was born and bred, we used the bucket system.
Those services never came to us. Now, when you say that the ANC encouraged
people not to pay for services, what services are you referring to, because
we never received these services? These services never came to us until I
and other youth activists pulled down those public bucket toilets because
they were a health risk in our communities. That is what we did. It was not
to encourage the public not to pay for services, because what services were
we paying for? That is the argument and this is where we come from. You
can’t just move in a vacuum. You have to start where you come from and then
plan ahead.

I also wanted to respond to the Municipal Infrastructure Grant programme.
That is exactly why I am saying that maybe we need to restructure these
provincial visits. The MIG programme is there, we brought it forward as the
Department of Provincial and Local Government in order for us to begin to
implement it because of the problems that we picked up in the profiling of
these municipalities. If you say, “here is the MIG programme” and regarding
municipalities you say, “here is the infrastructure with no provision made
for maintenance”, for goodness sake, you should be creative! Be creative.

You can’t just sit and fold your arms and say, “you have given me this
infrastructure, and who is going to maintain it?” You can’t do that. You
have to be creative. We are transforming this country. Bring proposals
forward and let us look at those proposals. Give them to DPLG and say, “in
order for us to be able to maintain this infrastructure, these are the
proposals and this is the business plan for maintaining this
infrastructure”. But, you don’t just sit and say that no provision has been
made. We need to be proactive. We are South Africans and therefore we need
to assist our local communities.

I am not going to be long even though I am tempted. I fully agree with the
statement that the wrong decisions were taken and that there is no
capacity. I agree 100%. Now, hon member, unfortunately, you had a certain
group of people in a given community locked up in a cage. They were locked
up in this cage for many years. All of a sudden, you decide to bring them
out and say: “Go and participate with the others in the Olympic Games, go
and race with them in the Olympic Games.” Meanwhile the other groups have
been practising and doing all sorts of things while these ones were caged.
You then bring the caged ones out and put them with those who have been
participating and say: “Go and participate in the race as equals.” Don’t do
that. Don’t do that. You have to level the playing field. Somehow you have
to level the playing field and say: “How does this group meet who group
that has been caged for many centuries?”

There is just one last thing I wanted to say to the members, particularly
Mr Adams, regarding the Urban Renewal and Rural Development Programmes in
the Western Cape. Hon member Adams, you know that in the Western Cape the
President announced the Urban Renewal and Rural Development Programmes in
2001. It took this province only two years to implement that programme.
Whilst other provinces were moving, it took this province two years to
start with the implementation of this programme after the announcement.
Hence this programme has not in fact come off the ground effectively as yet
and people are struggling, particularly regarding the things that you have
raised.

We are building one South Africa here and we are trying to integrate our
communities. These communities are still operating as Mitchells Plain and
Khayelitsha. Do you see the problem we have? We are still grappling with
that and it is because of the delay of two years that these communities
still regard themselves this way.

What happened in the Western Cape is that they had certain programmes that
they were busy with instead of implementing the presidential nodal
programmes. They were busy evicting poor people from houses and cutting off
services to those areas of Mitchells Plain and Khayelitsha. If you remember
very well … [Interjections.] Absolutely. I will not say it. You know which
council it was. [Laughter.] I will not mention it.

Lastly, when we say that municipalities are collapsing, that’s a very
strong word. It is a very strong word. I wonder: Are they collapsing
because other people are now benefiting from these services? Is that what
we are saying? Or, are they collapsing because other people are now in
charge? That statement carries a lot. If I should unpack that statement …
you know, I would not like to unpack it but it says a lot if one says
municipalities are collapsing. Why are they collapsing? Are they collapsing
because of certain reasons?

And lastly, very lastly, I really apologise to you. I would like to say to
all members here that we have to make our local municipalities work. I am
not saying that there are no flaws; I am not saying that we don’t have
problems or we don’t have flaws. We are at a learning curve, and we saw the
provincial visits that the President undertook and I was part thereof.
There are many programmes on the ground and we are still a learning curve
where we have to capacitate our people at a local level, and I think the
local municipalities are in fact the veins of a nation. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.


The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: We shall now proceed to the voting on the
question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per province. Delegation
heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or
against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Free State?

Mrs S E MABE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: IGauteng iyayixhasa. [Gauteng supports.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re ya e amogela. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Mpumalanga?

Mr J B TOLO: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Ke ya rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Western Cape?

Mr F ADAMS: Ons steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: All provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Hon members, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the hon Deputy
Minister and the special delegates from provinces for having come here to
participate in this debate.

The Council adjourned at 16:18.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                        WEDNESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of South African Revenue Service (SARS)
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 175-2004].

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Ntsika Enterprise Promotion
         Agency for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 140-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission of
         South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 107-2004].

     (c)    Annual Review of the Competition Commission of South Africa for
         2003-2004 [RP 107-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Manufacturing
         Advisory Centres Trust (NAMAC) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
         Standards (SABS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South Africa
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         Note: On the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports dated
         21 September 2004 there was an incorrect indication that this
         document had been tabled by the Minister of Arts and Culture.

4.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Industry
     Development Board (CIDB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 138-
     2004].


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    First Report of the Joint Rules Committee, dated 21 September 2004,
     as follows:

     At a special meeting of the Joint Rules Committee on Tuesday, 14
     September 2004, two matters were under consideration by the Committee,
     namely a proposed vision for Parliament and the new governance model.


        Consideration of proposed vision for Parliament


     The following options for a proposed vision statement for Parliament
     were presented:

         OPTION 1
         To build an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs
         of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising an
         improved quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

         OPTION 2
         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
         Africa.

     Mr D H M Gibson, on behalf of the DA, expressed support for Option 2,
     subject to the following amendment: To substitute "Parliament" for
     "people's Parliament". The vision statement would, therefore, read as
     follows:

         To build an effective Parliament that is responsive to the needs
         of the people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a
         better quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

     Mrs S A Seaton, on behalf of the IFP, initially proposed the omission
     of the first and third reference to "people", but subsequently withdrew
     the proposal and seconded the proposal by the DA.

     Mr A C Nel, on behalf of the ANC, also supported Option 2, subject to
     the following amendment: To substitute "their needs" for "the needs of
     the people". The vision statement would, therefore, read as follows:

         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         their needs and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better
         quality of life for all the people of South Africa.

     Mrs P de Lille, on behalf of the ID, seconded the proposal by the ANC.

     Mr N T Godi, on behalf of the PAC, also expressed support for the ANC
     proposal.

     Mr D H M Gibson proposed as an alternative that "people's Parliament"
     be replaced by "democratic Parliament". The vision statement would,
     therefore, read as follows:

         To build an effective democratic Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better quality of life for all the people of South
         Africa.

     After discussion, the Chairperson of the NCOP suggested that the
     proposed vision could be tabled in both Houses for debate and decision.

     The Chief Whip of the Majority Party said that if that were the case,
     the ANC would reserve the right to return to its original proposal
     presented to the Joint Rules Committee at its meeting on 4 August 2004,
     namely:

         To build an effective people's Parliament that is responsive to
         the needs of the people and that is driven by the ideal of
         realising a better life for all the people of South Africa.

     The Speaker, noting that apart from some matters of detailed wording
     there was broad agreement on the basic approach, appealed to all
     parties to continue talking to one another in order to reach consensus
     before the matter was put to the Houses for decision.

     The Committee resolved that the proposed Vision for Parliament would be
     presented to both Houses for debate and decision, while parties would,
     in the meantime, continue their discussions in an attempt to reach
     consensus.


        Consideration of new governance model


     After a discussion, the Committee resolved that the Presiding Officers
     and the Secretariat would reconsider and refine the proposals before
     the Committee, with particular attention to the following: -
     · the processing of policy and the role of the Chief Whips' Forum, the
         Quarterly Consultative Forum and the Joint Ad Hoc Committee on
         Parliamentary Budget;
     · the relationship between the directing authority and the Joint Rules
         Committee;
     · representivity on the directing authority; and
     · the participation of the Secretary to Parliament in the directing
         authority.

     An adjusted document would then be presented to the next meeting of the
     Committee, which would sit before the directing authority met for the
     first time. In principle the directing authority was agreed upon and
     work had to proceed for it to be formed.


                          MONDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 - Department of
         Public Service and Administration for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         10 for 2003-2004 [RP 170-2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
         Technology Agency (SITA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
         75-2004].

2.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 - Department of Public Works
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2003-2004 [RP 185-2004].

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF) Group of
     Companies for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

4.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.


                         TUESDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 - National Treasury
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2003-2004 [RP 141-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
         Deposits for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 - Statistics South
         Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 for 2003-2004 [RP 163-
         2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve
         Bank for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2002-2004.

     (e)    Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
         2004.

     (f)    The Address of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank on
         24 August 2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report received from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
     Development on 23 September 2004 regarding the provisional suspension
     of Magistrate S E Tebe without remuneration pending an investigation
     into his fitness to hold office.

         Note: This report replaces and supersedes the report tabled on 12
         August 2004.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    Report and Financial Statements of Electricity Distribution Industry
  Holdings (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
          Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004


                        WEDNESDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-General
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 177-2004].

2.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence Centre
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 189-2004].

3.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical Schemes for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 135-2004].

4.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
         Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 165-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
         Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
         Linguistic Communities for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 167-
         2004].

5.    The Minister of Public Works

     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust
     (IDT) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 86-2004].

6.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 143-2004].


                         THURSDAY, 30 SEPTEMBER 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following members of the National Council of Provinces have
         been appointed to the Joint Committees mentioned, viz:

         Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
         Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:

           African National Congress

              Gamede, Mr D D
              Goeieman, Mr M C
              Madlala, Ms N M
              Mkono, Mr D G
              Nyanda, Ms F
              Setona, Mr T S
              Sibiya, Mr M J

           Democratic Alliance

              Terblanche, Ms J F
              Watson, Mr A (Alt)

           New National Party
              Sinclair, Mr K

         Joint Budget Committee:

           African National Congress

              Botha, Mr D J
              Goeieman, Mr M C
              Kolweni, Mr Z S
              Manyosi, Mr A T
              Mkhaliphi, Mr B J
              Nyanda, Ms F
              Ntwanambi, Ms N D
              Ralane, Mr T S

           Inkatha Freedom Party

              Raju, Mr N M

           New National Party

              Sinclair, Mr K

         Joint Standing Committee on Defence:

           African National Congress

              Hollander, Ms P
              Manyosi, Mr A T
              Mokoena, Kgoshi L M
              Moseki, Mr A L
              Ntuli, Mr Z C
              Shiceka, Mr S
              Tolo, Mr J B

           Democratic Alliance

              Worth, Mr D A
              Loe, Ms S (Alt)

           New National Party

              Sinclair, Mr K


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

     Report and Financial Statements of The Presidency for 2003-2004,
     including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
     for 2003-2004 [RP 180-2004].

2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 - Department of
         Provincial and Local Government for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
         5 for 2003-2004 [RP 193-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
         Government Association (SALGA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
         Traditional Leaders for 2003-2004.

3.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 - Department of
         Agriculture for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2003-2004 [RP
         186-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 - Department of Land
         Affairs for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2003-2004 [RP 168-
         2004].

4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
         Institute for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Annual Review of the Community Public Private Partnership
         Programme for 2003-2004.

5.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Management
     Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2003-2004, including the Report of
     the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 127-
     2004].

6.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 9 - Department of Public
     Enterprises for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 9 for 2003-2004 [RP 143-2004].

7.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
         Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2003-2004, including the Report
         of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
         [RP 157-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
         Navigation Services Company Limited for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the Urban Transport Fund
         (UTF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 191-2004].

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
         Transport Agency for 2002-2003, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2002-2003 [RP 27-
         2004].

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
         Africa and Air Navigation Services Company Ltd for 2003-2004.

8.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 - Department of
         Minerals and Energy for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 85-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund (CEF)
         Group of Companies for 2003-2004, including the Reports of the
         Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 132-2004].

9.    The Minister of Correctional Services

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 - Department of Correctional
     Services for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2003-2004 [RP 192-2004].

10.   The Minister of Housing


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 - Department of
         Housing for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2003-2004 [RP 125-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
         (RHLF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
         (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of Thubelisha Homes for 2003-
         2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
         Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

     (e)    Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
         for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (f)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
         Corporation Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


    (g)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban and
         Reconstruction Agency for 2003-2004.


11.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 - Department of Sport and
     Recreation for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2003-2004.


                           MONDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2004




TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

Report and Financial Statements of Vote 14 - Department of Arts and Culture
for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
Statements of Vote 14 for 2003-2004.


                           TUESDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 - Department of Justice and
     Constitutional Development for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
     Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2003-2004
     [RP 182-2004].

2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
     (SADB) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
     the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 194-2004].

3.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 - Department of Home Affairs
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements of Vote 4 for 2003-2004 [RP 175-2004].

4.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Sports Commission
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                          WEDNESDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Health

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 - Department of Health for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements of Vote 16 for 2003-2004 [RP 179-2000].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 28
     September 2004 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
     informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South African
     National Defence Force:

     EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN BURUNDI IN
     FULFILLMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH
     AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS

     This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
     authorised the employment of the South African National Defence Force
     (SANDF) personnel to the Republic of Burundi as part of the United
     Nations Operation in accordance with the United Nations Security
     Council Resolution 1545 of 2004.

     This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
     section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
     1996 (Act No 108 of 1996), read with section 93 of the Defence Act,
     2002 (Act No 42 of 2002).

     A total of 1099 personnel will be employed until the end of the
     transition period in September 2004. The contingent will be reduced to
     1078 personnel after September 2004 and 1007 personnel after December
     2004 until the end of March 2005. The SANDF personnel are already in
     Burundi and will only changeover to the United Nations mandate.

     The cost of the deployment will be funded from the Department of
     Defence's current allocation for peace Support Operations and will be
     reimbursed by the United Nations.

     I will communicate this report to the Members of the National Assembly
     and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
     wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the notice of the
     National Council of Provinces.

     Regards

     SIGNED
     T M MBEKI


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Government Employees
     Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 4 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has
         agreed to the Bill.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Public Audit Bill [B
     1 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 4 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Public Audit Bill [B 1 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
         referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.

3.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Public Investment
     Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 4
     October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

4.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the National Payment
     System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75),
     dated 4 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
         the National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14B - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill
         with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 13


         1. On page 11, in line 4, after "subsection" to insert "(1) or".

                                  CLAUSE 17


         1. On page 11, in line 46, to omit "and commencement".

         2. On page 11, in line 47, to omit all the words after "2004" up
              to and including "Gazette" in line 49.


                           FRIDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Membership of Committees


     1)     Mr B J Mkhaliphi has been elected Co-Chairperson of the Joint
         Budget Committee with effect from 8 October 2004.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Government Notice No R.889 published in Government Gazette No 26603
     dated 10 July 2004: Designation of a body for the purpose of section
     212(4)(a) and (8) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of
     1977).

2.    The Minister of Labour

     Report and Financial Statements of National Economic Development and
     Labour Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
     Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


                          TUESDAY, 12 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled:

     The following papers have been tabled and are now referred to the
     relevant committees as mentioned below:


     (1)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Education and Recreation:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (b)     Report of the South African Geographical Names Council for
              2002-2003 [RP 203-2003].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Playhouse Company
              for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Zoological
              Gardens of South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Engelenburg House
              Art Collection for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Library for the Blind for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
              Research Council for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              98-2004].

         (h)     Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
              South Africa for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (i)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 111-2004].


     (2)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Finance:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
              Standards Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 73-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 133-
              2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Accountants'
              and Auditors' for 2003, including the Report of the
              Independent Auditors on the the Financial Statements for the
              year ended 31 December 2003.

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Revenue
              Service (SARS) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              175-2004].


     (3)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Labour and Public Enterprises:


         (a)     Recommendation No 192 concerning Safety and Health in
              Agriculture, adopted by the International Labour Conference at
              its Eighty-Ninth Session, Geneva, 21 June 2001, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (b)     Recommendation No 193 concerning the Promotion of
              Cooperatives, adopted by the International Labour Conference
              at its Ninetieth Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002, tabled in
              terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (c)     Recommendation No 194 concerning the List of Occupational
              Diseases and the recording and notification of occupational
              accidents and diseases, adopted by the International Labour
              Conference at its Ninetieth Session, Geneva, 20 June 2002,
              tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

         (d)     Convention No 185 revising the Seafarers' Identity
              Documents Convention, 1958, adopted by the International
              Labour Conference at its Ninety-First Session, Geneva, 19 June
              2003, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
              1996.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African
              Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Telkom SA Limited for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
              the the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (g)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
              Media Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2003-2004,
              including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (h)     Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Limited for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

         (i)     Report and Financial Statements of Transnet Limited for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
              the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.


     (4)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
              Prosecuting Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 160-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Legal Aid Board for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 129-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
              Electoral Commission regarding the Management and
              Administration of the Represented Political Parties' Fund for
              2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
              Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 116-2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 - Department of
              Safety and Security for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for
              2003-2004 [RP 184-2004].

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 23 - Independent
              Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 23 for 2003-2004 [RP 121-2004].


     (5)    The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
         Social Services:

         Report and Financial Statements of the Medical Research Council
         (MRC) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
         on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 91-2002].


     (6)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Land and Environmental Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
              Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC) for 2003-2004, including
              the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004 [RP 7-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Onderstepoort
              Biological Products Limited for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the the Financial
              Statements for 2003-2004.

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust
              Board for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 161-
              2004].

         (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
              Export Control Board (PPECB) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
              for 2003-2004.

         (e)     Report and Financial Statements of Ncera Farms
              (Proprietary) Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


     (7)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Local Government and Administration:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 - Department of
              Public Service and Administration for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
              Vote 10 for 2003-2004 [RP 170-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
              Technology Agency (SITA) for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 75-2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal
              Infrastructure Investment Unit 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004 [RP 178-2004].


     (8)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Economic and Foreign Affairs:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Mineral
              Technology (MINTEK) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP
              31-2004].

         (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
              Geoscience for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
              General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 68-
              2004].

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National
              Electricity Regulator for 2003-2004, including the Report of
              the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004
              [RP 122-2004].

         (d)     Annual Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund
              (CEF) Group of Companies for 2003-2004, including the Report
              of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
              2004.


     (9)    The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
         Public Services:


         (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 - Department of
              Public Works for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
              Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2003-
              2004 [RP 185-2004].

         (b)     Guidelines for the Implementation of Labour-Intensive
              Infrastructure Projects under the Expanded Public Works
              Programme (EPWP).

         (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
              Industry Development Board (CIDB) for 2003-2004, including the
              Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
              2003-2004 [RP 138-2004].


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Annual Review of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of
     Public Office-Bearers, 2004.

2.    The Minister of Education


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Council on Higher
         Education for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Government Notice No 983 published in Government Gazette No
         26692 dated 18 August 2004: Appointment of a replacement to serve
         as a member of the South African Qualifications Authority (SAQA)
         in terms of section 4(4) of the South African Qualifications
         Authority Act, 1995 (Act No 58 of 1995).

     (c)    Government Notice No 285 published in Government Gazette No
         26119 dated 3 March 2004: Appointment of members to serve on the
         proposed management structures with the aim of developing
         additional subjects to be included in the National Curriculum
         Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South
         African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (d)    Government Notice No 995 published in Government Gazette No
         26711 dated 23 August 2004: Amendment to the names of members to
         serve on the Ministerial Project Committee and Associated Subject
         Working Groups for the development of subject statements to be
         included in the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12
         (General) in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act
         No 27 of 1996).

     (e)    Government Notice No 1052 published in Government Gazette No
         26767 dated 8 September 2004: Appointment of members to serve on
         the proposed subject working groups in terms of the National
         Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South
         African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1080 published in Government Gazette No
         26788 dated 15 September 2004: The development of a National
         Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) -  Second phase: Call
         for written submissions from the Stakeholder bodies and members of
         the public in terms of the National Education Policy Act, 1996
         (Act No 27 of 1996).

     (g)    Government Notice No 981 published in Government Gazette No
         26690 dated 18 August 2004: Extension of the term of office of the
         current members serving on the Second South African Qualifications
         Authority for the period 26 April 2004 until 26 October 2004 in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).

     (h)    Government Notice No 982 published in Government Gazette No
         26691 dated 18 August 2004: Calling for nomination of persons to
         serve as members on the Third South African Qualifications
         Authority for the period 27 October 2004 until 26 October 2007 in
         terms of the South African Qualifications Authority Act, 1995 (Act
         No 58 of 1995).

     (i)    Government Notice No 820 published in Government Gazette No
         26560 dated 8 July 2004: National Policy regarding further
         Education and Training programmes: Approval of Additional
         Languages as National Education Policy to be listed in the
         National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General) in terms of
         the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and
         the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

     j) Government Notice No 1081 published in Government Gazette No 26789
        dated 17 September 2004: National Policy regarding further
        Education and Training programmes: Approval of the draft policy
        document, National Policy on the Conduct, Administration and
        Management of the Assessment of the Senior Certificate as National
        Education Policy in terms of the National Education Policy Act,
        1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South African Schools Act, 1996
        (Act No 84 of 1996).


                         WEDNESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2004



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

     Report and Financial Statements for Vote 27 - Department of
     Communications for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-
     General on the Financial Statements of Vote 27 for 2003-2004.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
     Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International
     Registration of Industrial Designs, dated 13 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Geneva
         Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International
         Registration of Industrial Designs, referred to it, recommends
         that the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
         approve the said Act.

     Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
     Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
     Registration of Trade Marks, dated 13 October 2004:

         The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
         considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Protocol
         Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
         Registration of Trade Marks, referred to it, recommends that the
         Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
         the said Protocol.
     Report to be considered.


                          THURSDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills


     (1)    Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] - Act No 19 of 2004
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 October 2004).

2.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 12 October 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Securities Services Bill [B 19 - 2004] (National Assembly
              - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
         Administration Commission of South Africa for 2003-2004, including
         the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2003-2004 [RP 188-2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Micro Finance Regulatory
         Council (MFRC) for the year ended 31 December 2003.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
     National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec
     75), dated 13 October 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
         the subject of the National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9B - 2004]
         (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports the Bill
         with proposed amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 8


         1. On page 5, from line 45, to omit "information to be discussed
              during a certain part of a" and to substitute:

              , for the part of the meeting concerned, the information to be
              discussed during that part of the

                                  CLAUSE 10


         1. On page 6, in line 44, to omit "the" and to substitute "a".


                           FRIDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) on 15 October 2004 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(3), classified the following Bill as a section 75
         Bill:


         (i)     Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill [B 20 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Judicial Matters Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister
         for Justice and Constitutional Development on 6 October 2004.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
         Development and the Select Committee on Security and
         Constitutional Affairs.

3.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Wysigingswetsontwerp op die Nasionale Betalingstelsel [W
              14 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the National
         Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004] (National Assembly -
         sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister in The Presidency

     Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing Council
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 174-2004].


                           MONDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2004



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - insert ATC1018e



                          TUESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Bills passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 19 October
         2004:


         (i)     Public Audit Bill [B 1 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec
              75)


         (ii)    Public Investment Corporation Bill [B 6B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


         (iii)   Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Wetsontwerp op die Openbare Beleggingskorporasie [W 6 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Public
              Investment Corporation Bill [B 6 - 2004] (National Assembly -
              sec 75).


         (ii)    Wysigingswetsontwerp op die “Government Employees Pension
              Law” [W 15 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investments Commissioners
     for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 99-2004].

2.    The Minister of Social Development

     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 - Department of Social
     Development for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General
     on the Financial Statements of Vote 19 for 2003-2004 [RP 198-2004].

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Government Notice No 1012 published in Government Gazette No
         26731 dated 27 August 2004: Notice of list of protected tree
         species under the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (b)    Government Notice No 1031 published in Government Gazette No
         26749 dated 3 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of water for
         agricultural use and for domestic and industrial use from the
         Gamtoos River Government Water Scheme (The Kouga Dam and the
         Gamtoos Canal) in the Fish-to-Tsitsikamma Water Management Area
         (WMA 15) in the Eastern Cape Province, in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (c)    Government Notice No 1042 published in Government Gazette No
         26752 dated 10 September 2004: Correction notice in respect of
         lists of protected tree species in terms of the National Forests
         Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

     (d)    Government Notice No 1099 published in Government Gazette No
         26807 dated 17 September 2004: Notice to protect a tree in terms
         of section 12 of the National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of
         1998).

     (e)    Government Notice No 1098 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Water Research Fund: Rates and
         Charges in terms of the Water Research Act, 1971 (Act No 34 of
         1971).

     (f)    Government Notice No 1103 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Restrictions on the use of surface
         water for agricultural purposes and urban and industrial purposes
         from any resource in the catchment of the Loskop Dam (Secondary
         Catchment B1 and B2) in terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act
         No 36 of 1998).

     (g)    Government Notice No 1104 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Upper Komati
         River Water User Association, Magisterial District of Belfast and
         Carolina, Mpumalanga Province, Water Management Area Number 5 in
         terms of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).

     (h)    Government Notice No 1105 published in Government Gazette No
         26799 dated 23 September 2004: Establishment of the Lower Modder
         River/Krugersdrift Water User Association, Districts of Boshof,
         Bloemfontein, Petrusberg and Jacobsdal, Province of the Free
         State, Water Management Area Number 13 in terms of the National
         Water Act, 1998 (Act No 36 of 1998).


