---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 November 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-11-10
---

WEDNESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2004
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____
The House met at 14:01.

The House Chairperson (Mr N P Nhleko) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

    DIWALI, HINDU FESTIVAL OF LIGHTS AND END OF MUSLIM MONTH OF RAMADAAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S Rajbally: Thank you, Chair. I move without notice:

    That the House -


    (1)     notes that -


         (a)     on Friday, 12 November 2004, Hindus all over the world
              will observe Diwali/Deepawali, also known as the festival of
              lights, and that this event marks the victory of good over
              evil, the enlightenment that service and duty must remain the
              hallmarks of both governors and the governed and that evil and
              injustice must be fought wherever they are found; and


         (b)     the Muslims' fasting month of Ramadaan ends this coming
              weekend and that Muslims, having gone through Ramadaan, have
              experienced a sense of revitalised spirituality and empathy
              for humanity, especially the poor and destitute; and


    (2)     wishes the Muslim and Hindu communities in South Africa and the
         world over, Eid Mubarak and a joyous Eid-ul-Fitr, and a happy
         Diwali/Deepawali.


    Agreed to.


                  DEATH OF GIBSON KENTE ON 7 NOVEMBER 2004


                             (Draft Resolution)

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you very much, House
Chairperson. I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes with profound sadness the death of Mr Gibson Kente, who
         passed away on 7 November 2004;


   (2)      recalls that Mr Kente, who was born in East London in 1932,
         began his long career in the field of arts in the early 1960s;


   (3)      acknowledges Mr Kente's contribution in the nurturing of many of
         South Africa's artistic talent;


   (4)      believes that he leaves behind a culture of excellence in the
         arts that will serve to inspire many generations to come; and


   (5)      conveys its condolences to his loved ones and the Kente family.


    Agreed to.

 DIHLABENG YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AND MORAL REGENERATION AWARDS HON WINKIE DIREKO
              WITH BEST HIV AND AIDS GRANDMOTHER EDUCATOR AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, House Chairperson. I move
without notice:
   That the House -


   (1)      notes that -


         (a)     the Dihlabeng Youth Development and Moral Regeneration
              will on 27 November 2004 confer the Best HIV and Aids
              Grandmother Educator Award on the Hon Isabella Winkie Direko;
              and


         (b)     this award is in recognition of hon Winkie Direko's
              untiring efforts in educating the youth about HIV and Aids;


   (2)      believes that hon Winkie Direko's work among the youth sets a
         shining example of the active role parents need to play in the all-
         round effort against HIV and Aids; and


   (3)      congratulates hon Direko on being awarded the Best HIV and Aids
         Grandmother Educator Award.


Malibongwe! [Praise!]


Agreed to.

   SUSPENSION OF RULES FOR PURPOSE OF CONDUCTING SECOND READING DEBATE ON
                     SECOND REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL
                             (Draft Resolution)

THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, House Chairperson. I move
the motion printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

That the House, for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate  on
the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004]  (National  Assembly  -
sec 75) -


      (a)   suspends any Assembly Rule that may delay the conducting of such
           debate; and


      (b)   subject to the concurrence of the National Council of Provinces,
           suspends Joint Rules 154 and 159.


    Agreed to.

 PILLARS OF THE AFRICAN RENAISSANCE CELEBRATING THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF AFRICAN
              WOMEN TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR THEIR OWN DESTINY

                                  (Debate)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon House Chairperson, when we grew up on the dusty
streets of our beloved townships, we used to sing and remix songs such
as...

Mampe mpelegele ngwana ke a lema. Wa mpona ke a lema. Ke lema ke le nosi.
Pina e ga e re wa mpona ke a lema, ke lema le rrago. E re wa mpona ke a
lema. Ke lema ke le nosi. (Translation of Tswana paragraph follows.)

[Mampe, please look after the baby; I am ploughing. You are aware that I am
busy. I am doing it alone. The song does not say I am ploughing with your
father. It says you are aware that I am ploughing. I am doing it alone.]

In West Africa, they sing:


      Ha nye zu fia mu logo
      Fia de to mu logo
      Kinka zu fia mu logo.


The above song means ``my songs take root and grow in the Kinka community
until they become a weapon which can topple even the mighty and powerful’’.
Allow me to cite one of the greatest poets, who says in one of her poems,
titled Still I rise:


    You may write me down in history
    With your bitter, twisted lies,
    You may trod me in the very dirt
    But still, like dust, I’ll rise.


Those are the words of Maya Angelou.

In his writings, Thomas Sankara stated:

       This vast and complex combination of pain and joy, solitary and
       forsaken yet creator of all humanity, suffering, frustrated and
       humiliated and yet endless source of happiness for each one of us;
       this source of affection beyond compare, inspiring the most
       unexpected courage; this being called weak but possessing untold
       ability to inspire us to take the road of honour; this being of flesh
       and blood and of spiritual conviction; this being is women; this
       being is you.


       You are our mothers, life companions, our comrades in struggle and,
       because of this fact, you should by right affirm yourselves as equal
       partners in the joyful victory feast of the revolution. We must
       restore to humanity your true image by making the reign of freedom
       prevail over differentiations imposed by nature and by eliminating
       all kinds of hypocrisy that sustain the shameless exploitation of
       women.

Ladies and gentlemen, women in Senegal, Togo, Tanzania, Kenya and South
Africa and, in fact, all over the continent, continued to fight for
emancipation, in most cases as victims of discrimination, racism, class
discrimination and religious discrimination, but also as disciplined cadres
for the freedom of their families, in the first instance, and themselves as
women. They soldiered on. As disciplined cadres, they constantly shake off
the dust and they rise.

            Mampe mpelegele ngwana ke a lema.
            Wa mpona ke a lema.
            Ke lema ke le nosi.

This is a song of a woman, a mother who is concerned about her children and
that when the rain falls, the field should be ready. Women have always been
crucial in all matters of transformation, in all matters concerning the
recovery of the continent. There can be no African recovery unless women
are part of developing the plans and implementing the plans, if they are to
benefit from them.

Women are beginning to claim their part on the stage. They are no longer
spectators but participants, locally, on the continent and internationally.
There are great men who have long been calling for the emancipation and the
involvement of women in decision-making. The generation of giants such as
Thomas Sankara, Samora Machel, Kwame Nkrumah, Patrice Lumumba, Nelson
Mandela and Oliver Tambo, have pointed to the correct path, that the
liberation of women is not an act of charity but a prerequisite for the
triumph of any revolution. In fact, in Oliver Tambo’s words, and I quote,
“We who have walked with giants know that the women of Africa belong in
that company too.”

Before placing a focus on the role, position, status and active involvement
of women in the African Renaissance, an overview of the meaning of the
African Renaissance should assist in addressing the contribution of women
to the transformation of the African continent. The African Renaissance is
about reclaiming the heritage of the people of the African continent, and
it is about the socioeconomic and political renewal of Africa. To those
living in Africa, the African Renaissance therefore means pushing back the
frontiers of poverty, underdevelopment, famine and ignorance, and
reconstructing a better life for all.

In modern African politics and political life, the African Renaissance is
at the heart of a renewed focus on the continent’s sustainable development,
economic participation in a globalised world, and the active participation
of all Africans in the social and political activities of countries
throughout Africa, and respect for the desires and contribution of all
sectors of society, including the notable contribution of women to the
development of Africa.

There is no doubt that women are a pivotal part of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, which puts into sharp relief the challenges I have
mentioned above. The women in our ancient societies wielded a lot of power
in the affairs of their communities. In both reproduction and production,
they were the custodians of our culture and language.

However, the power of women has been eroded by the wave of colonialism
which gradually undermined our culture and our values. This power was also
eroded by the conflicts and wars which turned them into refugees. They
became prey to preventable diseases. Women on this continent constitute the
bulk of the poor, the refugees and the sick, including those suffering from
HIV/Aids. Research shows that 80% of women who are infected are faithful to
their partners.

As Maya Angelou said:

    Out of the huts of history’s shame
    I rise
    Up from a past that’s rooted in pain
    I rise
    I’m a black ocean, leaping and wide,
    Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.
    Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
    I rise
    Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear
    I rise
    Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,
    I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
    I rise
    I rise
    I rise.
What actually is the role of the African woman and what part does she play
in the social, cultural and religious aspects of the African society? A
proverb from Ghana declares that a woman is a flower in a garden and a man
is the fence around it. [Applause.] This proverb is a picture of women in
African society and basically sums up the position of the women across the
African continent. Women are the centre of society. Most women keep the
families together and they also bear enormous responsibilities for their
families.

Economic activities such as trading are more often than not in the hands of
women. Women also play an important role as distributors in their
communities. They constitute an important reservoir of wage earning,
agricultural labour and are in general the backbone of socioeconomic
activities in Africa. Culturally, women are also considered equals; in
certain regions, they are even wealthier than men. In the Akan society of
Ghana, relationships are determined by blood. Every person is considered to
belong to his mother. In this case, without a woman, the man is without
foundation because one belongs to the mother’s family.

Because of this central role, women are also economically potent because
they inherit property and hand it over to their children. So, basically
women in this society have economic independence, economic potency and the
social standing that recognises their value because they are the people
that create and hold society together.

Proudly African and conscious of the imperative for the peoples of Africa
to take responsibility for their destiny, in her Beijing paper, Wangari
Maathai wrote:

      Africans were deculturised in ways intended to demystify, demean and
      devastate their personality and leave them unclear about their
      identity, values and spirituality. Many foreigners even believed and
      thought that African culture and spirituality were an impediment to
      progress and should be discarded. This has given the African an
      inferiority complex, which in turn legitimates holding them in
      contempt and demeaning and discrediting everything about them.

Professor Maathai won the award for founding the Green Belt Movement, one
of the world’s most successful programmes to combine community development
with environmental protection. The movement has built the self-reliance and
self-confidence of tens of thousands of people who are living in poverty.
It has convinced them that planting trees will make a difference in their
struggle to improve their lives and those of future generations.

On 8 October 2004, the Norwegian Nobel Committee informed the world that it
had decided to award the Nobel Peace Prize for 2004 to Wangari Maathai for
her contribution to sustainable development. Our grandmothers have always
been known as a strongroom of ideas and wisdom. Even the poet and writer
who is a South African member of Parliament, hon Ben Dikobe Martins, in his
poem Keepers of the law refers to a grandmother’s wisdom challenging judges
dressed in red and white, assessors in black and white, and prosecutors in
a hostage smile. Yet, Maya Angelou says: “I will rise”. We wish you could
write more, Ben Dikobe, because you give us a lot of knowledge through your
pen. [Applause.]

The basic traditional systems of African culture are matriarchal systems;
yet, over the years, a subtle conversion has taken place that has slowly
turned African systems - not necessarily their men but the systems - into
macho systems. Here lies the debacle of the African woman. If this is the
case, then the question arises: Is the success of the African Renaissance
inwardly interwoven with the emancipation of African women? This is an
African century. It is 100 years in which the African woman has to be at
the front of the struggle for the renewal of our motherland. Surely, as the
day follows the night, so shall the cold and the dark past of Africa make
way for a brighter tomorrow.

That is the context in which the concept of the African Renaissance must be
understood. Some of the important pillars on which the African Renaissance
rests are the reconceptualisation of the role of the African Union, the Pan-
African Parliament and the bringing into life of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, Nepad.

We are confident that the African continent, which is the cradle of
humanity, will rise to this challenge. The collective will of our ancestors
saw the end to this slavery. We decolonised and liberated our entire
continent. And, in South Africa, we defeated and destroyed the apartheid
system.

The 21st century has to be an African century. Therefore, the creation of a
nonsexist continent is a prerequisite for the success of the continent.
These struggles have to be fought by both men and women, side by side. The
continent cannot claim the 21st century until the women are truly
liberated. Like they sing in East Africa:

      Safari yaki sihi
      Entching inini

This song means, “Indeed, I will rise”.

A way ahead needs to be found to overcome the pernicious effect of the
markets’ exploitative division between the North and the South. However, it
must be borne in mind that empowering women entails more than merely
enabling some women to become leaders. Without resources, their leadership
is meaningless. True gender equity entails addressing the needs of women as
a whole. Thus not only should more women have access to power, but more
women leaders should also have access to sufficient resources.

I want to conclude by quoting President Mandela. He once said:

      Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is
      that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our
      darkness, that most frightens us. We ask ourselves, who am I to be
      brilliant, gorgeous, talented and fabulous? Who are you not to be? You
      are a child of God. Your playing small doesn’t serve the world. There
      is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other people won’t feel
      insecure around you. We are all meant to shine as children do. We are
      born to make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It is not
      just in some of us, it is in every one of us. And as we let our own
      light shine, we unconsciously give other people permission to do the
      same. As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence
      automatically liberates others.

Mampe mpelegele ngwana ke a lema. Wa mpona ke a lema. Ke lema ke le nosi.
[Mampe, look after the baby; I am ploughing. You are aware that I am busy.
I am doing it alone.]

      Out of the huts of history’s shame
      I rise
      Up from a past that’s rooted in pain
      I rise
      I’m a black ocean, leaping and wide.
      Welling and swelling I bear in the tide
      Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
      I rise
      Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear
      I rise
      Bringing the gifts that my ancestors gave,
      I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
      I rise
      I rise
...because I am a woman of Africa. [Applause.]

Hon MEMBERS: Malibongwe![Praise!] [Laughter.]

Mr M RAMGOBIN: Order! Chairperson, I will call for order on your behalf, if
you don’t mind. [Laughter.]

Chair, Mr Deputy President, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, inherent in
the subject for discussion is the presumption that for far too long our
people, especially women, have suffered so much and endured so many
hardships, denials and assaults on their beings that one will fail to
describe them to the young of today. Indeed, our destiny had been, and is,
even today, being compromised by selfish rulers from the days of
colonialism and apartheid.

We have achieved political liberation, but for us to summon ourselves for
the rebirth of our continent is indeed to summon ourselves to the second
liberation or revolution of our continent. Whilst I acknowledge that not
always were the women of Africa in a state or position, nor were they
allowed the power, to predetermine the cause of events, in broad terms, it
is my belief that women today constitute a major pillar for the
regeneration of Africa.

In paying tribute to those mothers and martyrs of our struggle, from the
Jamila Bopashas of Algeria to the Lillian Ngoyis, Helen Josephs and
Valiamas of South Africa, our discussion today must indeed be an
undertaking and a commitment to re-empower the masses of Africa. In re-
empowering the people, there will be mechanisms for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts, as already presented in the protocols of the AU and the
programmes of Nepad. In the words of our former President, Nelson Mandela,
when he addressed the UN:

      We must fight against and defeat the deification of arms: the
      seemingly entrenched view that to kill another person is a natural way
      of advancing one’s cause or an obviously correct manner by which to
      resolve disputes.

Again, as the ANC will put it, in the words of President Thabo Mbeki:

  We must make the point that the engagement of women in these processes by
  which the people determine their destiny must be central to our
  determination as to whether we are succeeding or otherwise in the
  struggle to make the masses of the people their own liberators.

He goes on to say:

  We must make the abuse of political power to gain material wealth by
  those who exercise that power foreign to our continent and systems of
  governance.

And he adds:

  We cannot speak of an African Renaissance where we permit that corruption
  remains an endemic feature of the private and public sectors of our
  continent.


  ...that the cancer of self-enrichment by corrupt means constitutes one of
  the factors which accounts for the underdevelopment and violent conflicts
  from which we seek to escape.

And he concludes:

  Many of us will be familiar with instances in which wars have dragged on
  seemingly without end, because soldiers and their political accomplices
  find the situation of conflict profitable as it opens up business
  opportunities for them to earn commissions on arms purchases, to open
  possibilities for criminal syndicates to loot and to rob...


  Why do I say this in a debate on women’s rights? I say this because, for
  me, women are better equipped to stem these antipeople tendencies, for
  they do not seek, with some exceptions, to appropriate power spaces for
  themselves, as most of us men do.

We need to address the issues of globalisation and the adjustment
programmes of the 1980s in respect of Africa. In Africa, women account for
more than half of the population, and most adult women are engaged in
agricultural activity, growing and processing the bulk of the food
consumed, and marketing the surplus.

In Africa, women suffer the double burden of poverty and discrimination. In
some countries they do not have the right to own land, and are denied
access to credit. They have limited access to productive resources such as
irrigation water, fertilizers and technology. Health services and
educational facilities are not equally available to them. Thus it is easy
to note that women suffer disproportionately from poverty, illiteracy and
malnutrition.

As a pillar to realise the regeneration of Africa, social movements under
the leadership of women, the mobilisation of workers, peasants,
intellectuals, commerce and industry, in partnership with them, must begin
to question the fundamentals of globalisation and structural readjustment
programmes and, if need be - especially if these questions become
impediments to the realisation of the African Renaissance - act against
them.

There is no doubt in any rational mind that economic, social and cultural
factors have combined and continue to produce the situation wherein most
development efforts have tended to discount the real and potential
contribution of women, and it must be clear to all of us who seek the
realisation of the African Renaissance that women must not remain where
they are and be satisfied to be the beneficiaries of welfare programmes.

Who among us can deny that the adjustment programmes of the 1980s have
worsened the position of women, especially in the rural areas where most of
them live? Many have lost and continue to lose their jobs in the formal
sector. Of course some have started certain new activities in the more
flexible informal sector, but the lack of capital and credit, coupled with
the absence of training and education, are added restraints. Increases in
food prices, the cost of education, health care and housing, both in the
rural and urban areas, intensify the severe pressures on women.

Indeed, we remain jubilant that the project and processes for the
mobilisation of women as equal partners in development activities will get
priority attention in the Nepad programme. This consensus is in keeping
with the value system that we in South Africa proclaim, and which I do not
hesitate to proclaim from here, namely that we will never be free for as
long as one half of us, males, keep the other half, females, in perpetual
economic, social and cultural bondage.

This consensus, for me, is a compelling call to action; action for
development which should not be and is not just a political imperative, but
also a basic condition for sustained economic and social progress based on
ethic. If we were to dispassionately reflect on the past 40 odd years on
our continent, we must come to a conclusion, and urge our people to
critically look at, and make compulsory, reading the Protocol on the Rights
of Women in Africa, as presented in Maputo last year. I do hope that these
rights are translated into as many indigenous languages as possible, and I
believe that it should be made an integral part of the curriculum in our
schools.

It is indeed important for us to celebrate the achievements of African
women taking responsibility for their own destiny. But this is not enough.
We need to celebrate this every day by invoking the AU protocol and by
applying it in our daily lives.

Without any ambiguity, our Parliament under the leadership of the ANC has
in fact implemented ANC policy positions on the rights of women. With equal
unambiguousness, the policy of the ANC on women’s rights is a profound
forerunner of all the declarations made from Addis Ababa to Maputo. It is
our duty now, with the instrument of political power in our hands, to
ensure that these rights, with all other human rights, are implemented. We
must protect them, if need be, with our lives.

I want to conclude with something that the hon Deputy Speaker started off
with when she referred to the “motherland”. In their wisdom, or because of
the lack of it, I was also brought up in a tradition where my country was
referred to as the motherland, and the gender question comes into play. For
record purposes I would like to state the way one refers to mother and
motherland in the language in which I was brought up. The manner in which
one said it during the days of liberation in the late 1940s and early 1950s
was: Vande maataram - Salutations to you, oh mother, my motherland. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

Ms C-S BOTHA: Hon Chairperson, our natural inclination is to consider the
achievements of African women as limited to the accolades accorded the very
public figures, such as the Nobel Prize winner from Kenya, Wangari Maathai,
and Mrs Getrude Mangella of Tanzania, Chairperson of the Pan-African
Parliament. However, the continent is not new and the fact of African women
taking responsibility for their own destiny has sustained the people of
Africa for centuries.

Therefore, I would like to interpret the use of the word “Renaissance” as
the belated recognition, re-evaluation, rediscovery and resurrection of the
ongoing saga of African women started, as a matter of fact, with the
African Eve. The recent revelations of the DNA trail, which lead back to
one African mother uniting us all in a shared ancestry, merely serve to
confirm the fundamental and ancient importance of the African woman to all
mankind.

But we also need to take a global perspective when we celebrate our
remarkable achievements. We need to guard against expressions of
complacency or superiority. We are amongst the achievers of the world, but
we are not alone and we must not allow our confidence to make us arrogant
and exclusionary.

Vele merkwaardige individue kan vandag uitgesonder word. En vele meer
verdienstelikes sal anoniem bly, maar ek wil tog ’n paar noem.

Ek is grootgemaak met die storie van Racheltjie de Beer wat 12 jaar oud was
toe sy haar lewe vir haar sesjarige broertjie opgeoffer het deur hom in ’n
uitgeholde miershoop te sit, haar eie klere ook vir hom te gee en haarself
ter beskerming van hom voor die opening te plaas. Ek dink aan Olive
Schreiner, gebore in 1886, wat beide lof en verwerping in haar leeftyd
gesmaak het vir haar uitgesproke feminisme in daardie tyd, haar anti-
imperialisme en haar anti-rassisme.

Daar was die merkwaardige mev De la Rey wat haar man, die generaal,
deurentyd vergesel het tydens sy militêre bedrywighede in die Boere-oorlog.
Daar was die vreeslose vakbondaktiviste van die dertigerjare soos Anna
Scheepers en Ray Alexander.

En daar is steeds die uitstaande mev Helen Suzman wat, ten spyte van die
feit dat sy meestal man- of vrou-alleen in die Parlement was, openlik en
onophoudelik die beleid van die Nasionale Party teengestaan het, en die
regering aangemoedig het om onderhandelinge met die vryheidsbewegings aan
te knoop. Sy bly tot vandag toe nog so uitgesproke. Daar is Mamphela
Ramphele, die eerste swart vrou en die eerste vrou wat baas van die
Universiteit van Kaapstad was en daarná ’n direkteur van die Wêreldbank
geword het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Many remarkable individuals can be singled out today. And many more
deserving will remain anonymous, but I still want to name a few.

I was raised with the story of Racheltjie de Beer, who was 12 years old
when she sacrificed her life for her six-year-old brother by placing him in
a hollowed-out ant heap, giving him her clothes and placing herself in
front of the opening to protect him. I think of Olive Schreiner, born in
1886, who experienced both commendation and condemnation in her lifetime
for her forthright feminism during that period, her anti-imperialism and
her antiracism.

There was the remarkable Mrs De La Rey, who always accompanied her husband,
the general, during his military activities in the Boer War. There were the
fearless trade union activists of the thirties such as Anna Scheepers and
Ray Alexander.

And there is the outstanding Mrs Helen Suzman who, in spite of the fact
that she was mostly man or woman alone in Parliament, openly and
continuously opposed the policies of the National Party and urged the
government to initiate negotiations with the freedom movements. Up to this
day she remains just as outspoken. There is Mamphela Ramphele, the first
black woman and the first woman to be the boss of the University of Cape
Town and who went on to become a director of the World Bank.]

I would rather bring to the attention of the House the nameless and
faceless individuals who took part in events which did not necessarily gain
them recognition as individuals, but whose courage, vision, integrity,
tenacity and morality have undoubtedly formed the foundation on which later
achievements were built and whose sacrifices will sustain the future of the
nation. None of these women subscribed to the fashionably politically
correct stance of the day.

Nie een van hierdie vroue, wil ek herhaal, het hulle onderwerp aan die
tirannie van wat die populêre politieke mantra van die dag was nie.

Dit sluit in die Franse vroue wat uit hul bekende Europa gevlug het in die
17de eeu omdat hul godsdiens vir hulle meer belangrik was as hul heimat.
Dit sluit in die nageslagte van voortrekkervroue wat met hul gesinne die
onbekende hinterland in getrek het omdat hulle hulle nie wou onderwerp aan
die Britse imperialisme nie. Dit sluit in die swart vrouens wat reeds in
1913 geweier het om ’n pas te dra en daardeur hierdie vernederende
staatsbeheer tot in die laat vyftigs ontduik het. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[None of these women, I want to repeat, subjected themselves to the tyranny
of the popular political mantra of the day.

This includes the French women who fled from their familiar Europe in the
17th century because their religion was more important to them than their
fatherland. It includes the descendants of Voortrekker women who moved into
the unfamiliar hinterland with their families because they did not want to
be subjected to British imperialism. It includes the black women who
refused to carry passes in 1913 already, thereby managing to evade this
humiliating government control until the late fifties.]

This includes The Black Sash movement, which started at a tea party in the
early 50s, and has remained a beacon of morality for all of us to emulate;
and it is embodied in the big march to the Union Buildings in Pretoria in
1955.

When the late Bram Fischer was arrested for the first time, his mother
assured him not to worry since, she said: “We, the Fischer family, have
been there before.” The experience of being on the receiving end of public
disdain for their political beliefs was familiar and respectable for the
Fischer family. To the eternal credit of his parents, a great intellectual
openness marked his upbringing, and his wife shared their uncompromising
commitment to racial equality in South Africa.

Hierdie benadering van diens bo self was ‘n essensiële impetus vir morele
optrede dwarsdeur ons geskiedenis. Dit het nog nooit verouderd geraak nie
of in onbruik verval nie. Om die waarheid te sê, geen renaissance of
wedergeboorte kan daarsonder plaasvind nie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[This approach of service above self was an essential impetus for moral
behaviour throughout our history. It has never become obsolete or fallen
into disuse. To tell the truth, no renaissance or rebirth can occur without
it.]

There is an old truism that “No people can rise above the standard of its
own women.” We must bear this in mind while we are confronted by the
terrors which still threaten the pillars of our Renaissance: the dreadful
fact of domestic violence, the high incidence of rape, the destructive
force of Aids, and the indignity of poverty.

Fortunately, we have seen the immense resilience of African society, which
is giving us an increasing impetus for assuming responsibility for our own
destiny.

It would be wonderful if we could sing the following women’s song, which
was recorded in Lesotho in 1836 but which is also heard on the border with
Mozambique: “Oh, how I should love to plait a string and go to heaven. I
would find rest.” But that time has not yet come for us. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Dr M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson, His Excellency our Deputy President, hon
members, we have discussed the notion of an African Renaissance for years
and today we are relating it to the efforts made in the past 10 years to
promote the condition and liberation of women. We may not have given enough
analytical attention to defining what we really mean when we speak of an
African Renaissance.

On this occasion, I wish to stress how our African Renaissance and the
economic and social liberation of our women are indeed one and the same. I
conceive of our Renaissance as being a move forward, rather than merely
looking back at the past. For me, an African Renaissance means the
opportunity of carrying into the future the sense of humanity, compassion
and empathy that is so inherent in our African culture and traditions. In
doing so, we open ourselves to new horizons of human growth and social
development.

Renaissance, I believe, is about maintaining our culture of ubuntu and a
sense of humanity, and those profound community ties of social solidarity
in the new context in which we live today, a context in which no woman
should ever experience the heart-stopping fear of being physically, morally
and psychologically abused or even merely being put down by her father, or
her husband, or her employers or by members of her community.

Renaissance is about ensuring that men change their attitude in the
communities, families and workplaces and begin looking at women as equals
and worthy of their full measure of respect and consideration. Within this
context, the heroines of our Renaissance are indeed the many women who in
their families, communities and workplaces are conducting a silent and
continual struggle to promote their dignity and assert their equality as
human beings, as partners, as workers, as spouses, as mothers and as
children.

This revolution in the making is taking place at all levels of our society,
a revolution that is bound to transform our lives in forms that are perhaps
deeper and more effective than the change brought about by the legislation
which we have adopted in this House.

We have passed many laws which have promoted, assisted and supported this
silent revolution. We have in place a legislative framework that protects
women in their families, workplaces and communities and severely punishes
violence, discrimination and abuse against women and children. However, the
gap between reality and legality is still vast and will not be bridged by
government action alone.
I plan to dedicate a great amount of my future political efforts and career
to promoting a new campaign that I want to become one of the flagship
issues of my party, which will be aimed at changing the attitudes of our
male population.

I can speak for many men when I say that each of us has a lot to learn
about what needs to be done to eliminate the many insidious and subtle
forms of violence, abuse and discrimination which women are still subjected
to in workplaces, communities and families.

The silent revolution of women must be met by a silent revolution of men
who will change their attitudes and so become themselves agents of progress
and transformation. This change is difficult and hard, and this is what
makes it both rewarding and worth pursuing. In the years to come, I wish to
join hands with all those who want to pursue this campaign, because I know
that we have only skimmed the surface of what needs to be done.

That is why, in this debate, I have sought to shift the emphasis from
individual examples of extraordinary women to ordinary women and men who
are making daily changes, both of whom are part of this process of
transformation, and to those who are finding grave difficulties in coping
with it.

Let us reach out to both men and women through changed attitudes to bring
about a real Renaissance where it counts, namely in the spirits, in the
hearts and in the minds of all our people. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Nkszn N M MDAKA: Mhlalingaphambili, siyakhahlela koomama baseAfrika kuba
enyanisweni bayintsika yebuyambo yaseAfrika. Sizingomba isifuba
ngempumelelo yabo nabathi bayizuze kwimisebenzi abayenzela ihlabathi,
ingakumbi kwizinto ezidla ihlabathi, besenza njengamanye amaqhawekazi athi
aqaqambe phakathi kwethu. Siyavuyisana noomama abanjengoLilian Ngoyi
kwanabanye abathi benze imisebenzi emihle imihla nezolo nethi, ngelishwa,
ingaqapheleki.

Ndibhekisa koomama abajongene nentlupheko emakhayeni abo, besenza unakonako
ukuba iintsana zabo zilale zityile.  Nditsho oomama abalwela uxolo, apho
kugquba iimfazwe babe ootata bezinikele ekubulalaleni. Sibaqhwabela
iizandla oomama abathi bangalahli themba naxa bedlwengulwa, bexhatshazwa
umhla nezolo. Ndithetha ngoomama abasagwetyelwa ukufa ngokuxulutywa
ngamatye.

Ndingathanda ukukhankanya umama uWangari Maathai nothe kule nyanga
iphelileyo … [Laphela ixesha.] Ndiyabulela, Mhlekazi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of Xhosa speech follows.)

[Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, I would like to commend the women of Africa for
the role they played and for continuously presenting themselves as pillars
of hope and unity on the continent of Africa. We are proud of their
successful efforts all over the world. We have tireless women amongst us,
such as Lilian Ngoyi and others, who continue to work hard, but their
efforts unfortunately go unnoticed.

I am talking about those women who face poverty every day of their lives
but who always struggle to make ends meet in order to feed their little
ones. I am talking about those women who continue to fight for peace where
there is war and where there are men who are senselessly killing one
another.  We applaud the women who do not lose hope even when they are
raped and abused. I am talking about women like those who are sentenced to
death by stoning.

If I may make mention of Mrs Wangari Maathai who, last month... [Time
expired.] I thank you, hon Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, women have achieved much, if one looks at
representation in the Pan-African Parliament. They should continue to
pursue gender mainstreaming in the operational policies and programmes of
the PAP. In terms of Nepad, women entrepreneurs need to invest in projects
that have more women beneficiaries.

However, while some women have risen to great heights in leading
organisations and continental projects, poverty affects a disproportionate
part of women, especially in the rural areas.

The role of women in conflict resolution and also in affairs of the
continent is a crucial one. We should therefore support the fact that at
least one of the five representatives of each country will have to be a
woman. African women have a lot to contribute and are already playing a key
role in governance on this continent and should be present in the
continent’s legislature.

Women have proved instrumental in building bridges rather than walls. They
have also been crucial in preserving social order when communities
collapsed. Conflict resolution and prevention calls for
creative and flexible approach. In all these areas we have seen examples of
women playing an important role. Yet, their potential contribution to peace
and security was undervalued and they are still underrepresented at the
decision-making level.

Gender equality issues are absolutely essential for the success of any
peace operation. In order for women to participate fully, they must be
informed, knowledgeable and their social consciousness must be raised so
that they can better dismantle the constricting structures... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Nk B T NGCOBO: Sihlalo, Phini likaMongameli namalungu onke, siyazi sonke
ukuthi abantu besifazane bayindlu yamandla. [Ms B T NGCOBO: Chairperson,
Deputy President and hon Members, we are all aware that women are
powerhouses.]


African women and women in general are powerhouses.



Njengoba-ke sikhuluma ngabantu besifazane namhlanje, ngizokhuluma
ngibhekisise kosomqulu abenziwa ukuze abantu besifazane bakhombise indlela
abanamandla ngayo. Kwakuyinhlalayenza nenjwayelo ukuthi abantu besifazane
bahlangane baxoxe ngezinkinga abanazo nangempumelelo abanayo. Ngokuhlangana
kwabo babambe iqhaza ezweni lonke, baze bazithola sebebhekeleke nakosomqulu
asebakhiwe.


Ngizokhuluma kakhulukazi ngosomqulu ababili abasemqoka: lowo esithi
phecelezi i-Cedaw nalowo futhi esiwubiza nge-Beijing Platform for Action.
Ngikhuluma ngalabo somqulu ngoba imithetho eyenziwe emazweni onke ase-
Afrika nezindlela osekuqale ukuthi kusetshenzwe ngazo e-Afrika kubhekelwe
yile mithetho. Abantu besifazane base-Afrika, ngokubamba kwabo iqhaza
kuzwelonke, bakwazile ukwenza imithetho ikwazi ukwenzeka kangcono nokuthi
ishintshe.

Indlela esibone ngayo ukuthi abantu besifazane ubuntu babo buphindele
endaweni okufanele ukuthi bube kuyo, yindlela okusetshenziswe ngayo labo
somqulu emazweni esihlala kuwo. Kusho ukuthi, “We are thinking globally and
acting locally”.

Uma singase sibheke izinto esezenzakele, sizokhumbula ukuthi indaba ka-
Unity Dow yayisematheni kakhulu eBotswana. Ngokusebenzisa imithetho
ekusomqulu, i-Cedaw, yakwazi ukuphumelela. NaseZambia ngokunjalo
sizokhumbula ukuthi emahhotela amakhulu, ko-Intercontinental Hotel,
kwakungavumelekile ukuthi umuntu wesifazane angene ehamba yedwa.
Kwakufanele angene ehamba nomuntu wesilisa - okusho ukuthi-ke edonsa inqola
yakhe. Kodwa, ngokusebenzisa lo somqulu, manje abantu besifazane
sebeyakwazi ukuthi bangene emahhotela amakhulu njenge-Intercontinental
Hotel, eZambia, bengaphelezelwa muntu kodwa bangene beyibo.

Sizokhumbula ukuthi eTanzania naseZimbabwe abantu besifazane babengakwazi
ukuthola amafa. Ngokusebenzisa labo somqulu, izinkantolo zathi uma ngabe
zithatha izinqumo zazithatha zibhekele labo somqulu. Okusho ukuthi abantu
besifazane, ngokuhlanganyela, bakwazile ukuthi basebenzise labo somqulu.

Kodwa-ke nakhu okunye okusemqoka: ENigeria, abantu besilisa babethi uma
amadodakazi abo eshada eyodwa mayingashadi ngoba kufuneka ihlale ekhaya
ibheke lo wesilisa ibuye imzalele izingane, ikakhulukazi ezabafana.
Ngokusebenzisa usomqulu, inkantolo yathi, “Cha, abantu besifazane
banelungelo lokuthi bayogana uma bethanda, futhi bagane abantu
ababathandayo uma bethanda ukuyobagana. Ngakho-ke ngeke nakwenza lokhu.”
Kusho ukuthi isithunzi somuntu wesifazane lapho sigcineke kahle ngendlela
efanele.

Sizokhumbula futhi ukuthi i-Afrika phela iyindawo enezimpi eziningi
kakhulu. Abantu besilisa bayashona ezimpini babuye balimale, baphinde futhi
babuye nezifo. Njengokujwayelekile, abantu besifazane ngokuphila kwabo
bajwayele ukuthi babheke imindeni nabantu abagulayo. Yibo kanye-ke abantu
besifazane abakade besala ekhaya benze imililo ilokhu ivuthile ukuze
amakhaya aqhubeke nezingane zikhule, kuphilwe, kudliwe ngesikhathi obaba
besempini, beshona futhi bebuya sebegula.

Sizokhumbula-ke ukuthi abantu besifazane base-Afrika babeneqhaza elikhulu
kakhulu abalibambe ezintweni eziningi. Njengoba sikhuluma nje, siyazi
ukuthi kuleli sonto elizayo, maduzane nje, kuzobe kuqala umbhidlango
wokuvimba ukuthi lungenziwa udlame olubhekiswe kubantu besifazane.
Ezikhathini zasemandulo, umuntu wesifazane ubengashaywa futhi engathukwa,
ngakho-ke njengoba kuzoba nalo mbhidlango obhekela ukuthi abantu besifazane
banganukubezeki, i-Afrika yonkana izobe ibambe iqhaza ekubhekeleni ukuthi
abantu besifazane bangabi bikho odlameni.

E-Afrika sithole kubalulekile ukuthi asingalokhu sikhuluma nabantu
besifazane, ake sibuyise futhi obaba nabesilisa ngapha bese sithi,
“Njengoba sihlale sibuka abantu besifazane njengalokhu esithi ama-victims,
ake sibuye sibheke nabantu besilisa laba esithi abaphehli bodweshu ngoba
bona bazokwazi futhi ukuveza izisombululo uma ngabe kuhlanganwa,
kuxoxiswana.” Akekho umuntu wesifazane ongathi nje eyedwa azenzele udlame
futhi akekho nowesilisa ongathi eyedwa azenzele udlame. Nabomamezala nabo
bayahlupha ngoba baye bathi, “Qinisela mntanami” kodwa-ke angikho lapho.
[Uhleko.]

Uma sibheka izinto ezifana namasiko nokunye, akhona amasiko amahle kakhulu
okufuneka agcinwe ngempela, njengamasiko asizayo ekwakheni intsha nokuthi
kube khona imiphumela emihle ngezinto ezenziwayo. Kepha futhi akhona la
masiko esiye siwabongele kanti awamahle. Njengoba sekukhona i-African
protocol, sengathi neNingizimu Afrika izoyisayina iyivume khona manje.

Abantu besifazane base-Afrika bahlanganile bakhuluma ngokuthi kukhona
izinto ezenzekayo kubantu besifazane ezingezinhle, njengalokhu esikubiza
nge-female genital mutilation. Kuyajabulisa-ke ukuthi inkosi u-Abilba III
waseGhana wathi, phecelezi, “We are fighting against all these outmoded
customs. To speak forcefully, we say: God put it there, why take it away?”
Kusho ukuthi kubalulekile ukuthi lawo masiko angemahle kumele nje siwayeke.

Sizokhumbula futhi abantu base-Afrika ngemizamo yabo yokugcina isithunzi
somuntu wesifazane. Kungekudala, bekunesimo sokuthi ngoba u-Amina Lawal
wathola umntwana ngaphandle komshado, emuva kokushona komkhwenyana wakhe,
ngakho lokho kuphikisana nenkolo yendawo. Abantu base-Afrika, ikakhulukazi
amakhosikazi nabantu bakwezinye izindawo ngaphandle kwale ngabadi,
babhekelele ukuthi umuntu angeze abulawa ebulawela lokho. Impilo yakhe leyo
futhi akukwazi ukuthi angabulawa, kangangoba-ke wazithola engasabulawanga.

Ngishilo-ke ukuthi izimo ezenza ukuvuseleleka kobuntu kukhule futhi
kuqhubeke, akufanele neze ukuthi zona sizibuyisele emaceleni. Sizokhumbula
ukuthi umhla ka-15 Okthoba ubuwusuku olukhulu lokubhekelela abantu
besifazane basezindaweni zasemakhaya. Siyabazi laba bantu besifazane
abasezindaweni zasemakhaya ukuthi bawo Florence Nightingale ezindaweni
abakuzo, ngoba benza umsebenzi omkhulu kabi esiye siwubukele phansi.

UPhini Somlomo uzokhumbula ukuthi ngathi, ngomhla ka-15 Okthoba, mhlawumbe
kuyafuneka ukuthi siyiPhalamende ke silethe abantu besifazane abavela
ezindaweni zasemakhaya, sibandizise futhi sibalalise e-Holiday Inn, sizwe
ukuthi bathini - kodwa singabatsheli ukuthi sicabangani ngoba kuningi kabi
esingakufunda kubo. [Ihlombe.] Lokhu-ke akupheleli eNingizimu Afrika
kuphela, kodwa kuphumela nangaphandle.

Okhulume ngaphambi kwami uke wakhuluma nangephalamende, iNdlu
yesishayamthetho yase-Afrika, lapho abantu bethu besifazane nabamazwe ase-
Afrika bebambe iqhaza elikhulu khona. Kuvuleke ithuba-ke lapha lokuthi
abantu besifazane baphinde futhi bahlangane bashaye inguyazana yokuthi,
njengoba-ke sebebambile ekuphathweni kwe-Afrika, bangenzenjani – lokho
bekukhuluma namazwe abo. Siyayincoma iNingizimu Afrika ngokuthi-ke sibe
khona futhi sibe baningi kangaka lapha ePhalamende, singabantu besifazane.
Uma ngiqalaza ngibona bebaningi kakhulu.

Emazweni ase-Afrika-ke abantu besifazane bayalwa ukuze bakwazi ukuthi babe
khona kohulumeni nasezindaweni zokuphatha ngobuningi babo, kangangoba onke
amazwe ase-Afrika ayazama ukuthi abeke lokhu esithi ama-gender machinery.
Angiwazi ukuthi asebenza kanjani-ke ezindaweni zase-Afrika kodwa-ke
bayawabeka. Kanti futhi siyazi ukuthi nasezindaweni zemfundo ephakeme e-
Afrika, bayazama ukuthi kube khona ama-gender study programmes lapho
kuzofundeka kakhulu nakangcono ngezimo zokubhekana nobulili.

Uma sesiphumela ngaphandle kwe-Afrika njengoba ngithe, “We think globally
and act locally”, ngokwamazwe omhlaba-ke i-Afrika ibhekelekile,
ikakhulukazi kubantu besifazane. Ngeke-ke ngisakhuluma ngoMathaai Wangari
ngoba bese kukhulunyiwe ngaye neqhaza alibambile. Ngizokhuluma ngokuthi
abantu besifazane base-Afrika bacatshangelwa kangcono emazweni aphesheya
nanganeno ngeqhaza abalibambayo njengabasebenzi, ababhali, abantu
abawochwepheshe nanjengamakhosikazi abantu bakhona. [Kwaphela isikhathi.]
[Ihlombe.]
(Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[As we are talking about women today, I will concentrate on charters that
were created and which the women applied to show how powerful they are. It
was a normal procedure for women to come together to discuss issues
affecting them as well as their achievements. It was through such meetings
that they ended up assisting in the creation of these charters.

I will talk about two important charters: the one we call Cedaw, and also
the Beijing Platform for Action. I mention these charters because all laws
passed in African countries and their ways of doing things are based on
these charters. The African women have played a significant role and as a
result laws are better and have changed. The way in which these charters
are applied in our countries has restored the dignity of women to the
correct place. This means: “We are thinking globally and acting locally.”

We will remember what happened with regard to the famous story of Unity Dow
from Botswana. The application of laws contained in the charter called
Cedaw was a successful issue. We will also remember that at big hotels such
as the Zambia Intercontinental Hotels a woman was not allowed to enter
alone. She was supposed to be accompanied by a male, meaning her partner.
The application of this charter now allows women to go to these Zambia
Intercontinental Hotels without being accompanied by males, but as women.

We remember that in Tanzania and Zimbabwe women were not allowed to receive
an inheritance. The application of these charters helped the courts to take
decisions based on these charters. The women therefore have succeeded to
use these charters. The other important issue is that in Nigeria males were
deciding for their daughters when to get married. The one daughter would
get married and the other would remain at home to look after the male and
give birth especially to male children. The court decided that women have a
right to get married if they want to, and to marry persons of their choice.
They applied these charters and as a result the dignity of women was
properly restored.

We are aware that Africa is a continent of many wars. Males are injured and
die in wars. They come back with diseases. It is well known that the women
looked after their families and the sick. It is the women who remained at
home helping to bring up the children, making fire and providing food
whilst the males were at war, dying or coming back sick.

We will also remember that African women have played a significant role in
many things. In the coming week we shall start the campaign for the
prevention of violence against women. In ancient times a woman was neither
assaulted nor insulted. As we hold these campaigns to stop violence
directed at women, the African continent as a whole will participate in
ensuring that women are not involved in violence.

We in Africa have decided not to concentrate on women only, but to rope in
the men. In most instances we concentrate on women, the victims. Let us
also look at the males as perpetrators, because they will be able to come
up with solutions if we work together. Neither a woman nor a man can cause
violence alone. The mothers-in-law also worsen the matter, as they normally
encourage one to persevere, but that is another subject. [Laughter.]

On the issue of customs there are good customs that should be preserved. We
have customs that help the youth and that yield good results in the things
that are being done. There are customs that are practised that are not
good. There is an African protocol and we hope South Africa will sign it
soon.

African women have come together to discuss things that continue to happen
to them, such as female genital mutilation. It is pleasing to note what
King Abilba III of Ghana said: “ We are fighting against all these outmoded
customs.” To speak forcefully, we say: “God put it there, so why take it
away?” It is important to stop carrying out those bad customs.

We will also remember the attempts by Africans to restore the dignity of
women. Recently Amina Lawal fell pregnant after the death of her husband
and that was against the religion in her area. People of Africa, especially
women, and the outside world ensured that a person cannot be put to death
for that. That was her life and she could not die for that. As a result she
escaped death.

I have already mentioned that things that revive human values should
continue and must not be put aside. We remember that 15 October was a
celebration for women in rural areas. We are aware that these rural women
act like Florence Nightingale in their areas.  Sometimes we don’t
appreciate their great work.

Deputy Speaker, you will remember that on 15 October I said it was
necessary for us as Parliament to invite rural women to come here, using
flights and accommodation at Holiday Inn, so that we can hear their
suggestions. We should not tell them what we think, because we can learn a
lot from them. [Applause.] That should not end in South Africa; but we
should expand it outside our borders.

The speaker before me has mentioned the Pan-African Parliament, where our
women played a significant role. This has opened a chance for women to have
discussions about what else they could do so as to play a role in governing
Africa. They will discuss that within their countries. We commend South
Africa for having such numbers of women in Parliament. Looking around I see
there are many.

Women in African countries are struggling to be included in government and
in spheres of governance as a result all African countries having what is
called gender machinery. I do not know how it functions, but it is in place
in their countries. We are aware that in institutions of higher learning in
Africa attempts are made to have gender study programmes where they could
learn more about addressing gender issues.

When looking beyond the borders of Africa, we should think globally and act
locally. Africa is expected to do something, especially about women’s
issues. They have spoken about Wangari Maathai, but I will not say anything
about her role. What I would say is that women from Africa are respected
better abroad for their role as writers, as specialists and as mothers by
people from these countries. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms C B JOHNSON: Chairperson, hon Deputy President and hon members, over the
weekend there were many reports in the newspapers as to whether or not
there is still sexism in South African politics. There was one specific
article that did a survey as to whom the newspaper thought was the best-
dressed or worst-dressed female Cabinet Minister.

Now, in my view that, by its very nature, is sexist. So, just to set the
balance straight, I have consulted some of my female colleagues to try and
establish who the best dressed male Cabinet Minister is, and the result is
unanimously that it is the hon Minister of Labour.
[Applause.]

The African Renaissance seeks to address socio-economic development issues
in Africa, and it is broadly based on five pillars: economic recovery,
political democracy, people-driven economic growth and development, the
review of certain neocolonial links between Africa and economic world
forces and, finally and most importantly, the mobilisation of the people of
Africa to take their destiny in their own hands.

Now, for women, in a society which - and this is of course debatable - to a
greater or lesser degree is still a patriarchal society, to take their
destiny into their own hands is ultimately a matter of choice and a matter
of conviction. It is about choosing to be part of the solution and to be
part the African Renaissance. But we also know from history that taking
one’s destiny into one’s own hands is not always the easiest option to
follow or the smoothest road to take.

Therefore, in my three minutes, I want to pay tribute to those women who
have courageously contributed continuously to the prosperity not only of
South Africa, but of Africa as a continent, despite numerous hardships,
personal sacrifices and setbacks. There are many women in society at large
and also women in this House who have made sometimes very painful and
sometimes very personal sacrifices for what they believe in and for the
struggle for the liberation of our people.

Sometimes people say things to me in the House just simply in passing, but
it stays with me for a very long time. Somebody recently said to me that
she was not able to see her children grow up, because she was in detention
or in exile. That stayed with me for days. I think that we sometimes forget
that behind the female politician is a person who is a wife and a mother,
and to them I want to pay tribute. [Applause.] In my view any sacrifice,
particularly a sacrifice of such an immensely personal nature, deserves
enormous respect and admiration, because I believe that it is ultimately
the biggest contribution that one can make to this country, to this
continent and to the African Renaissance as a whole.

Another contributing factor to the success of the African Renaissance is
the setting of certain targets for female representation in public office.
There are people who criticise the setting of targets. But why it is
important? It is not a simple game of numbers or statistics. It is more
than that.

International studies have shown three very interesting conclusions, and
the three conclusions are that once you reach a certain critical number of
women in public office, three things happen in relation to good governance:
Firstly, the public’s attitude with regard to women in power changes.
Secondly, political ideas change as women’s ideas are incorporated; and,
thirdly, the system, whether it is patriarchal to a greater or lesser
degree, begins to transform its values accordingly.

Therefore, somebody said to me recently that a pupil wrote an essay...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Speaker, all over the continent of Africa, women
are working towards a better future for themselves, their families and
their communities. They are women of courage, like my lovely wife; women
who speak up against injustice, who work hard and improve the lives of
others. Most are unknown and unsung heroines, mothers and wives who fight
continually against insurmountable odds to keep their families and homes
together.

We salute them for keeping our society from falling apart by imparting good
family values and meeting their families’ needs, even in the face of
poverty. There are also single mothers who are forced to be both mother and
father to their children, grandmothers raising orphaned grandchildren on
tiny pensions, women who create jobs by sewing, building houses or growing
and selling vegetables and fruit.

The thousands of women who contributed to the growth and wellbeing of the
African continent and who are still with us today, and those who have gone
before them, all had one thing in common: They saw the potential of Africa.
They believed that Africa had a great future and they worked hard towards
that peaceful and prosperous Africa. They contributed their blood, sweat
and tears in the pursuit of freedom, justice and socio-economic stability
in their respective countries.

May the selfless courageous and hardworking women of Africa continue to
make a positive difference on our continent. May they continue to uplift
their communities and to shape the destinies of our children.

Tswelang pele bomme re motlotlo ka lona. [Go on ladies, we are proud of
you.]  I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr I S MFUNDISI: Speaker and hon members, there is no doubt that women of
the continent of Africa have to be given the recognition they have earned
and deserve for the development of the continent. This they have displayed
through their fundamental contributions in their households, food
production systems and national economies within Africa and
internationally.

Ms Soukeyna Ndiaye Ba, President of Women’s Development Enterprise in
Africa, was spot-on when she said:

      If you want to develop Africa you must develop the leadership of
      African women.

Many rural and urban women belong to women-only mutual aid societies,
benevolent groups in churches, co-operatives and market women’s groups.
Some of these groups allow women to pool resources to reduce their workload
and to invest in saving societies or co-operative ventures.

Such co-operative societies have provided women access to resources, for
example, the Corn Mill Societies in Cameroon, the Six-S Associations in
Burkina Faso and the General Union of Co-operatives in Mozambique, which
supplies most of Maputo’s fruit and vegetables. In Benin an estimated 90%
of women participate in traditional women’s savings and credit groups.

Because of their human kindness and culture regarding social spending,
women have been forced to take on an increasing burden of unpaid work in
caring for the sick, obtaining food and ensuring the survival of families.

No doubt, therefore, given their rights, women can fly high and prove that
all they need is training and the means to bloom. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Speaker, the achievements of African women must be
celebrated under African restoration. Women must take their responsibility
under African restoration. The term African Renaissance is too much under
the shadow of the European Renaissance, whose consequences for Africa were
colonialism, racism and Africa’s underdevelopment.

The term African Renaissance is therefore an unfortunate mimicry and a
distortion of world history. Africans are not awakening. They had their
renaissance long before Europe. The first human civilisation on earth was
created by Africans. The first human government on this planet was
established by Africans. Much African epistemology has been destroyed. Some
of it lies stolen in the museums of Europe. It must be repatriated so that
the African people can see how high their ancestors rose on the ladder of
civilisation. This was up to the 15th century, when slavery and colonialism
began to destroy Africa.

The PAC has great confidence in the women of Africa. We say that education
is liberation. Knowledge is power. The PAC advocates free education for all
our women. Women can take responsibility for their destiny more effectively
only when they are armed with education. With education, our women can
achieve much more than they are doing at present. Long live the women of
Africa! [Applause.]

Hon MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Speaker, today I stand here, a proud South African
woman, knowing that so many of my sisters are liberating themselves into
becoming the architects of their own destiny. Women are making their
presence known and felt in all sectors of our economy and society. Today,
after 10 years of democracy, South Africa can boast a multiracial society,
free of discrimination and working hard at attaining gender equality.

The previously male-dominated industries have welcomed change gradually,
and it is up to us women to take this change to the top.

Mothers, sisters and daughters of our African Renaissance that know
sacrifice and perseverance so well, we embrace you. Thank you, and I hope
that you shall accept the invitation, because the open doors of democracy
are open for you too. Today no colour, creed or hardship shall stop you
from being all you can be and more.

The MF supports gender equality and supports the advancement of all women.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Ke a leboga Seboledi sa Palamente, ke leboga
kudu diboledi tše di boletšego ka mo pele gaka, kudu tša batho ba banna, go
swana le bo Mna Ramgobin, Mna Buthelezi, Mna Pheko. Ka moka taba tša rena
lehono di a tsebagala ka gore lehono re bolela ka lentšu le tee. Re bolela
ka lentšu le tee, e se gore ga go na moo re fapanago gona, eupša re leboga
bothakga bjoo re bo bonago bo direga, e sego mo nageng ya rena fela, eupša
Kontinente ka botlalo.

Gape se ke hweditšego se nthabiša kudu, ke go kwa banna e le bona ba
lebogago mešomo ya basadi. Ka gore, lege o ka ya kae kapa kae, ga e gona
naga yeo e lego gore e na le banna fela ga e na basadi. Ga e gona mo
lefaseng. Gomme banna ka moka ba belegwe ke basadi, gomme ba swanetše gore
ba ba hlomphe ka lebaka leo.

Ke leboga gape diboledi tše dingwe ka gore therešo ke gore batho ba basadi
ge ba šetše ba tsene ditulong, go na le bothakga le tsela yeo ba šomago ka
yona, yeo e leng gore gantši ga e hole motho ka gore e le yena a nnoši,
eupša e hola setšhaba ka moka.

Spikara, lehono ke tla thoma polelo yaka ka go laetša mabaka ao e sego a
therešo, kapa go hloka nnete ka kgethollo yeo re e bonago, goba yeo basadi
ba hweditšego ba le ka tlase ga yona. Gantši re botšwa ka ditumelo, ge ke
bolela ka ditumelo ke ra ka Sejakane, e ka ba bao ba balago Baebele kapa
bao ba balago Koran. Re botšwa gore kgatelelo e tšwa mo tabeng tše tša
sedumedi. Eupša ke manyami gore ge re lebelela madireng a Afrika, kae le
kae, kapa yona Baebele ge o ka e tšea wa e bala ka nnoši, ga e na gona mo e
rego mosadi o swanetše a gatelelwe.

Eupša batho ba šomiša Baebele kapa yona Koran ka tsela yeo bona ba nyakago
ka gona, gomme ba e šomiša ka tsela yeo e sego ya tshwanelo. Bothata ke
gore setšo seo ba bolelago ka sona, seo e leng gore ke setšo sa kgatelelo,
ke se se tšwago kae, ge e se gore ke sona setšo sa diabolo sona ka bo sona.
Ga se gona setšo sa mohuta woo, le Baebele le yona ga e sepelelane le tšona
dilo tšeo ka moka.

Ke nyaka go bowa gape mo dithutong tša Afrika ka gore ditsebi tšona di re
di tšwela pele di a ngwala, di phatlalatša mešomo ya tšona. Ge re lebelela
tsela yeo Afrika re šomago ka gona, gantši re šoma ka hlomphano. Ge o
lebelela ge o etšwa setšong sa ga bo rena, a e gona Kgoši yeo e no go go
tšwelela ya laela batho ya re dirang sa gore le gore. Banna ba kgobokana ba
boledišana ya re ge ba kwane, ba kgona go tšwetša tšeo ba kwanego ka tšona
pele. E seng gore motho a no tšwa a šupe ka monwana, sa go šupa ka monwana
ga re se tsebe, ke seo se tlilego le bao ba tlilego mono. Ke realo ka gore
ge batho ba ga bo rena, baetapele ba rena, bao ba bego ba re emetše, ba be
ba swarwa ka tsela yeo e sego ya tshwanelo. Ke ra ka tsela yeo ba bego ba
gobošwa ka yona, ga na gobošwa bona fela e le batho, eupša go gobošitšwe le
tsela tšeo rena re bego re šoma ka gona, ke ka fao lehono re nago le
bothata.

Gomme ke ka fao re bolelago ka tsošološo ya mekgwa yeo ka moka. Ge re
bolela ka tsošološo re bolela ka tsošološo yeo ya tsela ya go sepediša
ditaba. Ke nyaka go boela gape mo tabeng ye ya rena ya tsošološo, ka gore
ditsebi ge di lebelela, ba re ge o lebelela Afrika, pele ga ngwagakgolo wa
1450, Afrika e be e šetše e tšwetše pele. Mebušo ya go swana Monamotapa ka
Zimbabwe, ba be ba tseba tšeo ba di dirago.

Le gona pele batho ba rena mono Kontinenteng ba thupšwa, go be go na le
tšwelopele yeo e bego e le gona. Ge o lebelela ka Ghana
ma-Ashanti ba be ba na le tsela yeo ba sepedišago tša ekonomi, tsela yeo ba
sepedišago mmušo wa bona ka gona. Kae le kae, ge o etla mono Afrika fase
gape, o lebelela tšeo di bego di direga ka Lesotho, ka tsela yeo Morena a
bego a šomišana le batho ba gagwe ka gona, go be go na le tsela ya go
hlomphana, tsela ya go sepediša dilo ka tshwanelo. Eupša tsela ye ya go
goboša le kgatelelo, ke tsela yeo re e rutilwego ke batho ba go tšwa kgole.
Ga se tsela yeo rena re be go re phela ka yona. Tsela ye ya go goboša e
tlile morago ga 1884 le 1885, morago ga gore batho ba rena ba thupšwe.
Bjale re re tsela ye ga se ya loka, tsela ye ga e botse. Re swanetše gore
re no e lahla re boele setšong sa rena re kgone go šomiša taba tša rena ka
tsela ye e swanetšego. [Magoswi.]

Ka ngwaga wa 1960, re kwa gore basadi ba ile ba kgobokana, ba re ge ba
dutše ba ahla-ahla ba lebelela Kontinente ye ya rena, ba bona gore go na le
seo ba ka se dirago gore tše tša gore re thupiwe, re hlwe re gobošwa ke
bašemanyana dio swanetše go no fela. Eupša ge o lebelela basadi ba thomile
go ba le kopano pele, ebile go hlongwa Organisation of African Unity. Ba
ile ba kopana pele ba bontšhana ba leka gore ba lokiše ditaba, eupša
manyami ke gore kopano ye ya basadi ebile le mathata a tšhelete le a dilo
tše dingwe tšeo di bego di direga mo Kontinenteng.

Eupša ga se re fele pelo, ka gore morago ga gore Afrika Borwa e boele
sekeng, kae le kae moo o sepelago gona o le moAfrika Borwa, o no hwetša ba
re šate, šate. Lege ba bangwe ba re šate ka dipelo tšeo e lego gore di a
baba, eupša ba fela ba reta le bona. Gomme ge ba reta ka tsela ye, re le
basadi ba Afrika Borwa, kudu ka mono go ANC, ga ra ba le manyami gore re ka
kgona go bolela le tšeo di bego di re kweša bohloko, le tšeo di bego di sa
sepetšwe ka tshwanelo, gore re boledišane le basadi ba bangwe bao ba tšwago
mo dinageng tše dingwe, gore go tle go be le tšwelopele le mo dinageng tša
bona.

Ke realo ka gore re a gopola ka moka ga rena gore Mohumagadi wa yena
MoPresidente wa rena, o ile a leka gore ge basadi ba le kua Sun City ka
nako ya poledišano tša DRC, le rena basadi ba Afrika Borwa, re ye re
boledišane le basadi bale. Ge basadi ba Burundi ba be ba e na le mathata,
le bona re ile ra boledišana le bona, go laetšana tsela yeo rena re
sepetšego ka yona, le gore tema yeo re e kgathilego ke ya mohuta mang.

Gomme lehono re kgona go ema mo re thabile ge re labella ka tsela yeo
Rwanda e šomilego ka gona, gore morago ga dipoledišano tše ka moka, Rwanda
e kgonne gore e fihlelele 49% yeo e nago nayop lehono. Tše ka moka ke gore
di tlišitšwe ke ge re kgona gore re šomišanre le batho bangwe mo
Kontinenteng, gomme ke tše tšošološo e bolelago ka tšona gore ge re kgona
go laetšana, re kgona go bontšhana tšeo di agago, e sego tšeo di senyago,
go ba le tšwelopele mo Kontinenteng ya rena.

Se sengwe seo ke ratago gore ke bolele ka sona Spikara, ke tsela yeo tsela
ya segagaborena e šomišwago ka gona, indigenous knowledge. Lehono re kgona
go bona dilo tša segagaborena di šetše di le ka mapokisaneng di rekišwa, re
kgona go bona dilo tša segagaborena di šetše di etšwa dinageng ntle di
tlišwa go rena gape. Eupša, a re šomišeng tsebo ye ya rena go agana, re
šomiše tsebo ye ya rena gore e tle e be le mohola go rena ge go etla
ikonoming. Ke realo ka gore ke a tseba gore ge re lebelela mo go NEPAD,
gore basadi ba šetše ba eme ka dinao gore ba tlo kgatha tema, basadi ga ba
sa tšhaba selo, ba kgonne gore ba tsene dipolotiking, gape ba kgonne gore
ba ihlame e le basadi ba boledišane gore ke eng seo se ka ba tšwetšago
pele. A se ka phošo lehono ge re bona MoPresidente wa Pan African
Parliament e le motho wa mosadi.

Gomme seo se thabišago ke gore ga se motho wa mosadi fela, ke motho yoo a
kwešišago le gore dinyakwa tša basadi ke eng. Gomme ka lebaka leo go re fa
kholofelo gore basadi mo Kontinenteng, ba tla kgona go kgatha tema, ba tla
kgona gore go be le tšwelopele. Tšwelopele yeo e sa tšwelego mohola motho
yo tee fela, eupša e tšwela setšhab ka moka.

Ge ke ruma polelo Spikara, ke a bona gore nako yaka e šetše e ntšhiile, ke
leboga gape diboledi tšeo di bego di le ka pele, eupša ke nyaka gore ke tle
mo nhleng ya bohlokwa, yeo ba šetšego ba boletše ka yona gore gantši ge re
tsene ka mojako re tswalela mojako re tswalelela ba bangwe ka ntle. Ge re
tswalela mojako, re gopole bao ba lego ka kua ntle. Ge e le gore tshwanelo
ke gore re o tlogele op butšwe, a re o buleng gore ba bangwe le bona ba
kgone go tsena. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Thank you, Speaker. I am more grateful to the
previous speakers, especially men like Mr Ramgobin, Mr Buthelezi and Mr
Pheko. What we are saying today makes a lot of sense because we are
speaking from a common ground. Not that we do not have disagreements, but
we are grateful for the perfection that we have come across, not only in
our country, but on the continent at large.

The other issue that made me very happy is to hear men praising women’s
work. No matter where you go, there is no country with men only. For that
reason, women should be respected.

I also thank other speakers, because the truth is once women have taken up
positions, there is perfection in the way they work, which, in most cases
benefits the whole nation rather than the individual.

Speaker, today I will start my speech by pointing out some issues that are
unacceptable or dishonest with regard to the kind of discrimination we come
across, or rather, that which women find themselves in. We are mostly told
about religion, by that I mean beliefs, by those who read either the Bible
or the Koran. We are told that oppression originates from religion. It is a
shame, though, that when we look at the news about Africa, wherever, the
Bible itself says nowhere that women should be oppressed. People use the
Bible and the Koran in ways that suit them, which is wrong. The problem is
that the tradition of oppression they talk about is that from the devil
himself. There is nothing like that kind of tradition and the Bible does
not agree with all of that.

I would like to come back to the lessons in Africa, because experts are
writing and publicising their work. If you look at the way Africa operates,
it is always with respect. In our culture no chief would just come and
dictate to people what to do. Men would come together to discuss what had
to be done and proceed with what had been agreed upon. Not that anyone
should dictate to them what to do. That we do not know; it came with those
who came here. I am saying that because our leaders, who were representing
us, did not treat our people accordingly. I mean the way that they were
defamed. This happened not only to them as people, but also in the way in
which things were done. And this is why we have a problem today.

That is why we are talking about a revival of our ways. By that we mean the
channels we followed when certain issues were discussed. I would like to go
to the issue of revival. When experts look at Africa before 1450, it had
already developed. Governments like Monamotapa in Zimbabwe knew what they
were doing. Before the people on our continent were taken into slavery,
there was development already. Looking back at Ghana, the Shanti’s had a
way with their government. Wherever you go in Africa, looking at what
happened in Lesotho and the way the King worked with his people, that is
the way things are supposed to be.

This way of defaming and oppressing people is a foreign way. It is not the
way in which we lived. This defamation came about in 1884 and 1885, after
our people were enslaved. Now we are saying that this is neither correct
nor good. We must just do away with it and return to our traditional ways
so that we can work accordingly.

We hear that women came together in 1960 to discuss our continent. They
decided to put an end to slavery and defamation. The Organisation of
African Unity was formed after these women met. The women met to assist
each other to rectify these issues. Unfortunately, they experienced a
shortage of funds and other things that were happening around the
continent.

We were not, however, impatient. As South Africa goes back to its roots,
there are sounds of joy everywhere, even though some rejoice with broken
hearts. When we rejoice like this, as South African women, especially in
the ANC, we are not ashamed to talk about what has hurt us and what did not
go well. Whenever we speak to women from other countries, we encourage
development in their countries.

I am saying that because we can all remember that the President’s wife
encouraged us to go and talk to the women who were at Sun City during the
DRC talks. We also spoke to the women from Burundi when they experienced
problems, to show them the route we’ve travelled and the kind of progress
we have made.

Today we are able to rejoice in the progress Rwanda has made. After all the
talks, Rwanda managed to reach the 49% it has today. All these things are
the result of working together across the continent. This is what revival
is all about; to be able to show each other what builds us and not what
destroys development on our continent.

The other thing I would like to mention is the way in which our indigenous
knowledge is being used. Today our products are packaged and sold. They are
even exported and imported back to us. Let us use our knowledge to build
each other so that we can boost our economy.

I am saying that because when I look at Nepad, women are getting ready to
participate. They are not afraid of anything and are able to discuss the
way forward. We are not surprised to have a woman President for the Pan-
African Parliament. She is not just a woman; she is someone who understands
a woman’s needs. We therefore hope that women on the continent will play
their role, to strive for development, not only for themselves but also for
their nation as a whole.

Speaker, in conclusion, as I can see that I am running out of time. I thank
the previous speakers. I would, though, like to come to this important
point which has already been mentioned. In most cases when we come in and
close the door, people are left outside. Let us, then, remember them. If it
is acceptable to leave it open, let us do so, so that others may come in
too. Thank you.]

Debate concluded.


                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE


                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we go on to the next item on the Order
Paper, I would like to make a ruling. During the debate on the Second
Reading of the Petroleum Products Amendment Bill on Tuesday, 19 October,
the hon member A C Nel raised a point of order regarding remarks made by
hon Morkel that could reflect on the integrity of the Minister of Minerals
and Energy, hon Ms P G Mlambo-Ngcuka. I undertook to study the Hansard and
to rule on the matter at a subsequent sitting of the House.

Having now had the opportunity to study the relevant Hansard, I wish to
rule as follows: Mr Morkel’s remark suggested that certain persons had
access to the Minister and in having such access, could benefit when the
Minister issued service station permits. Although he indicated that that
was what people are saying, Mr Morkel, in repeating the suggestion, has
brought before the House the possibility of improper conduct on the part of
the Minister. The remark in question is unparliamentary and is not less so
for being attributed to other people. I must therefore ask Mr Morkel to
withdraw the remarks.

Mr C M MORKEL: I withdraw, Madam Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.


                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

DR H DAVIES: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The two Revenue Laws Amendment
Bills that we have before us this afternoon deal with a number of subjects.
I am going to concentrate my remarks on some of the main new anti-avoidance
measures provided for in these Bills. And my comrade Joan Fubbs, who will
be speaking later, will deal with other issues.

Chairperson, in his book The Roaring Nineties, Nobel economics laureate
Joseph Stiglitz perceptively analyses how a stock market bubble was created
on the back of the boom in the US economy in the 1990s; a bubble which
burst with serious consequences for the entire world economy in the new
millennium. Stiglitz writes:

   In the go-go environment of the nineties while market values soared,
   human values eroded, and the playing field became terribly unlevel.

One of the most prominent of what Stiglitz called the new forms of
deception that emerged during the roaring nineties was the stock or share
option scheme for senior corporate executives. This is an arrangement in
which senior executives are rewarded not with salary increases or even with
the straightforward awarding of shares, but rather with the awarding of an
option to buy shares at today’s prices in the companies they manage at some
future date. This created a strong incentive for senior executives to
ensure that the share prices of the companies they managed were continually
rising, regardless of whether or not this is underpinned by real
improvements in the performance of those companies. When the US stock
market bubble finally burst in the new millennium, the fact that senior
executives had so much of their own wealth dependent on the rising stock
market price was a major factor underlying the emergence of what is now
termed Enron accounting - massaging figures to disguise the widening gap
between inflated share prices and decline in the real performance of
companies.

Precisely because they are complicated and not very transparent
arrangements, executive share option schemes have also contributed to a
widening of the gap between pay levels of top executives and those of
ordinary workers, not just in the USA, but also in many parts of the
capitalists world where they have now become common. It is now not unusual
to find senior executives, largely through bonus and option schemes whose
full implications are not fully appreciated upfront, receiving hefty
increases way above inflation and way above the performance of their
companies. An article by Ann Crotty in the 18 October edition of Business
Report, based on an analysis of recent company reports, indicates that
South Africa is far from immune from such trends.

She writes that -

      The latest annual reports continue to highlight that the one
      consistent theme in executive remuneration is that it always moves
      upwards. It seems that regardless of whether a company reports an
      increase or decrease in profits, the top executives are always granted
      an increase. It is also apparent that those increases are considerably
      greater than the prevailing inflation rate.

Another feature of executive share option schemes is that they offer many
opportunities for tax avoidance. This arises largely because such schemes
defer benefits to a later date, and also because they convert income into a
capital gain, which is an advantage in jurisdictions like ours, where
capital gains are taxed at a lower rate.

Tax is a very funny thing. If you are an ordinary worker or salaried person
and you do not pay your tax, it is called tax evasion, and is subject to
criminal penalties. If, however, you are rich and powerful you employ
skilled professionals to shift your income or capital gains into activities
that either do not attract tax or are taxed at a lower rate. That exercise
is called tax avoidance and it is seen as a respectable occupation that
many of our best and brightest aspire to engage in after studying for many
years to qualify as lawyers or chartered accountants. It is a David versus
Goliath contest. Every year the National Treasury and the South African
Revenue Service deploy some of their best and brightest, probably numbered
in the tens, to try to close loopholes in tax laws that have been exploited
for tax avoidance purposes. And every year many more skilled professionals
numbering more than 100 in one firm alone advise clients on how to exploit
newly identified loopholes.

Many of the provisions in the two Revenue Laws Bills before us today are
about putting a little more spring into David’s catapult. What is
significant about this year’s Bills is that for the first time they
specifically target executive share option schemes. Taxpayers in receipt of
share options are now required, once they have unrestricted access to them,
to declare the gain or loss measured by market value. This amount is then
subject to tax at the full income tax rate and not at capital gains rate.

Another important innovation this year is the extension of
anti-avoidance measures to what is called hybrid financial instruments.
These are arrangements between groups of companies or subsidiaries in which
shares are exchanged for debt or physical assets in complex, multi-faceted
transactions. Although there is apparently some economic rationale for some
of these transactions, there is no doubt that many are constructed as
vehicles for tax avoidance.

The present Bill provides for these transactions to be taxed on the
principle of identifying the underlying substance of the transactions
concerned; an exercise that will involve SARS in a lot of work in some
cases, but will at least draw some into the tax net. The potential
significance of the measures in today’s Bill is considerable. We were told
in the committee that between R3 billion and R6 billion was being lost to
the fiscus through tax avoidance, oriented executive share options and
hybrid financial schemes. While I am sure that the avoidance industry is
already working hard to find ways around the new provisions, recovering
even part of that sum will be important for the fiscus.

In the time I have left I want to raise a broader issue. While the ANC, and
I personally, are more than happy to support legislation that tightens up
anti-avoidance provisions, particularly those exploited by highly resourced
individuals and corporates, I am of the view that we need to find other
ways to address some of the issues raised in the annual David versus
Goliath round of closing avoidance loopholes followed by the inevitable
discovery of others.

Earlier this week members of the Portfolio Committee on Finance paid a
highly informative visit to the SARS assessment centre in Bellville. I
emerged, from some of the discussions we had there, more convinced than
ever that we need to be thinking more out of the box if we are to reap the
potential benefits of the next generation of tax administration reforms.
While SARS has achieved much, we could still gain more from the
introduction of a far simpler tax system, which is more conducive to the
use of Information Communications technology.

This needs to be accompanied by a broader debate about our approach as a
society to issues of tax morality, and particularly the role in this regard
of tax consultants and advisers. We need to ask some hard questions about
the role of this industry of tax consultants, staffed by people whose
skills are in very short supply. What role is this industry playing? Should
its ethos continue to be governed, as it appears to be at present, by
trying to help the rich and powerful to beat the system? Or should it
rather come to see its main functions as being to advise and assist clients
to meet their compliance obligations?

In supporting these Bills today, I also want to signal my own personal view
that the Portfolio Committee on Finance must find time in the course of
next year to hold hearings on some of these broader issues.

I thank you for your attention, and the ANC supports these two Bills.
[Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Madam Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill is a money Bill and the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill
will be introduced as a Section 75 Bill.
These two Bills are highly technical and the Bills cover a wide range of
tax related amendments.

I will try to cover a number of important amendments that relate to broad-
based employee share holding, executive equity schemes, hybrid financial
instruments, deferred instalment of sales, relief for interest bearing
investments held by Namibian, Swaziland and Lesotho investors, eliminating
tax preferences for JSE and the Bond Exchange, stamp and transfer
amendments, VAT amendments, capital gains tax and withholding on property
transactions by nonresidents. The legislation also provides for advanced
tax rulings.

One of the positive aspects of these pieces of amended legislation is that
it provides for tax incentives for employee share ownership. It is my
considered opinion that this clause will contribute to wealth accumulation
and it is bound to create stability in the share ownership requirements for
the various BEE charters.

Madam Chair, South Africa is becoming part of a global economy. It is
therefore of crucial interest that our tax regime adhere to internationally
accepted tax norms and standards. A substantial number of the amendments
will promote better tax compliance and will ensure that taxpayers receive
advice consistent with tax legislation.

The finance committee this morning had a very constructive meeting, with
submissions from various financial sectors of the retirement industry. Some
of the statements made by some speakers during the meeting regarding
administrative charges, costs and penalty claims, may affect the financial
viability of pension fund members, especially those at the lower entry
levels. The DA will support any attempt to investigate and to clarify any
issues that will enhance consumer protection for members of pension funds.

I have said before that it is important that the South African pension
funds benchmark themselves with other international funds, though we
acknowledge that interest in inflation rates may differ from country to
country. Any debate regarding the retirement industry and pension funds
cannot be isolated from the present tax rate of 18% on pension funds. This
rate adversely affects the end return of the pension fund members, which in
return will increase the number of people dependent upon welfare grants.

An urgent appeal is therefore made that a further reduction in the present
tax rate on pension funds be made in next year’s budget.
The DA supports these amending Bills. [Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Madam Chair, since the IFP supports the two Bills I will not
repeat what my colleagues before me have already stated.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill should be seen in the context of the South
African tax and fiscal policies that continue to stabilise.
Although tax policy and administration should remain consistent to ensure
certainty, challenges of potential tax avoidance are real and should be
addressed. The challenge is still the development of capacity and skill
levels for the successful implementation of tax policy proposals and
revenue collection.

The IFP applauds the hon Minister in that he has never been intimidated
when dealing with tax reforms. Let me use this opportunity to correct the
wrong perception that the African has always been a tax burden. I will do
this by quoting from a book by Leon Louw, South Africa: The Solution.

  When the blacks started acquiring more land, a number of levies and fees
  were imposed on blacks, with the result that they paid a higher
  percentage of their income than whites in taxes. The Land Act of 1913
  brought all these pressures to a logical conclusion.

Unfortunately, the motive here was not to fight poverty and unemployment,
but to impoverish the blacks, so that they could provide cheap labour,
which was required at the time. The IFP undertakes to assist the Minister
as far as possible in his fight against poverty, unemployment and HIV/Aids.

Under the leadership of Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi people in
KwaZulu-Natal, with virtually no tax base at all, imposed a voluntary tax
upon themselves and as a result they built hundreds of schools, using the
rand-for-rand system. We have a history of helping ourselves and of taxing
ourselves.

The indication that National Treasury is considering a system for small
business and medium term enterprises to pay their tax on a cash basis is
welcomed by the IFP.

In conclusion, Madam Chair, fairness, equity and administrative efficiency
are always essential in the execution of any tax policy and administration.
The criteria involve giving the taxpayer relief where it is due.

The IFP supports the two Bills.

Mr K D S DURR: Chairperson, I have one minute, hence I will deal with one
issue. Minister, I wish to say something about withholding tax on payments
made by purchasers of immovable property to sellers not resident in South
Africa. We have no argument with this tax; it is right. We believe,
however, that the obligation placed upon the purchaser to make provision
for the seller’s tax obligations is unreasonable in the extreme.

There is no nexus between the purchaser and the conveyancers. The seller
employs them and neither does the purchaser trigger the tax event. The
purchaser has no hold over these professionals, because they are mandated
and paid by the seller. Although I am not sure whether this measure is
unconstitutional, it certainly invades the rights of the purchaser. The
imposition of penalties on the purchaser is simply inequitable as the
residency status of the seller is usually not known by the purchaser but is
known by the seller’s professional community.

In addition, estate agents and conveyancers are used to acting for the
state. They are already doing it in a host of ways. They collect all kinds
of things, including duties of various kinds, taxes, refuse and everything
else. They have their professional bodies that will call them to account
and they are subject to regulations. The purchaser has none of these
things. Minister we support this legislation, but I do ask you to consider
that when you have time. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, in view of this Revenue Laws Amendment Bill it
is noted that the department has once again derived a strategy to stabilise
tax and fiscal policies. The MF accepts and supports all the amendments to
income tax.

As a government we do not aim at making the poor poorer and the rich
richer, but to give all taxpayers relief where it is due. Such relief
should be incorporated in all fairness, equity and administrative
efficiency in the execution of any tax policy and administration.

Further amendments made to foreign discretion trusts as well as urban
development zones, are found applicable and supported. Capital gains tax
and real property withholding is found equitably devised as in the
industrial development zones adjustments. The MF wants the public at large
not to look at tax as an unfair burden, but as an investment into a better
life for all. The MF supports the two amendments Bills. Thank you, Madam
Chair. [Applause.]

Ms J L FUBBS:  Hon Chairperson of the House, colleagues and comrades, the
challenge for the state in this second decade of freedom is to improve the
quality of state intervention in both the first and the second economy to
meet the imperatives of shared prosperity and an inclusive society.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill seeks to bring about a broad-based economic
equity for workers. This is a deliberate move away from the established
pattern of simple economic empowerment.

This Bill also opens the door for workers to the core benefits. Firstly, as
the real producers of wealth the ordinary worker will share in the wealth
he or she creates. Secondly, as directors of the company, workers will play
a direct role in the governance of the company. Policies then can be
influenced and even changed. Thirdly, the income of workers can indirectly
be influenced and can directly increase through both the leverage of
capital and through an ownership stake. Up to now black economic
empowerment has been an area entrenched in exclusivity with a few discreet
invitations to a select few who by their very numerical limit on the board
find themselves constrained to effect change.

This Bill is another plank in the platform to implement broad-based black
economic empowerment, which President Mbeki confirmed in May this year as
the pivotal element of government policy. So this Bill puts a powerful tool
in the hands of our people, but it will also be an effective instrument to
fight poverty.

Companies will, in Minister Manuel’s words -

  ... be permitted to provide shares of up to R9 000 in value to employees
  over a three-year period without any fringe benefit tax consequences,
  provided these arrangement meet prescribed conditions.

However, as part of the equity principle, tax benefits from share options
for high-income earners will face more stringent limitations.

But this Bill also seeks - because now it is two Bills - to encourage
compliance while broadening the tax base. Among the instruments developed
in this Bill to close the tax gap, while developing a culture of
compliance, is the registration of tax professionals. This set of clauses
will promote better compliance and ensure that taxpayers, both individuals
and companies, receive advice consistent with tax legislation.

Another important issue is that companies will indeed benefit from
increased profits arising from increased production. Surely, for those
companies who keep on demanding more and more incentives, the increase in
production and increased profits is in itself an incentive.

Notwithstanding the monetary rewards that are sometimes sought by
constraining production to meet or maintain artificial price levels,
another positive aspect, which companies should consider, is the
significant financial spin-offs derived from compliance rather than
actively seeking avoidance. There is a very cynical argument that we hear
expressed on occasion - and one reads it in the media - that millions can
be saved by employing aggressive tax avoidance specialists. This is a very
short-sighted move, especially in this international environment that is
fast cutting down on such escape routes to safe havens. More and more
countries are realising the benefits to be gained by endorsing
international tax accords and embracing a culture of international
compliance.

There is general agreement when you go to these businessmen clubs - because
very few women are members - that fairness and good governance should be
the order of the day. However, such companies have turned tax avoidance
into a new Olympic sport. I believe that there is a shift - it is
imperceptible perhaps - by some South African companies and individuals who
are moving towards greater compliance, and certainly the numbers who took
advantage of the foreign exchange amnesty gives evidence of that.

I want to appeal to companies, their executives and their professionals to
consider for a moment the following scenario. In an environment assailed by
international shocks and a global economy that knows no borders, surely
nothing could give companies a greater sense of security than a domestic
environment that is financially sound - as all speakers concurred only
yesterday in this House - and a politically stable society; furthermore,
that such a society is underpinned by an electorate willing to wait for
progressive service delivery. Surely, our captains of industry and business
bulls could not ask for a more conducive environment to make money and
still pay the state the revenue it is due. It will be revenue to continue
to sustain this stable and peaceful democracy that has been hailed in this
House by all parties as the forerunner of a new era in fiscal citizenship
and corporate good governance.

So, I am asking myself why companies persist in pursuing policies and
employing tax professionals to avoid paying tax, when they could simply be
paying. In short, I am referring to yet another financial sport. I suppose
a lot of these folks have got what you call “corporate tummies”. They don’t
exercise and they practise these sports. I am referring to this practice by
certain groups of companies claiming tax deductions in excess of normal
claims in respect of loans. This is done by creating a circular cash flow,
or several such circular cash flows. Loans are inflated and taxation is
avoided within the confines of the legal framework. But is there no other
way to direct your energies, to create wealth in a way that will sustain
political stability and continue to support an environment of financial
resilience and robustness?

Then there are the advanced tax rulings. SARS has decided to give
companies, people with this money, a little bit more guidance. So the Bill
provides for three types of rulings, namely binding general rulings,
binding private rulings and class rulings. If that is not enough in trying
to reach out a helping hand, what do we get from companies? They want their
applications considered; they don’t want to see any of their applications
refused for such ruling.

Well let me tell you, that you are lucky you are not in Germany, Australia
and a number of other countries including the Netherlands and the United
States.

An HON MEMBER: Why?

Ms J L FUBBS: I will tell you why. Australia is not even prepared to rule
on products with a potential to create tax. The ANC supports the Bill.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson, and to
all the parties for supporting the Bills. I just want to restate what I
said yesterday, that the Joint Tagging Mechanism had sought, in the context
of the legal opinion that they had, to split the Bill into two. Probably,
in the light of the amendments to section 77 of the Constitution last year,
it is a correct view.

However, I think that what is fundamental, as expressed by a number of
contributors in the debate here this afternoon, is that tax administration
and tax rates are part of exactly the same thing. So I would like to ask
that at some point in time we should amend section 77 to effect this
reality in the Constitution and, therefore, in the context of law-making
going forward.

The hon Rabie asked for a further reduction of tax rates. I would have
thought that the shock of the debate this morning would still be very
strong in his mind, that the ease with which the institutions palm off the
responsibility on to the tax authorities is a red herring. That the
responsibility on the part of the institutions to ensure that those who
save with them have their savings protected is actually a greater part of
this debate, and I hope that the Portfolio Committee on Finance will join
us in that endeavour, going forward.

The hon Vezi quoted from Leon Louw. I’m not quite sure, hon Vezi, whether
hon Kalyan, quoting from Isidingo, is better or worse for quoting from Leon
Louw. But I think your point is well taken.

The hon Durr raised questions about what he described as something that may
invade the rights of the purchaser, the withholding of tax on the sale of
real estate. There is a context to this, and the context is in fact
provided by the reality that all over the world financial transactions must
now be more accounted for. It is for that reason that, in the context of
the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, estate agents and conveyancers are
accountable institutions.

Part of what has happened in different parts of the world is that property
bubbles are driven by speculators, and speculators know no boundaries. So
they cross borders and drive up prices, and this has no impact on them.
They try to take out the money as soon as possible.

Section 35(a) is, to my mind, very clear because the focus is on
accountability. Therefore it is the foreign seller who would be required to
pay the tax. The provision is made in the Act that if a South African real
estate agent or conveyancer is used, there is an onus placed on them to
ensure that the purchaser would part with the money. If a seller chooses a
foreign conveyancer or a foreign estate agent, then that seller is left to
his or her own devices.

I think this is something that we need to deal with in the context of
responsible and accountable governance, ensuring that financial
transactions, especially given the magnitude of these transactions, are
properly accounted for and that we can actually begin to build a little
buffer against the risk of a speculative property bubble.

Hon members, this being the last time I stand here before you this year,
thank you very much for your contributions. For those of you who will rest
over the Christmas festive period, enjoy it. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.




                     SECOND REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL




                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AFFAIRS AND
FORESTRY – PUBLIC HEARINGS ON NATIONAL WATER RESOURCE STRATEGY

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Thank you, hon Pieterse.

House Chairperson, hon members and hon Lee, it is common knowledge that the
human body can only survive three days without water, and so too it is
common knowledge that 60% of the body weight is water.

The body is chemically balanced, which is controlled by the kidneys, and if
the water level drops due to dehydration the chemical levels automatically
increase, thereby placing the body in hypervolemic shock, meaning there is
too little water. On the other hand, if a person retains too much water due
to an increase in sodium or also cardiac failure the human body develops
oedema commonly seen in the lower and upper limbs, and also the lungs. This
places the human body in hypervolemic shock, meaning there’s too much
water. Both these conditions render the human body incapacitated and, if
not corrected, it could be fatal.

The earth’s surface consists of about 70 – 75% water and if not managed and
maintained the various ecological systems will become dysfunctional,
causing changes in the earth’s gravity and in the climate. As a result
floods will occur, as well as droughts in the extreme circumstances.

It is clear that management of water is essential, from the above analysis
that I have given you now. Therefore, government has responded to these
challenges of the management of water in South Africa. In September, when
Cabinet adopted the National Water Resource Strategy, the Portfolio
Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry saw the need to call for public
hearings on the strategy document. We have done so in order for Parliament
to familiarise itself with the strategy and also to allow additional
participation by those who have to assist us in the management of water –
the people.

The tabling of the National Water Resource Strategy by the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry has enabled South Africa to be one of the first
countries to have met the WSSD 2002 obligation, and for this we say, well
done, ANC.

Die strategieë verskaf die nasionale raamwerk vir waterbronbestuur en sal
lei tot die voorbereiding van strategieë om water te bestuur in die 19
gebiede gegrond op die opvangsgebiede waarin die land verdeel is.

Die betrokkenheid van alle staatsdepartemente, gemeenskappe en die oorgrote
meerderheid van ons mense, wat nooit seggenskap gehad het oor hoe om water
te beheer nie, word nou verwesenlik. In 1994 was die situasie so erg dat
slegs 12 miljoen mense toegang gehad het tot water as natuurlike bron vir
drinkwater, en 21 miljoen nie toegang gehad het tot sanitasie nie.

Op Vrydag 12 Oktober vanjaar, in die Noord-Kaap, word daar aan die
tienmiljoenste persoon sedert 1994 water verskaf. Daarvoor sê ons baie
geluk aan die ANC vir die dienste wat gelewer is aan ons mense wat nooit
vantevore toegang gehad het tot water nie.

Dié strategieë sal bydra tot die beskerming van waterbronne om
volhoubaarheid te verseker, die toegang tot water te verbreed en om
gelykheid te bevorder, soos gelyke toegang tot waterbronne vir opkomende
kleinskaalboerderye soos vir kommersiële boerderye. Suid-Afrika is ‘n
waterskaarse land en daarom moet daar gereeld na strategieë gekyk word om
te bepaal wat die huidige waterstand is, en wat ons in die toekoms gaan
benodig om aan die land se behoeftes te voldoen.

Die departement se rol in die bestuur van waterverwante rampe is ook ‘n
belangrike deel van die strategieë. Die doelwitte van die heropbou- en
ontwikkelingsplan om water te beheer is natuurlik, eerstens, om voorsiening
te maak vir elke persoon se gesondheid en funksionele behoeftes; tweedens,
om landbouopbrengste te verhoog; en, derdens, om ondersteuning te gee aan
ekonomiese ontwikkeling. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The strategies provide the national framework for water resource
management and will lead to the preparation of strategies to manage water
in the 19 areas based on the catchment areas into which the country is
divided.

The involvement of all state departments, communities and the majority of
our people, who never had a say in how to manage water, are now being
realised. In 1994 the situation was so bad that only 12 million people had
access to water as a natural source for drinking water, and 21 million did
not have access to sanitation.
On Friday, 12 October this year, water will be delivered to the ten
millionth person in the Northern Cape since 1994. We congratulate the ANC
for the services delivered to our people who never before had access to
water.

These strategies will contribute to the protection of water sources in
order to ensure sustainability, to extend access to water and to promote
equality, for example equal access to water sources for emerging small
scale farming as for commercial farming. South Africa is a water scarce
country and therefore we should regularly look at strategies to determine
what the current water situation is, and what we will need in future to
meet the needs of the country.

The role of the department in the management of water related disasters
also forms an important part of the strategies. The objectives of the
reconstruction and development plan to manage water is, firstly, of course,
to provide for every person’s health and functional needs; secondly, to
increase agricultural production; and, thirdly, to support economic
development.]

Our recommendations, as a committee, should therefore be seen in line with
what the reconstruction and development objectives are. And while we are
saying that the decisions on water resources must be transparent our
recommendations are that the National Water Resource Strategy should be
published in all South African languages, it should become a people-
friendly document, and the National Water Resource Strategy should have
been published in the Government Gazette; if not, it should be done now.

We also think that what we ought to do is to redetermine how free basic
water is provided. In April last year the CSIR said that 26 million people,
who comprise about 57% of the total population, are benefiting from free
basic water. Only 29% within the poor sector of the population are
benefiting. In some areas the free basic supply is 10 kilolitres per month,
whilst in others it is less than 6 kilolitres per month.

The RDP stated that its short-term aim should be to provide every person
with adequate facilities for a range of things, whether it is 20-30
kilolitres of water a day to, in the medium term, 50-60 kilolitres of
water, until such time as we can say as the we have been able to provide
for every South African to have accessible water and sanitation in the long
term.

The importance of balancing water conservation and water demand should be
understood in the context of “people first”. And as we considered a water-
pricing strategy Eskom raised some concerns in the public hearings. It was
our view in the committee that it would be beneficial to include other
stakeholders too, but more than that, we should be guided by our RDP
principles on tariffs and ensure that every person has an adequate water
supply.

The national tariff structure should include the following things: a
lifeline tariff, to ensure that all South Africans are able to afford water
services sufficient for health and hygiene requirements; in urban areas a
progressive bloc tariff to ensure that the long-term cost of supply to
large-volume users are met, and that there is a cross subsidy to promote
affordability for the poor; and in rural areas a tariff that covers
operating and maintenance costs of services and recovery of capital costs
from users on the basis of a cross subsidy from urban areas, in cases of
limited rural affordability.

I want to say, in conclusion, as the National Water Resource Strategy is
being implemented – and as the ANC we welcome this – the committee would
want to know what the implementation strategy of the department is, and
whether indeed sufficient allocation has been made for it. Also, as a
committee we would want to know how constituencies can and will be
accommodated to form part of the implementation strategy.

We want to thank those who have participated in the public hearings, and we
want to thank the department for the support that they have given to us
during the public hearings. We want to support those in our country, the
many organisations that came and contributed to the public hearings, and
enabled us to bring this document before this House today. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D K MALULEKE: Madam Chair, the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa, 1996, contains both our Bill of Rights and the framework for
government in South Africa. There are two provisions of the Bill of Rights
that are particularly relevant to the management of water resources. These
are Section 27 and 24, which state, that:

    Everyone has the right to have access to have access to
    sufficient food and water...

and -

    The state must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within
    its available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of each
    of these rights.

Secondly -

    Everyone has the right –

      ... to an environment protected, for the benefit of present and future
      generations, through reasonable legislative and other measures that –
               i) prevent pollution and ecological degradation;
              ii) promote conservation; and
               iii) secure ecologically sustainable development and use of
                    natural resources while promoting justifiable economic
                    and social development.

The DA couldn’t agree more; we support such ideals. The reconstruction and
development programme and the Constitution provide the impetus for a
complete review and revision of the policy and law relating to water, and
resulted in the development of the National Water Policy for South Africa
in 1997 and the National Water Act, 1998. The policy and the Act were
founded on principles of equity, sustainability and efficiency, each of
which is important for different reasons.

South Africa’s previous legislation, the Water Act, 1956, was not in itself
racist, as was the Land Act, 1913. However, access to water was tied to
land. The riparian system enshrined in the former Act gave access to water
mainly to those across or alongside whose land it flowed, or under whose
land it was found. Since access to land was determined along racial lines
under the apartheid system, access to water was thus similarly determined
by skin colour.

We have come to understand the interdependence between human beings and
ecological systems, and that our activities often affect the quality and
quantity of available water. We have also recognised our obligation to
protect the natural environment, while at the same time promoting
development that will meet the needs of not only current generations but
future generations as well.

During the hearings some concerns were raised by Eskom – it had to do with
the water-pricing strategy – and it was explained that there is no
intention whatsoever for there to be any double charging with regard to
infrastructure development or any other aspect of the pricing strategy.

An explanation of the return-on-assets charge in relation to projects
funded off-budget was offered to Eskom representatives. However, Eskom
still had reservations, which was unfortunate. It was comforting to hear
that the pricing strategy established in 1999 is currently under review,
and there will be opportunities to thrash out this issue, and others, in
the coming months. All stakeholders should be brought into the discussion
to hear opinions on the matter.

It would be interesting to know what portion of the free basic water is
allocated to the sanitation programme, as we all know that most sanitation
are water-borne systems. If that has not been taken into account, it really
creates major accounting problems for many local municipalities that are
currently not reflecting free basic water allocation on their statements,
as guaranteed in the Constitution. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chair, hon members, the National Water Resource Strategy
was established in accordance with the National Water Act, which states
that a national water resource strategy must be established, but that it
must be phased in in separate components over time.

This strategy is a framework in which all the different strategies needed
to manage our water resources can come together in a structured way. I find
that the National Water Resource Strategy is a very comprehensive document
that has considered every aspect of South African water resources.

Although South Africa is considered a dry country, with relatively small
rivers and low rainfall, I still believe that our present water resources
are capable of meeting the current needs of our population. If people and
the various industries and organisations that use water as part of their
production processes use water resources more efficiently and wisely, I
think that there will be enough water to meet the population’s needs.
Therefore, I am pleased to see the public education and awareness issues
that have been taken into consideration, through complementary strategies,
as they can ultimately have a positive impact on the water resources of the
country.

No matter how good or comprehensive the strategy is, I believe that its
success will ultimately depend on the management and distribution of water.
These are two aspects that should be afforded particular attention, as they
impact directly on the lives of many people, especially those in rural
areas. If there is mismanagement, or a problem with the distribution or
supply of water, it is the poor and people in rural areas who seem to bear
the brunt.

The supply of water has a major role to play in the eradication of poverty
and the upliftment of the lives of many people. Therefore, we... [Time
expired.]

Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson, hon members, water is such a basic element for
the sustainable existence of human society that it is often taken for
granted. However, a number of factors mean that we in South Africa can
never afford the luxury of complacency regarding water.

Ours is essentially a dry and water-scarce country. We have a growing
population and a growing economy, and millions of people were previously
deprived of the most basic water services in terms of potable water and
sanitation. These factors combine to create a huge demand for water, where
the supply is already severely restricted.

It is in this context that a National Water Resource Strategy is of such
vital importance. We applaud the creation of a single integrated strategy
that deals holistically with the legislative, social, economic and
administrative aspects of water management and usage in South Africa. It
also ensures the sustainable availability of this resource for future
generations. We hope that the strategy in conjunction with the National
Water Act... [Time expired.] Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, South Africa is a water-scarce country and
the situation is only getting worse. Climate changes will exacerbate the
situation, and its effect is already starting to be felt, as evidenced by
the recent spate of droughts. At the same time the water supply is
dwindling, the demand for water is increasing. Therefore, it is clear that
a mind shift is needed in South Africa, where water is truly valued as the
precious commodity that it is.

High-volume users must be forced to pay more for this precious resource, so
that there can be an economic incentive to conserve and recycle water. At
the same time, those who cannot afford to pay must be entitled to a free
basic lifeline. Twenty-five litres of free water per person falls below the
international norm of 50 litres. We should therefore look at increasing
this basic lifeline for our people. Water is not only a constitutional
right; it is a basic human right essential for survival.

The ID believes that while dams might in some instances be the only
solution, they must at all times be the last solution. It is far better to
institute demand-side measures that can conserve water than to build a dam
to collect water. As a country... [Time expired.]

Ms M N S MANANA: Chairperson, hon members, two years ago the international
community gathered in Johannesburg for the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, and drew up a plan to eradicate poverty and protect resources
for the benefit of the planet.

This year in September, the government and civil society organisations from
across the country gathered in Johannesburg for the Johannesburg Plus 2
Sustainable Development Conference to assess the country’s progress in
reaching these goals.

The development of the National Water Resource Strategy brings South Africa
into full compliance with one of the first targets of the Johannesburg plan
of action, which was adopted at the 2000 WSSD, namely, the National Water
Management Plan. The first edition of the National Water Resource Strategy
describes how South Africa’s water resources will be used, protected,
developed, conserved, managed and controlled in accordance with the
requirements of the policy and the law.

Sections 24 and 27 of the Bill of Rights in the Constitution of South
Africa of 1996 state that everyone has a right to access other rights, such
as sufficient food and water, and that -

    The state must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within
    its available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of this
    right.
Everyone has a right to an environment that is not harmful to his or her
health and wellbeing, and to have an environment which is protected for the
benefit of present and future generations, through reasonable legislative
and other measures that prevent pollution and ecological degradation,
promote conservation, secure sustainable development and use the national
resources, while promoting justifiable economic development.

The objective of managing water resources is to ensure that water is used
to support equitable and sustainable social and economic transformation and
development. Water is important for human life. South Africa’s water
belongs to its people. But it is the task of the government to care for it
and to distribute it fairly, and to facilitate its use wisely, among other
things, for socioeconomic development and transformation. Such development
is vital to ensure that poverty is eradicated, as it starves our country.

During the apartheid era, development benefited a small white minority,
while black townships and homelands were underresourced and underdeveloped.
The introduction of the strategy will facilitate, among other things, the
distribution of water among the people of South Africa. Too many people are
poor, and water is a tool to eradicate poverty by providing a way for the
poorest of our people to survive and make a living, a burden that rests
upon women in society.

Mangikusho ukuthi kungumsebenzi kahulumeni ukuqinisekisa ukuthi abantu
bawasebenzisa kahle amanzi ukuze wonke umuntu awathole. Njengoba uMthetho
kaZwelonke wezaManzi, National Water Act, uthi amanzi afanele aphathwe
kahle ukuze anelise bonke abantu, enze umnotho uthuthuke futhi avule
amathuba emisebenzi, ukwenza lokhu ube ubhekisise ukuthi imvelo
ivikelekile.

La masu azozama ukuthi sonke sithole amanzi ngokulingana kanti futhi
azozama ukulwa nenhlupheko. La masu azomisa umhlahlandlela wokuthi amanzi
azosetshenziswa kanjani. Bonke abantu abeza kulezi zimbizo zomphakathi
bavumelana nala maqhinga namasu omnyango oza nawo, ngaphandle kokusho
ukuthi lo mbhalo kufanele wenziwe nangezinye izilimi ukuze bonke abantu
baseNingizimu Afrika bawazi. Ziningi izinkinga ezibhekene nezindaba zamanzi
lapha eNingizimu Afrika. Kodwa siyethemba ukuthi lawa masu ayisiqalo sokuya
phambili.

Sengigcina, ngithanda ukuhalalisela uMnyango wezaManzi naMahlathi
ngokuphumelela kwawo maqondana nokuthi emva kweminyaka emibili kwaba khona
le ngqungquthela yomhlaba lapha eNingizimu Afrika ngo-2002, i-WSSD,
ukwazile ukuphuma nomhlahlandlela wokuthi uzozama kanjani ukubhekana
nezithembiso owazenza kulo mhlangano owawumkhulu kangakaya.

Sengivala, ngithanda ukusho ukuthi thina singuKhololose siyawamukela futhi
siwesekela la masu azanywa uMnyango wezaManzi naMahlathi. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of Zulu paragraphs follows.)

[I must say this, that it is the task of the government to ensure that
people use water wisely so that everybody can get it. The National Water
Act states that water should be managed economically to ensure that
everybody gets it, to make the economy grow, open up job opportunities and,
whilst doing all this, to make sure that nature is conserved as well.

These strategies will try to ensure that we all get water equally and it
will also try to fight poverty. These strategies will develop a way as to
how water should be used. All the people who came to the izimbizo (public
gatherings) supported these strategies from the department. They also said
that these should be in other languages so that all people in South Africa
can understand it. There are many problems related to water affairs here in
South Africa. But we hope that these strategies are the beginning of the
way forward.

Lastly, I would like to congratulate the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry in succeeding, in the two years since the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, to come up with a way in which it would try to
face the promises it made in such a big meeting.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we, the ANC, accept and support
these strategies which are tried by the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chairperson, I rise in support of the National Water Resource
Strategy. Water is essential for human life, and the National Water
Resource Strategy describes how the available water resources of South
Africa will be protected, used, developed, conserved, managed and
controlled in accordance with the requirements of the policy and law.

Water is central to all economic activity, but the first priority is to
ensure that water resource management supports the provision of water
services; that is, potable water and safe sanitation to all people in South
Africa, especially the poor and the previously disadvantaged.

A wide range of role-players, which included many nongovernmental
organisations, were consulted. Some felt that 25 litres of water per person
per day do not meet basic human needs. They were of the opinion that 50
litres of water per person per day, a figure recommended by the World
Health Organisation, would be a better allotment. [Time expired.]


Mr K D S DURR: Chair, my congratulations to the department for the
excellent National Water Resource Strategy document. It was a really
interesting document. I commend them for that.

I would like to say in the brief time I have left that we don’t only need a
national strategy, Minister, but we also need a subcontinental, or at least
a regional, strategy for water. Just as we have a subcontinental power grid
at the moment with Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, Zimbabwe up to Malawi, so we
need a subcontinental water grid. We can swap cheap power where we can give
that advantage to our neighbours and then we can draw what we require, that
is water from our neighbours.

These water pipes can flow along the power lines. They already exist. If
iron ore trains can run downhill from Sishen with one horse pulling a train
that is a mile long because it flows by gravity, then piped water from the
Orange River can flow down the same railway route. The unused, fresh and
impounded water of the Orange River is about 60% unused. [Time expired.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chairman, without water life would come to a complete
standstill. A way must be found to accumulate water during the rainy season
and to preserve it. Our scientists in this field must be assigned for this
task. Can there be more dams? Can a way be found to stop water that is
wasted in the rivers to simply flow into oceans or elsewhere?

It becomes logical that a caring government cannot privatise water. Water
must remain a national property. No monopoly companies or rich individuals
must be allowed to control our water. At the same time, top scientists and
the most qualified people in water studies, must be employed by the
government to assist with regard to the conservation of water and how more
water can be acquired. More scientific knowledge about water must be taught
in our schools and communities so that there could be maximum appreciation
and care for water in the nation by everybody. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, regarding the drought and low levels of
rainfall this annum, many South Africans are in a frenzy of concern about
the supply of clean water. With the earth being made up of mainly water, it
is hard to understand the prevalence of drought and water shortage in so
many areas.

In view of poverty, not only is access to water a concern, but many also
depend on agriculture as a means to an income and survival. The
accessibility of water for this industry and all forms of life is extremely
crucial.

Our National Water Resource Strategy needs to be well devised to place
confidence in our people to whom we aim to deliver. In view of the National
Water Resource Strategy, it is evident that there are many challenges. Our
water situation is a concern that needs to be earnestly addressed.

The MF finds the National Water Resource Strategy a valid contribution to
the water situation and management of water in South Africa. The MF
supports the National Water Resource Strategy. Thank you.

Mr J D ARENDSE: Agb Voorsitter, gedurende tydperk toegelaat vir openbare
insette rakende die Strategie vir Nasionale Waterbronne het die verskeie
rolspelers die strategie oor die algemeen goed ontvang. Sommige van die
rolspelers het wel teenkanting uitgespreek teen sommige areas van die
strategie, veral op areas in hoofstuk 3, paragraaf 8 en 9. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J D ARENDSE: Hon Chairperson, during the period allowed for public
input into the National Water Resource Strategy the various role-players
generally received the strategy well. Some of the role-players did express
opposition to some of the areas of the strategy, particularly regarding
areas in Chapter 3, paragraphs 8 and 9.]

The information on possible infrastructure development contained in Chapter
3, part 8 and 9, does not - and it’s quite clear in the National Water
Resource Strategy - constitute a proposed or indicative programme of
construction. What the information does indicate is that the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry is carrying out its mandate of solving possible
problems of water shortage in a comprehensive manner. This misconception by
some presenters and also by the press clearly illustrates the dangers of
reading only tabular information in the National Water Resource Strategy
and not also reading the accompanying explanatory text.

Since 1994, the ANC has led the way in providing an integrated, holistic
approach to major socioeconomic questions including the provision of
infrastructure. One of the ANC’s major tasks when it came to power was to
conduct a massive survey of infrastructure needs in the face of the obvious
backlogs that we faced. In this survey, we found that there was an
infrastructure backlog of about R170 billion in our country across all
areas of activity. A number of resolutions adopted at the Mafikeng
conference identified specific areas of activity and infrastructure
development that was linked to job creation and skills development.

Agb Voorsitter, daar is ’n duidelike verskil tussen die voorsiening van
groter en kleiner damme. Met die opgaar van water in groter damme, sal dit
meer effektief wees in waar dit geleë is, juis om die groeiende,
meervoudige behoeftes van ons industrie te bevredig.

Dit is ’n sigbare byvoordeel, veral in die voorsiening van krag naby ons
stedelike en industriële gebiede; ook dien dit tot bystand vir ons landbou-
ontwikkeling.

Met die daarstelling van basiese, kostelose watervoorsiening deur ons
regering, gelei deur die ANC, sal dit verder help met die doelstelling om
die voorsiening van water te vergemaklik en te versprei, en sal groter
damme ons in staat stel om hierdie voorsiening te vergemaklik.

Met die doelwitte soos uiteengesit in die HOP, is die einddoel van die ANC-
regering om die nasie te bou. Sentraal tot ons krisis in die land is die
oneweredige verspreiding en die verdeeldheid wat deur apartheid gelaat is.
Moenie dat ons die verdere verdeling van ’n Eerste Wêreld en Derde Wêreld
bevorder nie. Bou voort om die ongelykhede van gister in ’n beter lewe vir
almal te verander. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, there is a distinct difference between the introduction
of larger and smaller dams. With storage of water in bigger dams, they will
be more effective with regard to where they are situated, particularly to
satisfy the growing multiple needs of our industry.

It is a visible added advantage, particularly in the provision of power
close to our urban and industrial areas; it also serves to assist our
agricultural development.

With the provision of basic, free water by our government, led by the ANC,
it will further help with the objective of facilitating the provision of
water supply and distribution, and larger dams will enable us to facilitate
this provision.

With the objectives as spelled out in the RDP, the ultimate aim of the ANC-
government is to build the nation. Central to our crisis in this country is
the unequal distribution and divisions left behind by apartheid. Let us not
promote further division between a First World and a Third World. Continue
to build and change the inequalities of yesterday into a better life for
all.]

Using this unifying RDP in an integrated manner to facilitate
infrastructure development and to meet the basic needs of all our people is
the mandate of the electorate.

Water is a natural resource and should be made available in a sustainable
manner to all South Africans. Gone are the days when access to water
resources was dominated by a privileged minority, while the majority of the
population enjoyed little or no water security. There are many projects in
rural areas that collapsed because of uneven distribution of water. That
must come to an end. Seventy per cent of the people of this country said,
“enough is enough” and voted for the ANC to speed up the pace of service
delivery. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Thank you very much indeed, hon
members. It has been interesting to listen to all of you and your positive
comments. I would like to express special appreciation to the House for
giving time to this very important strategy. This confirms the seriousness
of both government and Parliament towards realising the human rights and
the Bill of Rights enshrined in our Constitution. We must not forget that
water is life and that access to water is a human right.

On behalf of our department, I would like to say that we would appreciate
continued monitoring and evaluation by Parliament during the implementation
of the strategy. This will be very important to ensure that the interests
of the people are taken on board effectively.

Let me remind this House that the objectives of the National Water Act of
1998, amongst other things, are to ensure that water resources are
protected, used, developed, conserved, managed and controlled in a
sustainable and equitable manner; and that water is allocated equitably and
used beneficially in the public interest while promoting environmental
values.

This then puts an obligation on all of us to make sure that the strategy is
not only a document but also a programme to transform the water sector in
general and, most importantly, to transform our own attitudes that water
will always be in abundance and always be available. We must begin to
appreciate that we are a water-scarce country and change our behaviour with
regard to the manner in which we use water.

Let us take the strategy as but one of the measures that underpin our Batho
Pele principles and values. We should take it as one of the vehicles
through which our government realises the people’s contract to fight
poverty and create jobs.

Despite the achievements and successes of the first decade of democracy, we
all agree that the debate taking place today is still seen in the context
in which the greatest challenge is to extricate the majority of our people
from abject poverty.

It is an undisputable fact that water is central to the eradication of
poverty. We need a sufficient amount of clean water to wash, to cook and to
live with basic dignity and health. We need water even during dry times to
grow the food that our nation needs to become strong and healthy. We need
water for industry to create jobs, to broaden and strengthen the first
economy in order to lift up those who are in the second economy.

The National Water Resource Strategy provides our blueprint for survival. I
cannot stress sufficiently the importance of this document. It sets out the
way in which we will manage our scarce water resources to meet the
challenges I have outlined in a manner that is environmentally and socially
sustainable. Amongst other things, it sets out how we intend to meet what
is perhaps the most important challenge facing our water managers today:
how to achieve equity in the benefits derived from using water for
productive purposes.

This is a multifaceted strategy. If I may respond to the “how”: The
strategy itself is an integrated approach to dealing with the management of
water resources. As a result, it addresses the issues of pricing, of
regulation and of how we should develop our water. It establishes
institutions that will help us to manage water. So, in that way, the
strategy looks at all the things we use water for in life generally to
ensure that we have water for everything forever. The strategy seeks to
make sure that the competing interests for water are all served.

Currently, access to water for productive purposes, for farming and for
industry – and to the benefits derived from that water - is largely
concentrated in the hands of the minority. The strategy proposes a way in
which to deal with all these things.

However, we need to stress and caution that we have tried to bring about
transformation by giving licences - in response to Mr Maluleke – in terms
of ensuring that the riparian rights are removed from our system. What we
have done is to give licences to what we call water users. But this is
often abused so as to exclude our people, bringing back, in a way, the
riparian rights. However, the strategy, again, does suggest what we should
do in this regard.

The implementation of this strategy is not only a challenge for government;
government can definitely not meet this challenge alone. We will require a
partnership between government, Parliament, civil society, the private
sector and, most importantly, all of us as South Africans to ensure that
this is implemented.

In my view, part of the implementation aspect of the strategy should be to
embark on a campaign, a well-thought-through programme of action that aims
to target schools and broader civil society in the spirit of a people’s
contract and co-operative governance. I would like to stress that this is
not just a document, but also a vehicle to change our behaviour and
attitude.

I think that the document will also help us to understand why we should not
waste water, why government charges for water, why it is important not to
pollute water, why we have established structures like the CMA and water
users associations, what is meant by equity and water-resource management,
and to understand the processes of licensing and many other processes.

I would encourage all of us to read the document. I am quite happy to hear
that one of the hon members has taken an interest. It is quite a voluminous
document. We are aiming to simplify it, making it readable and friendly to
everybody.

We have met the target well in advance, as already indicated here. This was
the target of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, and we are proud
to say that we are one of the first countries to meet this particular
target. [Applause.]

In conclusion, let me respond to Mr Durr on the regional strategy he
proposed. There is the African Ministers’ Council on Water. This matter was
tabled in that there should be a regional policy to look at water resource
management strategies. However, currently we do co-operate in the region.
There is what we call the SADC protocol on shared water courses. Under that
protocol, we still co-operate. The issue of integrated water resource
management does come into that particular forum.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincerest thanks to all of you
and to all those South Africans who commented on the strategy. We conducted
an extensive consultation process, with workshops being held in all nine
provinces with a wide range of stakeholders. Over 2 000 written submissions
were received, which influenced the contents of the strategy.

We can safely say that this is a people’s strategy. I also urge you to be
part of the process when the strategy is reviewed. It is hoped that we will
all be back here because the strategy will be reviewed after five years.
So, hopefully, we will come back to this House even when we are using
walking sticks.

Our water is precious. Let us use it well, and let us use the strategy to
build a wetter life for all forever. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
Report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.




                     MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT



         (Consideration of Report of Portfolio Committee on Finance)


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the
Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:43.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    Ms M R Morutoa has been elected Chairperson of the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Women with effect from 10 November 2004.


     (2)    Mrs S E Mabe has been elected Deputy Chairperson of the Joint
         Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
         of Women with effect from 10 November 2004.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces:

1.    The Minister of Communications


     (a)    Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
         African Post Office Limited for 2002-2003, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual Financial Statements
         for 2002-2003.

     (b)    Report and Group Annual Financial Statements of the South
         African Post Office Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Group Annual Financial Statements
         for 2003-2004.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     Report on the removal from office of Magistrate P P Mkalipi on account
     of his incapacity to carry out his duties of office efficiently.

National Assembly:

1.    The Speaker


     (a)    Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 9 November 2004
         to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports
         of South African Post Office Limited for 2002-2003 and 2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         TABLING OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN POST OFFICE'S 2002/03 AND 2003/04
         ANNUAL REPORTS

         I hereby table the annual reports of the South African Post Office
         for the financial years 2002/03 and 2003/04 in terms of section 65
         of the Public Finance Management Act of 1999.

         The delayed submission of the 2002/03 Annual Report was initially
         due to the entity's inability to finalise the statements on time
         due to the unresolved issues around SAPO's recapitilisation.
         However, these statements were further delayed due to concerns
         raised by SCOPA and the Auditor General on the same statements.
         These issues had to be addressed by the entity before the release
         of the reports. The annual report in respect of the 2003/04
         financial year has been delayed due to the factual
         misrepresentation that was picked up in the report.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI, MP
         MINISTER


     (b)    Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 9 November 2004
         to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of section
         65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Reports
         of The Universal Service Agency and the Universal Service Fund for
         2003-2004:

         Dear Madam Speaker

         TABLING OF THE UNIVERSAL SERVICE AGENCY AND UNIVERSAL SERVICE FUND
         2003/04 ANNUAL REPORTS

         I would like to sincerely apologise that the Universal Service
         Agency / Universal Service Fund's (USA/USF) Annual Report and
         Financial Statements for 2003/04 financial year were not tabled in
         Parliament within six months after the end of the financial year
         as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act no 1
         of 1999).
         The delay in the submission of the USA/USF's annual report is due
         to the entity's inability to finalise these as the result of the
         exodus of key finance personnel.

         I would like to assure you that I would, in future, ensure that
         the annual reports of this entity are tabled timeously.

         Kind regards,

         signed
         IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI, MP
         MINISTER


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws
     Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 10
     November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 77), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a Money Bill, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Second Revenue
     Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated
     10 November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the subject
         of the Second Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 25 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without
         amendment.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 - 2004] (National Assembly
     - sec 75), dated 10 November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the subject of the National Small Business Amendment Bill [B 23 -
         2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified
         by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the
         Bill with amendments [B 23A - 2004].

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on Draft
     Notice for Declaration of Amnesty, dated 10 November 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
         the request for approval by Parliament of the Draft Notice for
         Declaration of Amnesty in terms of the Firearms Control Act, 2000
         (Act No. 60 of 2000), referred to it, recommends that the House,
         in terms of section 139(2)(a) of the Act, approve the said Draft
         Notice.

     Request to be considered.


