---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2004-08-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST 2004

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


QUESTIONS AND REPLIES – see that book.



                             NOTICES OF MOTIONS


Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That this House discuss the effective protection of whistle-blowers in
  the fight against corruption in the public sector.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

  That the House discuss the effectiveness of Sector Education and Training
  Authorities in improving the skills of both the employed and the
  unemployed in South Africa.

Ms C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move:

That the House discuss the need to review the Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Act, considering the scientific evidence that has come to light
recently.


                                FINANCE BILL

                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, the Finance Bill
before the House proposes to give effect to the resolutions of the Standing
Committee and Public Accounts. These resolutions contain recommendations
and certain unauthorised expenditure that may be submitted to Parliament
for authorisation.

It should be noted that these recommendations came about as a result of
Scopa exercising oversight over public money by gathering and considering
all relevant information and unauthorised expenditure. A great deal of
dedication and diligence shown by members of the Public Accounts Committee,
combined with an earnest will to find and consider the actual facts of each
case, brought about the resolutions, as submitted to Parliament, which
Parliament subsequently adopted. The amounts go back to the 1998 fiscal
year and are around R50 million.

Madam Speaker, I hereby introduce the Finance Bill 2004. I thank
you.[Applause.]

Bill referred to Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration and
report.

              CHOICE ON TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Declarations of vote:

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is simply wrong that the ANC opposed
a debate on this Bill. It is a controversial piece of legislation that will
have an impact on the lives of many South Africans. It is also a matter of
intense public interest, and there should have been a proper debate.

The policy of the DA is to allow each of our members to determine his or
her own position on matters of conscience, including abortion. We
understand and respect the fact that men and women of good intention may
disagree on certain controversial issues, either on grounds of religion or
ethics. Consequently each of our members here today will exercise a free
vote on this Bill.

I wish to emphasise that the way in which our members vote is not
necessarily an indication of whether they are pro-choice or against
abortion. Rather, our members have made up their minds whether or not they
believe this particular amending Bill to be right or wrong – a good law or
a bad law.

I must add that many members of our caucus, on both sides of the abortion
debate, including some who support the objectives of the Bill, believe it
makes for very bad law. Among those who oppose it there are two primary
concerns: Firstly, allowing already overburdened and underqualified nurses
to perform abortions will increase the risk to pregnant women. Secondly,
doctors and nurses who oppose abortion will be put under still greater
pressure to participate in abortion procedures against their will.

The truth is that the public health sector simply does not have the
capacity to provide quality health care to the people of our country, and
this Bill exposes that fact rather dramatically.

Finally, I wish to say that our members have considered this piece of
legislation carefully. Each has arrived at a conclusion in good faith,
motivated by her or his view of what is good and right. In the DA we
respect each other’s opinions and we hope that a similar tolerance will be
observed in this House and in our country. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, during deliberations on the Choice on
Termination of Pregnancy Amendment Bill, the ACDP proposed that the entire
amending Bill be scrapped, and called for a review of the principal Choice
on Termination of Pregnancy Act.

At hearings held on 3 August, presenters were unanimous in their concern
over the amending Bill, which aims at increasing access to abortion. The
negative impact of the Bill on health workers and health services was a
common concern, but the overriding issue was the increased risk to women’s
emotional and physical wellbeing, and the blatant further violation of the
unborn child’s right to life.

The committee, however, has simply ignored the input, and proceeded
unabated on a mission to steamroll the Bill through Parliament. When the
ACDP’s proposal to scrap the Bill was voted against on Wednesday, the ACDP
proposed amendments aimed at minimising the negative effects of the Bill,
but to no avail.

The ACDP also challenged the statement in the Bill that financial
implications for the state are not expected to be major. It is our view
that increased access to abortion, which is the point of the Bill, will
result in a significant rise in costs. This will be detrimental to the
health budget, and will compromise already strained health services.

The ACDP was the only party to vote against the Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Amendment Bill in the committee, and requested that the Bill be
debated. This was denied, motivating students, mostly from the University
of Cape Town, to protest at the gates of Parliament, chanting: “Why no
debate?” and holding placards saying: “Are you afraid of the truth? –
Abortion kills babies.” Is government afraid that members of Parliament
will think before they vote if debate is allowed?

The new law will increase the number of hospitals performing abortions. At
the same time the law will not only allow nurses to kill unborn babies, but
will put them under severe pressure to do so. MPs and officials were
adamant that a clause protecting the right of health workers to participate
on grounds of conscience or belief would undermine the Choice On
Termination Of Pregnancy Act, and was therefore unacceptable.

The main argument in 1996 was that the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
Act would reduce the number of women being injured by illegal abortions.
Legal abortion appears to have failed, even in this, and injury to women
may, in fact, have even increased. Independent poles show the 1996 abortion
law to be South Africa’s most unpopular law. Nine out of ten South Africans
believe abortion is morally wrong and the vast majority of nurses and
doctors oppose it. This Bill makes it worse.

The ACDP will vote against this Bill and implores MPs to take a stand and
do the same. Do not let the blood of more innocent babies be on your hands.
The 1996 abortion law has been shown to have failed in its implementation.
There is massive conscientious objection in our hospitals; and there is a
large-scale abuse of the rights of conscientious objectors. It is being
ignored.

Abortionists are regularly breaking the law without prosecution. Women are
not being counselled as to the health risks of abortion and the development
of the baby, as promoted by the law. [Time expired.] I thank you.

Mr B E PULE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the UCDP decries the fact that this
debate takes place in August - the month dedicated to women. We, in the
UCDP, take note of the euphemism used in referring to the killing of a
young baby as termination of pregnancy. To us pregnancy can be terminated
by the natural birth of a child, or miscarriage, and not by any humanly
induced method.

The use of the word fetus in reference thereto, as some stuff that is
inhuman, is incorrect, as fetus is a Latin word for young one, and
therefore, getting rid of such a young one is for us murder and we are
averse to that.

We know that strangers to the truth keep informing the public that abortion
does not cause loss of fertility, but it does, along with many other
medical problems about which women are never warned. Empirical research has
proved that termination of pregnancy can be linked to infertility, tubal
pregnancy, cervical damage, severe depression, breast cancer, suicide and
so forth.

The UCDP will vote against the Bill. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, I would like to address myself to the
hon Minister of Health directly. The fact of the matter is that this Bill
will make it easier for abortions to be performed in this country. That is
a fact. This will be the case for two reasons.

Firstly, registered nurses will now be allowed to do exactly what doctors
were supposed to do. Secondly, it won’t be necessary for the national
Minister to indicate such facilities; it will now be up to the provincial
Minister to do so in order to speed up this process.

We are not talking about theory. We are talking about practice. What is
happening at this very moment in state institutions? I can give you an
example: Babies weighing less than a thousand grams at birth are not given
specific attention or care in intensive care units. They are basically
allowed to die. That is what is happening.

What’s happening in practice is the following: Women come to these state
institutions for abortions after the period expired in terms of which they
are allowed to have such an abortion has expired. Once they come there,
they are given medicine to get the process going.

I can give you an example of a child being born, weighing 850 grams. That
child was not dead. It was alive. What happened then? The nursing staff did
not give any attention to that child, because it was supposed to be an
abortion, and it was supposed to die. That child lived for a further 48
hours. That is what happens in state institutions in this country. For 48
hours that child lived - without any attention, no food, nothing - before
it died. It was allowed to die.

My problem is this, Madam Minister: Now you are allowing nurses to perform
abortions. How many of them will know that they are not supposed to do an
abortion when women come there after the period that is allowed for
abortions has expired?

An HON MEMBER: Did you report it?

Dr C P MULDER: Report it? Why is it necessary? Why is the department not
doing anything about it? [Interjections.] Your department is allowing these
things to happen. We are not talking about this “wonderful choice”. We are
talking about the killing of human beings.

I want to ask the Minister, the women and especially the mothers in this
House: Which one of your children would you have preferred to abort?
[Interjections.] Are there any of your children that you would have
preferred to abort? No, of course not, because we are talking about human
beings.

The fact of the matter is, the FF Plus will vote against this Bill. With
these amendments you are going to allow more children to be killed. Young
babies weighing less than a thousand grams are going to be born, and they
will be left, in terms of your government’s policy, to die in our
hospitals. We cannot allow that.

The Rules of this House make provision, in terms of Rule 81(2), that a
written statement can be handed in under the signature of a member to be
published in the Minutes of Proceedings. I am doing that to put our point
of view on record. We will be voting against this very bad Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms F BATYI: Hon Deputy Speaker and members in the House, at the outset, it
is important to make the point that we are not voting today on whether we
agree or disagree on the termination of pregnancy. That debate has already
taken place and the termination of pregnancy has been enacted into law
through the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act. What we are debating
today is whether we agree on the amendments to this Bill or not.

The ID recognises that the issue of termination of pregnancy is a
particularly divisive one in South Africa. This was evident throughout the
public hearings, where many organisations put forward strong positions. As
the ID, we believe that if termination of pregnancy is to occur in South
Africa, the health and wellbeing of the women concerned have to be
protected.

It is for this reason that the ID would have liked to see the following
provisions included in the current Bill: We believe that health staff who
morally object to such procedure should have a right to conscientiously
object. The ID also believes that mandatory counselling should be provided
to applicants before an abortion procedure so that women are fully informed
about the important choice, and that they are aware of the possible side-
effects on their physical, mental and psychological health.

The ID also believes that strict monitoring of repeat abortions, especially
in the case of teenage pregnancies, needs to occur. The ID would also have
liked to see included in this Bill a provision that provincial health MECs
should produce quarterly bulletins that state how many new facilities were
approved and the number of abortions done during that quarter.

The ID also agrees with the Planned Parenthood Association of SA that the
Department of Health must establish a code of good practice for health
workers and constantly provide them with information and upskilling. This
is going to be particularly important if, as stated in this Bill, nurses
will now be allowed to perform terminations of pregnancy. I thank you.

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Choice on Termination of
Pregnancy Act was promulgated to stop illegal backstreet abortions and
money-making, to stop the rate of orphans and unwanted pregnancies rising,
to curtail poverty and to allow females the freedom of choice. All women
have the freedom to have babies, to create families; and they have the
freedom not to have families. [Applause.]

The MF will only support this Bill if the proper legal provisions that are
in the Bill are followed, safety precautions are taken and all females who
want to terminate pregnancies are advised properly. Thereafter they should
use their own initiatives and make their choice. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM supports this
amending Bill. As a slight comment, I wish to remind those who wish to turn
today’s debate into a policy debate that, firstly, the Bill never sought to
amend the overall policy. It would have been far more constructive if they
had raised their concerns in a separate debate. Surely, if this policy was
of such importance to them, they could have petitioned the Speaker and the
relevant committee to debate the overall policy?

Secondly, this policy has its foundation in the Constitution, and has been
confirmed by the Constitutional Court. Women have a right to make this
decision. That is why the Act has the word “choice” in it. [Applause.]

It is fine to object on moral, religious or other grounds. What concerns me
is that often the objectors carry on as if women are being forced to make
use of this procedure. This is false. I am certain that many women share
the convictions of the objectors, and hence do not make use of the rights
afforded by this Act, but there are many women who do not share the
objectors’ convictions. Are we expected to remove their choice? Are the
very people who protest this policy forcing people to do something against
their will? Are they in fact the people who want to force people in one
direction when they would rather choose another?

I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, I apologise for
being late. The order of the speakers’ list was changed. The IFP is a party
representing people of many races and religious persuasions. Our public
representatives include people who practise Christianity, Islam, Hinduism,
Judaism, Buddhism and African religions; some are agnostic and a few even
consider themselves atheists. We respect one another’s diversity, but as a
party we are united by our belief in the sanctity of life.

Fertilisation, conception and birth all are part of the miracle of life,
and deserves sensitive handling by lawmakers. Rights are essential if
coupled with responsibility, respect and family or community values; alone
they breed selfishness and entitlement. As lawmakers we believe that we
should be role models, and particularly with the current Aids crisis, we
should do all in our power to discourage sexual intercourse, promote
abstinence and celibacy and take pregnancy seriously.

Abortion on demand, given at any time, to anyone, including minors, by any
nurse, turns abortion into a form of contraception, and embryos into mere
clumps of tissue.

The IFP condones abortion only under limited circumstances, most
particularly if there is danger to the life of the fetus or the mother, or
following rape or incest, and if practised by a doctor or trained midwife,
preferably with the consent of a parent or a spouse, and definitely after
counselling and attempts to foster alternative choices.

We do support the devolution of some of the authority and the tightening-up
of places where abortion should be given in terms of their quality, but we
oppose the amendments. [Applause.]

Mr S J NJIKELANA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC is honoured to speak in
advocacy of the amendment to the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act,
one of the most progressive and enabling pieces of legislation in Africa,
for the benefit of women’s health and rights.

The key focus of this amending Bill is the decentralisation of authority of
the designation of facilities for the termination of pregnancy, which will
include provincial MECs for health, as well as allowing private and public
facilities that meet the requisite criteria to perform termination of
pregnancies.

Furthermore, it will ensure an increase in the number of potential service
providers who will undergo appropriate and specialised training. The main
advantage of this amendment is the improvement of the geographical spread
and capacity of the functional facilities, and the fact that it allows
local health services to respond to local needs. In line with our national
development priorities, the Bill aims to ensure such services are not only
accessible in urban areas, but also in the rural areas.

Furthermore, raising the levels of service provision enables HIV-positive
women, who choose to terminate their pregnancies, to do so in supportive
environments. What we have here in this Bill is one of the expected
technical refinements of the principal Act.

The ANC knows that the substantial majority of submissions during the
public hearings clearly criticised the principal Act. However, the purpose
and focus of the amendment is not the overall redo of the principal Act.
The debate on the principal Act has long taken place and was closed. I,
therefore, appeal to those who have fundamental differences with the
principal Act to use appropriate mechanisms and avenues to present and
express their views against the Act, but not here.

The process of deliberating on and finalising of this Bill must not be
abused as a platform for cheap political gains by those who have ulterior
motives. The ANC has and will cherish and promote public debate on any
sensitive issue, but will never support the abuse thereof.

It is actually strange that there is only one member of the ACDP present,
whilst it is the very party that is calling for a division. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Division demanded.

     The House divided:




     AYES-218: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S
     E; Bapela, K O; Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu,
     P; Bhoola, R B; Bici, J; Bloem, D V; Blose, H M; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
     Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
     Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B
     N; Davies, R H; De Lange, J H; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M;
     Dipico, E M; Dlali, D M; Dodovu, T S; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C;
     Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs , J L; Gabela, L S; Gcwabaza, N E;
     Gerber, P A; Gillwald, C E; Gogotya, N J; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J;
     Goniwe, M T; Greyling, C H F; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Gxowa, N B;
     Hajaig, F; Hanekom, D A; Harding, A; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P;
     Holomisa, B H; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
     Joemat, R R; Johnson, C B; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U; Kannemeyer, B W;
     Kasienyane, O R; Kati, Z J; Kekana, C D; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K;
     Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kondlo, N C; Koornhof, G W;
     Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lishivha, T E; Louw, S K; Ludwabe,
     C I; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Mabuyakhulu, D V; Madikiza, G
     T; Madlala-Routledge, N C; Maduma , L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
     Magazi, M N; Mahlawe, N M; Mahote, S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Maloyi, P
     D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manie, M S; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
     Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M;
     Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsepe-Casaburri, I F; Maunye, M M;
     Mayatula, S M; Maziya, A M; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mdladlana, M M S;
     Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mnandi, P N;
     Mngomezulu, G P; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale,
     O M; Mogase, I D; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy,
     K; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N;
     Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpaka, H M; Mshudulu, S A;
     Mthembu, B; Mtshali, E; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Ndzanga, R A;
     Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo,
     B T; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, M L; Nhleko, N P; Nhlengethwa, D G;
     Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z;
     Nqakula, C; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, S B; Nxumalo, M D; Olifant, D A A;
     Oliphant, G G; Phala, M J; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A;
     Radebe, J T; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe,
     D M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Saloojee, E; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman,
     E A; Sefularo, M; Sekgobela, P S; September , C C; Shabangu, S;
     Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S; Sigcau, S N; Sigcau, Sylvia N;
     Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Smith , V G; Solo, B M;
     Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M;
     Stephens, M; Stofile, M A; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thomson, B; Tolo, L
     J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P;
     Turok, B; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, Annelizé; Vundisa, S S; Wang,
     Y; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L L; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z; Zuma, J
     G.


     NOES-52: Bekker, H J; Bhengu, M J; Biyela, B P; Blanché, J P I;
     Boinamo, G G; Botha, C-S; Camerer, S M; Chang, E S; Davidson, I O;
     Delport, J T; Ditshetelo, P H K; Doman, W P; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J;
     Farrow, S B; Haasbroek, S F; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; King, R J;
     Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Mars, I; Masango , S J; Mdlalose,
     M M; Minnie, K J; Mnyandu, B J; Mulder, C P; Nel, A H; Ngema, M V;
     Opperman, S E; Pule, B E; Rabinowitz, R; Roopnarain, U; Schmidt, H C;
     Seaton, S A; Selfe, J; Sibuyana, M W; Simmons, S; Smuts, M; Spies, W D;
     Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Taljaard, R; Van der Walt, D; Van
     Niekerk, A I; Vezi, T E; Waters, M; Weber, H; Woods, G G; Zille, H;
     Zulu, N E.


     ABSTAIN-15: Coetzee, R; Gibson, D H M; Godi, N T; Henderson, R K;
     Kalyan, S V; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Mohamed, I J; Morgan, G R;
     Mpontshane, A M; Pheko, S E M; Rabie, P J; Skosana, M B; Vadi, I; Van
     Dyk, S M.


     Question agreed to.


     Bill accordingly read a second time.




     DENTAL TECHNICIANS AMENDMENT BILL



                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

IMMIGRATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Deputy Speaker, Deputy President and hon
members, in his state of the nation address at the opening of the third
democratic Parliament, the President of South Africa committed government
to finalising the immigration regulations within three months.

However, when we started this process, it soon became clear that it was not
going to be possible to address the problems identified in the draft
regulations without effecting certain changes to the principal Act. At this
stage the Department of Home Affairs had been working with the principal
Act and interim regulations for just over a year, and shared the view of
the State Law Adviser that urgent amendments were necessary to correct
fundamental flaws in the principal Act.

A sound immigration policy is vital to the country for a number of reasons.
Such policy should facilitate economic development, attract foreign skills
and investment, and reflect our commitment to human rights and the security
of those who live within our borders, both citizens and residents. Our
immigration policy should be consistent with our foreign policy objectives,
particularly with regard to SADC and the continent. It should also be
consistent with our commitment not to discriminate on the basis of gender.

In the medium term, government intends developing and refining its
immigration policies. This amending Bill and the regulations that will
follow represent a short-term intervention. Nevertheless, we have consulted
extensively in the short period afforded to us. The amending Bill contains
a number of drafting and technical amendments. Here I will outline some of
the more noteworthy and progressive changes that will make the principal
Act more user-friendly and equitable.

The preamble has been amended to properly reflect the purpose of the Act
and to emphasise the need for the country to attract scarce skills and the
role of the government in the development and growth of the region and
continent.

A number of definitions have been clarified, for example the definition of
spouse will be brought in line with a Constitutional Court judgment on the
issue, and will now include permanent heterosexual and homosexual
relationships as prescribed. The definition of marriage and customary
marriages will be brought in line with the existing legislation. Instead of
talking about the powers of the department in terms of the replacement
section, the Minister retains executive powers. The power to take
administrative decisions is vested in the Director-General, DG.

The principal Act provided for the establishment and composition of the
Immigration Advisory Board. The relevant sections will be amended to make
provision for the inclusion of the representatives of the National
Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee and the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development on the board, as well as to change the name of
the Department of Finance to the National Treasury.

This amendment requires that representation be at the Deputy Director-
General level, which will ensure accountability at a sufficiently senior
level. The amendment provides that the Minister is no longer required to
solicit public nominations for the civil society representatives on the
board, but rather allows for the appointment of one representative of
organised labour and one of organised business. The Minister is also able
to appoint up to five members of the board on the basis of relevant
expertise. The operations of the board will be described by the
regulations.

Amendments to the principal Act reflect the advisory nature of the board
and emphasise the role of the board in facilitating the interdepartmental
co-operation on immigration matters. Likewise, the section that mandated
the DG to establish a liasing committee of departments involved in border
control will be repealed, as it is felt that existing forums already serve
that purpose. A new section dealing comprehensively with regulations will
remove the cumbersome requirements concerning public comments, which
required the Minister to respond to each comment in footnotes to the
regulations. However, regulations will be published for public comment.

Amendments have been made to section 8 of the Immigration Act to streamline
the process of internal appeals and reviews of administrative decisions
taken by officials in the department, and to bring it in line with the
Promotion of Administrative Justice Act. In order to bring the principal
Act in line with other legislation, powers or functions are attributed to
the DG and not  the department, as is currently the case with the principal
Act.

As a legal mandate to levy fees, such as the training fund under the
principal Act that falls under the Department of Labour, this provision
will be deleted. The requirement for a chartered accountant’s certificate
has been removed from the Act. Foreigners or employers will now have to
prove certain matters to the satisfaction of the DG, which may include the
submission of a chartered accountant’s certificate. These will be specified
in the regulations. This reflects our conviction that the implementation of
immigration laws and policy should not be privatised, but should always
fall under the mantle of government.

While we recognise the expertise of chartered accountants in assessing
complex financial matters, we believe it is not appropriate, for example,
to hand them the responsibility of evaluating labour standards and
agreements. While immigration law is a specialised field which requires
specialised expertise, it is not appropriate to legislate such courts, and
the reference to immigration courts will be removed from the principal Act.


The principal Act prohibited the recording of entry into and departure from
the Republic of citizens. In response to concerns of Statistics South
Africa, the Reserve Bank and the SAPS, amongst others, an amendment will
provide for such recording. While the principal Act provides for an asylum
permit, a new clause introduces an asylum transit permit that will be valid
for 14 days. This will enable an asylum seeker to report in person to a
refuge reception office within that period and apply for an asylum seeker’s
permit in terms of the Refugees Act. This will clearly distinguish asylum
transit permits from asylum seekers’ permits. If the transit permit expires
before the holder has reported to a refugee reception office, the holder
becomes an illegal foreigner and will be dealt with as such in terms of the
principal Act. This amendment is designed to protect bona fide asylum
seekers, while at the same time discouraging abuse of this process.

Amendments to the principal Act will require a foreigner who is married to
a South African citizen or permanent resident to wait for a period of five
years before being able to apply for permanent residence. On the basis of
the marriage, foreign spouses will be entitled to a temporary residents
permit, which will allow them to work and study.

A further amendment provides that anyone found in possession of a
fraudulent residents permit, passport or identity document is regarded as a
prohibited person and, therefore, does not qualify for a temporary or
permanent residents permit, a visa or admission into the Republic. The
amendment to the effect that police officers or immigration officers should
interview any person whose status is in doubt before taking such person
into custody, will ensure that the right of citizens and non-citizens alike
will be respected and protected.

I would like to close by thanking all the officials in the department,
particularly the Directors-General and the state law advisers, who worked
very hard on these amendments and are poised to ensure that regulations are
published without delay. I would like to thank my colleagues in the Cabinet
and members of their departments for their helpful comments and insights
given at short notice. I’m sure you will agree that these amendments will
improve and streamline the operation of immigration management and control,
as well as provide a basis for transparent and workable regulations, as
promised by the President.

Hayi ke basebenzi ndiyathemba into yokokuba nixolile ke ngoku, ngale
immigration sinivile izikhalo zenu ngayo. Yeyenu le policy esipasise apha
namhlanje. Siyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of Xhosa paragraph
follows.)

[I think, workers, you are now pleased by this Immigration Amendment Bill.
Your grievances about it have been heard. This policy that has been passed
here today is yours. Thank you. [Applause]]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker … [Interjections.]

You see, my only problem is, because we have taken a decision as a
portfolio committee to close the porn shop next to Parliament about a week
ago, the attack that I’m receiving from my left-hand side is really
unprecedented. I understand their needs, but it’s unfortunate we had to do
that because we have laws that govern this kind of business in the country.

Without any waste of time, I think the Minister has managed to cover most
of the areas that we’ve been dealing with. The problem comes from the kind
of Immigration Act that we have today. We are amending the Bill as it
stands before us today to allow the Minister to be able to come out with
regulations. If we recall, two years ago when the Act was passed, there was
no policy. It was informed by the White Paper inputs that were taking
place, but we did not have a clear policy that guided that process. That is
why we are having these kinds of problems today.

Most opposition party members who participated in the portfolio committee
deliberations understand the challenges that we are facing. I think all the
parties in the portfolio committee have agreed that there is a need for
reviewing the whole Act. The Minister did promise in her input during the
public participation session that there would be a review of the entire
Act.

Now, the area that I want to focus on is the public hearings, when Cosatu,
together with Nedlac, was making an input. One of the issues they raised
was the problem of workers, especially mineworkers. When they are dismissed
unfairly by their bosses, the kind of permit that they have is terminated
automatically and they must pack their bags and go back to their countries
of origin.

The very positive amendment that we have tried to insert in the Act allows
mineworkers to stay for as long as there is litigation that is taking place
between the particular worker and the management. They will stay for a
period of about six months. If the matter still continues, it would be
extended by the Director-General of Home Affairs. [Applause.]

One of the areas that the Bill has attempted to address is the scourge of
illegal marriages that are taking place in the country. In the Act, we have
inserted a clause that deals with permanent residence. We have increased
the term, and now say that any foreigner who marries a South African will
only qualify for permanent residence after a period of five years. I think
that’s our way, as a portfolio committee, of contributing to women’s issues
in this month of August. By that we have ensured that not only women, but
also men don’t find themselves in a situation where they are married to
these illegal people without knowing it. So, within the Act we have
embodied the fact that such people would have to be in a good marriage for
a period of five years.

I want to thank the Director-General for the leadership that he has given
when we were dealing with this amendment. Members will recall that when we
were dealing with this matter two years ago, it was characterised by many
problems and much infighting, especially in the absence of the policy I’ve
made mention of. However, the Director-General and the Minister have given
clear leadership. They have showed us leadership, first of all, in terms of
how we can handle this process.

Secondly, they have taken us through each and every single amendment that
we have been engaged in and all the clauses that we have amended. They have
been with us, giving us all the support we needed. Even the members of the
public who came during the public hearings, all agreed with us that there
was no policy in place. That is why we have the kind of Immigration Act
that we have today. All of them agreed that they wanted to contribute and
help their government to come up with a clear policy on immigration.

To the Director-General and his team, together with the state law advisers
and those who helped draft this amendment, you still have challenges lying
ahead. I don’t have many words today, because we still have much work to do
in making sure that we have a clear policy.

In his state of the nation address, the President gave the Minister three
months to finalise the immigration regulations. There was no way in which
the Minister could finalise this or come up with regulations with the kind
of Act that we have. That is why we are introducing this amendment.

Minister, the task is on your shoulders now to make sure that you come up
with regulations before the end of August. Obviously, the concern that was
raised was that the public would not be given an opportunity to participate
during the regulation meeting, but I want to assure everybody that the
manner in which we have crafted the regulation-making process will allow
each and everybody to make an input. It will also allow government and
Parliament to publish in the Government Gazette the kind of regulations
that we are going to make, so the public will still be given an opportunity
to make their input.

The problem, Minister, has been that when we drafted the Bill, we were
quite worried that some of the issues that we did not want to be reflected
in the Act would be sneaked in through the regulations, and we were right.
I’ll mention one example, concerning the Taiwan issue. It was said that
that would depend on government-to-government relations, but now, because
of the powers that the department has, they decided to make the regulation
to put Taiwan in.

Some of the things that we do not want in the regulations, like the
business levy that an individual with a work permit has to pay when he
enters the country, are not the responsibility of Home Affairs. It is the
responsibility of the Labour department to regulate around that area.

On the issue of the immigration courts, we have courts in this country and
there is no way we are going to make immigration courts separate from
these. We have therefore repealed that particular section.

On that note, Minister, I’m not going to waste much time. My colleagues
will cover some of the areas that we have to deal with. I think we have
done well on the issue of workers. Cosatu’s contribution is recognised and
we have taken into account all the issues that it has raised. All the
issues – for example Nedlac and business issues – were sort of incorporated
into the amendment. We are, obviously, still going to have more debates and
amend the Act. The sooner that happens, the sooner we’ll finalise the
immigration policy.

On that note, I wish to thank the DG and his team very much. We would also
like to thank the Department of Home Affairs and all the departments that
participated in this process, making sure that we are able to amend. It was
just a technical amendment, but we have achieved a great deal, especially
on the issues of workers. Those workers will now be able to stay in the
country and fight whatever injustices they are experiencing.

On that note, Minister, I wish to thank you very much for the leadership
you’ve given. However, many challenges still lie ahead. We definitely have
to come up with a clear policy on immigration, and I believe that with the
leadership that you are giving, we’ll be able to do that.

The other issue that I want to finish with, Minister, is the question of
the reviewing of the Home Affairs policy. All the 13 Home Affairs laws must
be reviewed. There is no way that we can afford a situation where we cannot
do that. For example, on the point I started with earlier, regarding the
porn shop outside Parliament, that issue is regulated, but people tend to
do things on their own as if there are no laws that govern this kind of
thing in this country. It means that we must review that law.

We are going to call upon the Deputy Minister, as part of his
responsibility, to tell us where the loopholes are. We have to close the
gap. The DA can cry foul, jump up and scream, but we are going to change
those things, because we cannot afford to have a situation where our
country is turned into a banana republic, with porn shops everywhere you go
– even right outside Parliament. We cannot afford that. [Interjections.]

I know you are angry, but we are going to do that. We are going to amend
that Act to make sure that we have proper regulations in place. We are
going to close down some of these shops that are located within the
residential areas, Minister. We are going to close them down. We are going
to close all the porn shops that are located next to our schools and
churches.

On that note, Minister, I thank you very much. I also want to thank all the
members of Parliament. [Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Tell us about the DA-IFP marriage!

Mrs S V KALYAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, the amendments proposed to the
current Immigration Act are a short-term quick fix aimed mainly at enabling
the implementation of the Act, and is in keeping with the presidential
deadline set in the state of the nation address in April of this year. The
Minister has promised a more comprehensive review of South Africa’s
immigration policy, and the DA welcomes this.

Despite many public submissions and an agreement with Nedlac to retain the
civil society component on the Immigration Advisory Board, it would appear
that the Minister reneged on the agreement. The result is that the role of
civil society on the board has been diminished and there is a huge
imbalance, obviously favouring government representation.

Also, the Minister can appoint whomever she likes and the result is that
she could find herself surrounded by a band of yes-men. If that happens,
the main function of the advisory board would be defeated. It is the DA’s
considered opinion that civil society plays a vital role in keeping the
checks and balances. There has not been sufficient motivation for
diminishing the role of civil society, and the DA would like to urge the
Minister to revisit this aspect in the interest of transparency.

While I’m not advocating more departmental representation, I do find the
omission of a representative from the Department of Health curious. Given
the recent outbreak of the SARS virus and the threat that HIV/Aids poses to
South Africa, one would have expected a more serious approach to disease
control, and who is better qualified to deal with this than the Department
of Health?

The proposed amendments in respect of transit and asylum-transit permits
are welcomed, as are the stricter suggested conditions for the application
of permanent residence by foreigners on the grounds of marriage to South
African citizens. Too many innocent South African women have fallen prey to
opportunistic foreigners who offer so-called employment prospects, only to
find themselves married without their permission and, of course, still
jobless.

Members of the portfolio committee are often presented with stories of
women whose IDs have been stolen and, on application for new IDs, they find
themselves married. However, there are also women who enter into business-
type marriages to enable their foreign partners to gain permanent residence
in South Africa. The DA calls on all members of this House to encourage
young female constituents to check their marital status and to support the
Department of Home Affairs in its national “know your marital status”
campaign.

In keeping with international trends, the proposed amendment to record both
the entry and exit of South African citizens will go a long way to enhance
our internal security, more especially in view of recent allegations
regarding a South African connection in international terrorist activities.

The Department of Home Affairs is greatly underresourced, both in terms of
human and nonhuman resources. While the department itself has acknowledged
this and explained its turnaround strategy in great detail, the DA is still
concerned that the lack of capacity may hinder the honourable intention of
the amendment.

However, we can see the larger picture and wholeheartedly support one of
the main objects of the amendment, which is to attract scarce skills. This
will go a long way to address the current skills shortage, encourage
transference to South African citizens and contribute to the economy of
South Africa. The DA supports the amending Bill. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Madam Deputy Chairman and hon Minister, last Tuesday’s
editorial in Business Day aptly captured the essence of this Bill. It
pointed out how the existing legislation had opened up our country to
skilled and necessary immigration by allowing employers to determine which
foreigners are needed, whereas the amendment we are now discussing will
close down our country to much-needed migration.

In the words of that editorial, the existing system is self-regulating,
while the present amendment introduces government discretion on the matter.
Effectively, the present amendment will dismantle the entire reform of
migration control, bringing back the  original Act in terms of which it was
the government that would decide on an ad hoc and individual basis who
would be allowed to come into the country permanently or temporarily, as no
objective and predictable criteria were then in place.

The present system relied on objective and predictable criteria, the
application of which could easily be performed by employers and chartered
accountants. The devolution of certain aspects of the application to such
private entities enabled the Immigration Act, as it now stands, to raise
the level of scrutiny and the complexity of requirements. However, this
amending Bill eliminates the qualified input of private entities, forcing
the department to perform a more complex assessment for which it is not
qualified.

One example, amongst many, which will clarify the nature of this piece of
legislation, is the following: The Immigration Act uses the criteria of
book value to determine the contribution which enables an investor to
receive a business permit. Any accountant would know how to determine book
value, which includes both tangible and intangible assets. In terms of this
Bill, this determination will now need to be made by the department, in
which one could hardly identify anyone who would routinely perform or
review book-value evaluations.

This example could be multiplied in respect of other permits. The Bill sets
the clock back to the time when a US trade representative identified our
obsolete old system of migration control as one of the major impairments to
doing business in South Africa. In certain respects the new Bill will
eliminate the legal basis on which the present system confirmed the long-
standing tradition which, even under the Aliens Control Act, had
regionalised the administration and issuance of permits.

Under this Bill permits will only be issued in a centralised manner, which
will increase inefficiency and delays. Work permits will only be issued on
the basis of labour certification, which the department is not equipped to
review, and would need to defer to the Department of Labour, as it did five
years ago.

However, the Department of Labour is not equipped or qualified for this
task, as it does not have the underlying information, and should not be
encouraged to pursue a long-discredited plan of developing a database of
all existing and necessary skills.

The administration of work permits will be discretionary, if not arbitrary
and enormously lengthy, both in terms of the applicant preparing the
required documentation and the department processing it. The fact is that
we have no idea how this will pan out, because it will all depend on the
regulation.

The necessity of the Bill was motivated by the need to bring the Act into
compliance with the regulation, which should not be the case, as legally
one brings regulations in compliance with the Act, and not vice versa.
However, it is untrue that this amendment will require a complete rewriting
of the regulations.

The nature of this Bill presents a much broader threat to the current
state. It was formulated, approved and finalised by Cabinet in less than
three months, with the purpose of wiping out reform which took 10 years to
complete and involved Green and White Papers, two international conferences
… [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mrs I MARS: Thank you. The IFP will abstain.

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Ke a leboha modula setulo, Letona la rona mme Mapisa-
Ngcakula, matona ohle a leng ka hare ho Ntlo ena, ditho tsa Palamente,
basebetsi le baeti ba rona ba leng teng kwano. Re lebohela boteng ba lona
kwano kajeno. Modula setulo ntumelle hore ke hopole bo-mme ba rona ba ileng
ba re hodisa mona ntweng ya ditokelo tsa rona re le bo-mme ba Afrika Borwa.


Re leboha bo-mme bohle ba ileng ba e hlanaka nakong tse thata tsa kgatello.
Ho ne ho le bohloko mme, melao e thatafetse bakeng sa motho e motsho. Ka
lehlakoreng la bo-mme e ne e le kgatello ena e utlwisang bohloko, ka ha ba
ne ba sena ditokelo hohang jwalo ka ho reka naha kapa hona ho reka ntlo,
esitana le hona ho ba le bukana ya banka, ho ingodisetsa dithuto tsa
yunivesithi kapa tsona tsa teknikhono. Tsena tsohle ene e le toro ho ngwana
wa morwetsana.

Kajeno ka lebaka la bo-mme ba rona ba kang bo-mme Rita, bo-mme Bertha le bo-
mme Ivy, re kgona hore kgweding ena ya Phato re hopole bo-mme ha re qeta
dilemo tse leshome tsa demokerasi, re keteka tokoloho ya demokerasi, re
keteka hobane bo-mme ba ile ba itshwasolla diketaneng tsa kgatello. Kajeno
ho monate pusong ena ya batho. Re amohela batho bohle ba tswang dinaheng
tse ding, ho sa natswe hore na ba tswa kae.

Hoo eleng hwa bohlokwa ke hore ho be le molao wa naha o amohelang batsamai.
Mang kapa mang ya etelang naha ena o lokela ho hlompha melao ya naha ena,
le ho latela tsela eo ya ho etela mona, e leng ka bohahlaudi kapa ho
tsetela le ha e le hona ho sebetsa, ho hlokehang ke hore o latele tsela e
tshwanetseng, e batlehang ha o batla ho tla sebetsa kapa o le mohahlaudi
naheng ena. Re tshehetsa letona ntlheng ya hore baahi ba Afrika Borwa ba ye
dikantorong tsa lefapha la tsa lehae ho nnetefatsa hore re fela re nyalane
le balekane ba rona, esere motho wa iphumana o nyaditswe motho kapa batho
ba sa tsejweng.

Re hatella haholo ho batjha ba Afrika Borwa, mmoho le ba ho batho ba sa
kang ba itlama ka manyalo, hore ho bohlokwa hore le hlokomedise lefapha
hore na ebe maemo a lona ke ao le a tsebang kapa tjhe. Kgwebo e se e le
teng ka ha re ho naha ya rona. Ke ya ho nyalana le batho ba tswang dinaheng
tse ding. Ho molemo ha ka kang hore ha re nyalana re nyalane le batho bao
re ba ratang, hore ebe kgwebo. Ha re tsekisi batho ba nyalanang ka tsela ya
nnete e tshwanetseng, empa re bohloko haholo ka ba hwebang ka lenyalo.

Re le komiti re re mo-Afrika ya nyatseng kapa ya nyetsweng ke moratua wa
hae, eo eseng moahi wa naha ena, a qale pele ka kopo ya tumello ya na
nakwana ya boahi, ke hore a fuwe tokomane ya tumello ya boahi ya nakwana e
tlang ho nka dilemo tse hlano. Ka morao ho dilemo tseo tse hlano, ha ho se
ho ena le bonnete ba hore ke nnete batho bana ba a ratana, ke banyalani mme
ha ho qeya-qeyo, e be hona motho eo a ka qalang fatshe a etsa kopo ya
tokomane ya ka nako tsohle ya boahi. Re etsa kgoeletso ho batswadi bohle ba
Afrika Borwa ho tshwarahana le mmuso dipatlisisong tsa manyalo a seng
molaong. Batswadi, emang ka maoto, bana ba nyalwa ka ntle ho tsebo ya lona.
(Translation of Sotho paragraphs follows.)

[Mrs M M MAUNYE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister Mapisa-Nqakula, all
the hon Ministers in this House, members of Parliament, workers and our
visitors who are present here, we thank you for your presence today.
Chairperson, allow me to remember our mothers who brought us up in the
fight for our rights as women of South Africa.

We thank all women who fought during difficult times of oppression. It was
painful, and laws were harder on a black person. On the women’s side it was
such a painful oppression, because they did not have any rights at all,
such as the right to buy land or a house, or even to have a bank book, or
to register for university education or at a technikon. All these were just
a dream to a young girl.

Today, because of our women like madam Rita, madam Bertha and madam Ivy, in
this month of August we are able to remember women as we complete ten years
of democracy, as we celebrate the freedom of democracy; we celebrate
because women unchained themselves from the chains of oppression. Today it
is wonderful in this people’s government. We welcome all the people from
other countries, irrespective of where they come from.

What is important is that there should be a national law that welcomes
tourists. Everyone who visits this country should respect the laws of this
country and follow the correct procedure in visiting here, whether it is
for purposes of touring or investing or even working. What is needed is
that one should follow the right procedure that is required when one wants
to work or tour in this country. We support the Hon minister in that South
Africans should go to the Department of Home Affairs offices to make sure
that we are married to our spouses, so that one doesn’t find oneself
married to an unknown person or unknown people.

We emphasise, especially to the youth of South Africa, as well as those who
did not commit themselves to marriages, that it is important to notify the
department on whether or not one’s condition is unchanged.  There is a
business in our country. It is that of getting married to foreigners. It is
important that when we marry, we get married to people we love, so that it
does not become a business. We are not against people who marry in a proper
way, but we are disappointed by those who marry for business purposes. We,
as the committee, are saying that an African who marries or is married to
his or her lover, and who is not a citizen of this country, must first
apply for a temporary citizenship permit, and be granted that permit
document for five years. After those five years, when there is evidence
that these two people are in love, and they are undoubtedly married, such a
person will be able to apply for a permanent citizenship. We urge all South
African parents to work together with the government in investigating
illegal marriages.  Parents, stand up, your children are getting married
without your knowledge.]

We call upon the Minister to review the Marriage Act and tighten the law so
that it is not easily abused. It is therefore important for young and
unmarried citizens to verify their status with the department by supporting
the Minister regarding the Check Your Status campaign.

Tokoloho ya rona re e fumane ha boima, ha re a e reka ka tjhelete.
[We found our freedom in difficulty, we did not buy it.]

We are a developing nation in a very exciting time of reconstruction and
development. Every step that we take in nation–building is a new victory in
our struggle to overcome apartheid baggage. We are therefore happy that the
preamble now allows for the promotion of economic growth through the
employment of needed foreign labour, especially those foreigners within the
southern development community and the continent. We are also encouraged
that the preamble will now strive to promote a human rights-based culture
of enforcement, and that civil society will be educated on the rights of
foreigners and refugees.

There is a need for exceptionally skilled and qualified people. Such skills
should be transferred to our citizens so that there is no repeat of
applying for renewal of permits. Some presenters raised concerns pertaining
to the removal of the requirement for chartered accountant certificates. We
cannot afford to privatise services that should be provided by the
department to foreigners in need of these services. The department should
speed up the training of officials so that such services could be provided
without hassles.

We support the composition of the board. Further, we urge that the
administration of the board be performed by officials of the department, as
designated by the director-general for that purpose. We understand the need
for the public to participate in the board. However, the Minister will
choose whom she wishes to consult outside the prescribed members of the
listed departments, and those from labour and business. In this process she
can choose additional members from the public with whom to consult.

If the representatives from the board, who were present at the public
hearings, were a sample of a gender balance within the board, then the
Minister must have the freedom to correct the demographic situation.

Letona la ka mme Mapisa-Nqakula, ke phahamisa yona tletlebo ena ya ka moo
lekgotla le thehilweng ka teng, hobane batho ba neng ba le teng mane haholo
e ne ele bo-ntate. Jweale ho hlakile hore hona le kgaello ya bo-mme ka hare
ho lekgotla leo. Re kopa ke hona he hore o etse ka hohle ka moo o ka
kgonang ka teng hore mane lekgotleng la rona, bo-mme le bona ba be teng. Ke
a leboha modula setulo [Ditlatse.] (Translation of Sotho paragraph
follows.)

[My Minister madam Mapisa–Nqakula, I raised a complaint about the way in
which the House is formed, because most of the people who attended were
men. It is clear that there is a shortage of women in that House. We would
like you to try your best to make sure that in our House, women are are
present as well. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Deputy Chair and hon members, the Bill before us addresses
a substantial list of technical and grammatical problems in the principal
Act. The passage of the principal Act was dodged by a political tug of war.
As a result, after many years, a piece of legislation, which was riddled
with these errors, was hurriedly passed.

It was a textbook example of how not to legislate. Given this history of
the principal Act, we support any effort to resolve unnecessary errors that
crept into the law. Immigration registration directly impacts on the
economy and has specific implications for a number of government
departments.

It is, therefore, necessary for government to resolve its policy on this
matter once and for all. We cannot afford continuing uncertainty and policy
flip-flops. As far as specific policy amendments are concerned, I would
like to single out the following matters; the amendment to section 5,
proposed by clause 6, limits the powers of the Immigration Advisory Board.
We concur that it is more appropriate for the board to fulfil an advisory
role instead of the executive authority originally implied. In the end, the
Minister is the executive authority and should be the one that is held
accountable for a decision.

It is hoped that the new sections 8 and 9 will prove to be less cumbersome
that the original wording, but much still depends on the regulation that
will flow from these provisions, as well as the proper implementation.
Similarly, the amendment to section 11 to prevent endless extensions of
visitors’ permits is welcome, but will still require policy.

In conclusion, the amendment of section 15 should go a long way towards
addressing one of the primary concerns regarding immigration policy. If we
intend to encourage foreign investment, the sort that translates into long-
term enterprise and job creation, then we must make it possible for those
business people to enter the country without unnecessary bureaucratic
obstacles. The UDM supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr Y WANG: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members and everyone that is
watching us, thank you. Congratulations, Mr President. It looks like the
department is going to meet the deadline on this legislation. However, as
the Bill was processed in such a short timeframe, it is quite possible that
more errors will occur.

We may also find practical problems with the implementation of the Bill,
such as the huge task of co-ordinating all the various departments that are
necessary for effective delivery. We certainly hope that the department has
already consulted fully with interested groups and departments in their
clusters like Sars, SAPS, National Intelligence Agency and the Health
department.

South Africa must also check that the Bill will be in line with all
conventions we have ratified and adopted. We are glad that the hon Minister
has recently stated that she would not hesitate to improve on the Bill
again in future, if necessary. That shows that she is serious and
determined to clean up this legislation. Thank you, hon Minister.

However, one just wonders if that is the best approach to this important
piece of legislation that affects everyone in the country. Judging from the
public’s complaints, would not it have been better if stakeholders could
have had adequate time to work together on this Bill?

In conclusion, I would like to recommend that the departments provide a
public-friendly version of the Act, that is, language-friendly to the
average citizen on the streets, and also an updated regulation manual to
all Home Affairs officials to ensure that public servants are properly
trained to understand the implications of the Bill so that they can deliver
properly.

By the way, last Friday afternoon I put away my parliamentary card and
visited the Home Affairs branch here in Cape Town. I stood in the queue for
half and hour, trying to get a blank application form, and I really
struggled. You cannot believe it! In the end I had to take out my
parliamentary card to get the things that I wanted. I think that is wrong!
It is just a thought. Thank you.

Ms C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, I speak on behalf of my
colleague, hon Steve Swart. The ACDP appreciates the fact that this
Amending Bill seeks to address a number of defects in the principal Act
that were caused when the Immigration Act was rushed through Parliament in
2003, and that a long-term review process is envisaged by the Minister.

The ACDP raised various reservations concerning the Amendment Bill, the
most important of which related to the removal of the statutory appeal and
review procedures. We agreed with those commentators who held the view that
the then formulation of the draft Bill would not pass the test of
constitutionality.

The ACDP was, therefore, pleased that the department took cognisance of the
concerns and redrafted certain amendments dealing with the delegation
powers of the Minister and director-general, and provided specifically for
review and appeal procedures relating to any decision in terms of the Act.

We are still concerned, however, that the requirement for chartered
accountant certificates, particularly in relation to business permits, has
been removed from the principal Act. Whilst we appreciate that the
provision for such certificates can still be in the regulations, we would
have preferred retaining those requirements in the principal Act. We do not
believe that the department has the necessary capacity to properly deal
with this issue without the involvement of chartered accountants.

The ACDP also has concerns relating to the composition of the Immigration
Advisory Board, and shares the view that the role of civil society has been
reduced. This being a policy matter, we trust that this matter will be
recognised once the long-term review of immigration policy takes place.

The ACDP looks forward to participating in the long-term review process and
will support this amending Bill. Thank you.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Chairperson, Ministers, hon members and distinguished
guests, it is a shame and a disgrace to realise that among the opposition
parties there are still people who are daydreaming, who are shouting and
singing: Bring back my history.

Kulabo bantu kufanele kucace kamhlophe ukuthi kule lengabadi yakithi akukho
mhlambi kazelusile, futhi akukhona kwampunzi edla emini. [To those people,
it should be crystal clear that in this indigenous country of ours there
shall be no breaking of rules and that the cat is not away, so the mice
shall not play.]

These people do not appreciate that the democratic government is
continuously transforming our country.

Isibonelo, uMphathisihlalo uke wakhuluma ngesitolo esidayisa izinto zabantu
abadala kuphela (adult shop) ngaphandle.[For example, the Chairperson spoke
about the adult shop outside.]

There is something very strange about it.

Inhlangano ethile phakathi kwethu njengoba silapha, iyona ebikade
isebenzisa leli hhovisi. [A certain political party here amongst us is the
one that has been using this office.]

Within two or three days it would be occupied by the people who had moved
in. It is a shame to them. [Interjections.]

It must be clear to everybody in this august House that the main objective
of the Immigration Amendment Bill is to redress the fact that the
regulations were inconsistent with the Immigration Act, particularly with
regard to skills, migration and immigration control.

The current Immigration Act had unintended consequences for migrant workers
regarding their work permits, in particular mineworkers and farmworkers who
were recruited from neighbouring countries. They were being shamelessly
exploited by unscrupulous mine owners, farmers and other employers at our
borders. Some of the ways of exploitation was to withhold their
remuneration on payday, and to then summarily deport the workers without
them being paid their salaries. Workers dismissed in this way could not
even engage in normal labour relation procedures to ensure that they got
what was due to them. They were simply reported to the authorities, loaded
up and deported.

We salute the bravery of our migrant mineworkers, toilers of the soil, who
work deep down in the heart of the earth. During the changing of their
shifts, many of them will be found, queuing, dancing and singing courageous
songs like, “Thina lomhlaba siwugezile”. [We have cleansed this earth.]
Despite their passion for their work, our current Immigration Act does not
allow them the opportunities to be given what is due to them.

The ANC led-government committed itself by amending this Bill to cover all
migrant workers who were not catered for after termination of service.
Accordingly, we have changed the subsection dealing with work permits to
ensure that these remain valid for a period of up to six months after the
contract has been terminated, so that the affected foreign worker can then
exhaust all the rights they are accorded to in terms of the Constitution
and laws governing labour relations.

This amendment also provides that the period to redress their labour
problems may be extended for an additional three months at a time. For this
extension, the affected workers need to provide proof to the Director-
General of the Department of Home Affairs, along with their work permits
and the details of their last employer.

During our deliberations on and considerations of the Immigration Amendment
Bill, the ANC realised that the principal Act had unintended consequences
for visitors who wanted to enter our country for entertainment purposes,
conferences, or for other short term professional purposes. It become
apparent that visitors falling in this category did not necessarily want to
apply for a work permit, since they were only performing or consulting for
few days and would then leave the country soon after that.

The committee then decided that the concession to this category of
visitors’ permits could fall under the jurisdiction of the director-
general. He would be able to grant permission to the holder of a visitor’s
permit to conduct work, of course subject to certain conditions.

The ANC was concerned that the business permit holder in this country not
only invested in cash, but the investment often took the form of property
or an investment that would mature over a longer period of time. Therefore,
we required that a foreign investor submits proof that he has fulfilled the
requirements of the business permit, and that he would continue to update
the director-general on the progress of this investment.

The requirements of the corporate permits have not substantially changed
with this amendment, except that the corporations are now required to
report to the director-general instead of the department, and they must
comply with the prescribed requirements at all times. Failure to do so will
lead to the withdrawal of the permit.

Millions of people are flocking to our country for different reasons. This
is posing a challenge to the Department of Home Affairs to have adequate
resources to handle the situation.

Umtsetfo uba ngumtsetfo nawuhlonishwa bantfu lowakhelwe bona. Loku
kwabonakala ngesikhatsi Imbokodvo iba ngemadzelakufa, imasha, imashela
umtsetfo wemapasi nga 1956. Nanyalo malunga lahloniphekile kumele
sicaphelisise kutsi lomtsetfo webantfu labangena kulelive unekulawuleka
lokutakwenta kutsi uhlonipheke futsi umbandzakanye wonkhe muntfu.
(Translation of siSwati paragraph follows)

[A law becomes a law when the people it is meant for respect it. This was
evident when the Imbokodvo defied death by marching against the pass law of
1956. Even now, hon members, we have to be careful that the Act concerning
immigrants into South Africa, is regulated so that it is respected and
caters for everybody.]

Let us put the interests of our country first in order to realise the dream
of making South Africa accessible to all people who want to add value to
our wellbeing. Accountability is a key word to any endeavour to make any
piece of legislation relevant to our sociopolitical situation. It is for
that reason that we strongly believe in making this envisaged legislation
more centralised for the same reason.

This new amending Bill also seeks to redress a nightmare unfolding for our
country’s women. It is particularly relevant in this women’s month that we,
the ANC led-government, do whatever it takes to protect our grandmothers,
mothers and sisters from exploitation and unprincipled foreign nationals
who use marriage to our women, with or without their permission, to gain
access to residency of our country.

Home Affairs offices across the country are inundated with queries from
women who find themselves suddenly married, and they have no knowledge of
whom their spouse is or how they ended up being married in the first place.
In some instances, poor, vulnerable women are offered money as a bribe in
order for them to agree to marry a stranger who happens to be a foreigner.
After they do it, they never see the person again. Sometimes the women do
not even fully understand what they agreed to.

The most tragic of these cases have been reports of foreigners targeting
HIV-infected women, especially those who are close to dying. They marry
these women, knowing that they only have to bear the burden of marriage for
a few months. Our own officials in the department are sometimes pawns in a
much larger global game that is controlled by crime syndicates intent on
exploiting our women.

According to the new amended system, the director-general will have to be
satisfied that a spousal relation has existed in good faith for five years
before an application for a permanent resident permit will be granted, and
to strengthen these stringent requirements even further, the amendment
stipulates that this permit will lapse if, within two years from the date
when the permit has been issued, the good faith spousal relationship no
longer exists. The only exception that will be made is if the spouse dies.

The ANC supports the amending Bill. I thank you.

Mr B E PULE: Madam Chair and hon members, we in the UCDP accept that
society, particularly a young democracy like ours, is dynamic and not
static. We also know that one of the objects of this Bill, among others, is
to seek to address a number of defects in the
principal Act, which were caused by its hurried passage in 2003. Regarding
that, I would like to point out that the Bill took more or less eight years
before being passed.

It has to be borne in mind that the principal Act was at some stage an
issue between the six-a-side committees of the ANC and the IFP. Therefore,
in an effort to beat the deadline set by the Constitutional Court, it was
hurried. We accept the omission of chartered accountants at every turn of
entry to make the Republic safe in exceptional cases, such as in the case
of large companies.

The UCDP accepts and recognises the delegation of powers given to the
director-general as head of department. As accounting officer, the director-
general has to make decisions, as against the reference to the department
having to do all the work. We appreciate that the Bill made it quite clear
that the Minister will delegate certain powers to the director-general. We
also accept that the director-general is the first to be appointed as a
member of the immigration board, unlike in the principal Act, where this
official was an afterthought, having been the last of the board members.

The UCDP also welcomes the clearly set out functions of the immigration
board, which are advisory in nature and not calculated to upstage even the
Minister. The preamble makes provision for the legislation to ensure that
the role of the Republic in the continent and the region is …

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr B E PULE: The UCDP supports the Immigration Amendment Bill. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chairperson, the PAC supports the Immigration
Amendment Bill. The amendments seem to be an improvement on the previous
Act.

I simply want to state that I have noted the regulations in section 7. They
seem to be fair, particularly seeing that the Minister may consult with the
board. The provision of the review and appeal procedures in section 9 must
be welcomed.

The Bill defines a resident as the holder of a permanent resident permit.
This is acquired on the basis of having lived in the country for five
years, upon procurement of a job. One assumes that what really
distinguishes a citizen from a resident is that the latter cannot vote in
this country, and that residents will have IDs to this effect.

Research conducted by the University of the Witwatersrand indicates that
most traders have legitimate businesses. It is disturbing that the inward
movement is often from Europeans, Americans and Asians. They often have
less difficulty gaining residence than the so-called informal or unskilled
workers from neighbouring African countries. Given that much of South
Africa’s economy was built with the sweat and blood of migrant labourers,
it seems peculiar that many citizens of neighbouring countries, especially
from Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, should complain that they are not
treated well at the borders.

Neighbouring immigrants who have no criminal record must be treated with
deep consideration. Not long ago, their own economy suffered because of
their assistance to their brothers and sisters here to overthrow apartheid
colonialism.

In view of so many of our women who often suffer the trauma of finding that
they are “wives” of mysterious foreign “husbands”, this Bill should have
prescribed a very severe punishment for foreigners who commit this type of
crime. The burden of proof must also be shifted away from our women, who
are victims. [Time expired.]

Miss S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Chair, the MF is aware of society’s thoughts
on the issue of foreigners. Xenophobia is a reality to most. With
unemployment and poverty being the major challenges and problems faced by
South Africans, these fears are nurtured.

However, the MF finds that there is a need to publicise the government’s
many initiatives to create employment. Efforts by the public and private
enterprises should comprise initiatives to do the same. Further, the impact
and efforts of affirmative action are, in securing hope for many, also
creating stress for some. In view of this, South Africans’ xenophobic
attitude is a natural reaction.

However, the MF feels that the realisation needs to be embedded in society
that, yes, we as South Africans have a foremost responsibility to our
citizenry to educate them that South Africa belongs to a larger entity, ie
Africa. We have a responsibility towards Africa, as a global initiative to
strengthen our continent.

The MF supports the amendment made in the light of the immigrants’ entry
to, and departure from South Africa. Other common fears concern drugs,
violence and money-laundering, which are so often associated with
foreigners, not forgetting the scams involving illegal immigrants who claim
to be married to innocent South Africans. We urge that these be controlled
and that such persons be ejected from South Africa.

It is, however, true that our neighbours have many beneficial trades and
skills that they can teach us. We need to take advantage of these, noting
the benefits it may yield for our economy. Further, foreign investments
bring much income to our economy. So, while hostility may be expressed
regarding the issues of immigrants, there is a lot that we may gain from
that too.

The Immigration Amendment Bill aligns mechanisms for ensuring that we draw
the positive and expel the negative. South Africans, rest assured that our
government has your best interests at heart.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Miss S RAJBALLY: The MF supports the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SWART: Madam Chair, the current Act has many flaws. The situation is
that in terms of the current Act it is difficult to promulgate regulations
that suit the Bill. The DA, therefore, welcomes the new Bill and we will
support it.

At the public hearings, however, there were concerns from various parties
who gave inputs on the question of chartered accountants with regard to
business permits that were taken away. The director-general may, in his
discretion, appoint a chartered accountant to actually look into the merits
of a particular business permit application. However, if that is the case
and he does appoint a chartered accountant or chartered accountants’
company at that point in time, we may just as well legislate for it now,
but that is not being done.

The officials or delegated authority will now have the capacity or right to
decide whether a person has the necessary means to actually have a business
permit. We are concerned about the capacity of officials, ie whether they
will be able to do so. It could also leave the door open for corruption,
because somebody could quite easily slip an official a few thousand rands
under the table to certify that he has the requisite means to actually
receive a business permit.

We are not advocating that we should get work for CAs and we don’t want to
place obstacles in the way of people wanting to invest in South Africa, but
we might be dealing with people with dishonourable intentions and therefore
we feel that it’s necessary for independent people to actually look into
the matter.

We would, therefore, have liked to see the question of chartered
accountants remaining in the Bill only in as far as business permits are
concerned. We would like Parliament to note, accordingly, that that is the
stance of the DA, though we do support the Bill.

During discussions this afternoon, the hon members on my right-hand side
referred to the adult shop on the other side of Parliament on a few
occasions. I would like to say that they tried to create two perceptions:
the one perception was that the DA actually opened that shop, and that is a
blatant lie. I would be very worried if I were a member of the ruling party
because, if this week’s Sunday Times is to be believed, it seems to be
members of the ANC who watch dirty movies in their hotels in Pretoria.
[Interjections.]

The other perception was that the DA would be against regulating as far as
these shops are concerned. That is also far from the truth. We don’t worry
about it. We will probably be in favour of regulations. The only thing we
are saying is that, if you want to be on the moral high ground by saying
that we should regulate these shops, we should draw the line right through
as far as the travel scam is concerned, as well. Thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Thank you Chairperson. Madam Chair, Ministers, Deputy
Ministers and members, the Immigration Amendment Bill seeks to rectify some
of the concerns that we as the ANC raised in the portfolio committee during
the deliberation of the current Immigration Act, Act 13 of 2002.

We were duly concerned that the problematic sections, which were removed
from the principal Act, would find their way back into the regulations. We
therefore tasked the hon Minister of Home Affairs, through her department,
to come up with regulations that would be in line with the amending Bill.

We were not surprised, though disturbed, when the discarded clauses did in
fact show up in the regulation drafted by the department then. All of us,
as committee members, attempted to amicably solve the issue of the
regulation, but it all fell on the side. Ultimately the Cabinet intervened
through the President, hence we are here today.

It is, therefore, rather an unpleasant task for a portfolio committee in
Parliament to do some damage control, in order to ensure that we have an
Act that can be implemented in such a manner that will promote a flow of
visitors from and to South Africa without hesitation of any kind. The
spirit of co-operation and transparency that has marked the passing of this
amending Bill has pleased and even surprised the ANC, because the co-
operation that we received from the opposition parties and from everyone
else led to one direction only.

Everyone in the department – those who represented the department in the
redrafting of the Bill – was of great assistance and they went all the way
to ensure that they reformulate certain problematic sections in a very
pleasant way. The spirit of co-operation was clearly apparent when we made
changes in clauses of the Bill dealing with work permits, and also in all
other changes that we recommended.

In fact, the experience of certain stakeholders was more problematic
compared to that of the government representatives. The hon member of the
IFP referred to the fact that the good work of the past nine years was put
aside, but I think that if there is no co-operation and teamwork, we can
work on an issue for 10 years without any results. We only took a short
space of time because of teamwork, and we achieved a lot through this Bill.
[Applause.]

Madam Chair, the ANC-led government is fully aware that South Africa has
become a destination of choice for many foreigners who want to visit our
country or bring business to our shores. For us to woo indirect investment,
we need to have legislation that will promote and protect the existing jobs
for our citizens, and at the same time encourage new opportunities.

What was also increasingly apparent during the public hearing processes was
that South African immigration legislation would be closely monitored in
the SADC region. As we enter the new century, it will also be
internationally scrutinised. The ANC’s role in this Bill was to ensure that
the department has a piece of legislation that can be implemented in the
shortest time possible.

Our concern was also that the amendment should give rise to the transparent
set of regulations that would carry the policy contained in the Bill
through the process of implementation. We were - and we will continue to be
- vigilant, Minister, to ensure that the regulation that follow the passage
of this Bill will not seek to create a loophole to bring in the existence
of this detail that was discussed in the committee.

Chairperson, sections 27 and 28 of the principal Act are amended to do away
with the requirement of the certification of a chartered accountant and the
Department of Labour, as was provided for in the principal Act. Instead of
furnishing certification of a chartered accountant, a foreigner will in
fact give proof of certain matters to the satisfaction of the director-
general.


I think that is enough, because not everything is in terms of rands or
dollars. You have to prove to the director-general that you have the
relevant information, and he would be convinced and accept you as such.

The proposed amendment to section 28 of the principal Act will make it
possible for the director-general to withdraw a permanent permit if the
first holder is convicted of any offence listed not only in Schedule 1, but
also in Schedule 2 of the principal Act. The requirement is that such
conviction should, within four years of issuance of the permanent residence
permit, be dealt with.

The granting of an exemption to the requirement of residence in respect of
certain residents or class of residents also no longer resides in the
recommendation of the director-general. Insolvent persons, before being
admitted in the Republic of South Africa, should have a visa, irrespective
of whether they are citizens of a visa-exempted country or not.

The need to consult the board is also dispensed with. We are trying to
ensure that everything is taken care of in as far as issues of immigration
are concerned. I think the international world is also satisfied. Section
31 of the principal Act that deals with the provision of an unauthorised
person to enter the Republic in a place other than a port of entry, is also
amended.

As this has already been dealt with elsewhere in the Bill, it is also
amended to remove the requirement that the Minister must consult with the
board in order to issue exemptions in terms of the Act, and to remove the
six-month limitation with regard to distinguished visitors. Provision is
also made to confirm that the entry of a resident or diplomatic person from
a foreign state is dealt with under the Diplomatic Immunities and
Privileges Act of 2001. That is Foreign Affairs and has nothing to do with
Home Affairs.

Section 33 of the principal Act is amended in order to establish an
inspectorate in terms of the Act, and not by regulations, as was the case
in the past. Section 34 of the Act is amended so that the requirement is
now a place of detention for illegal foreigners who are to be deported.

The administration for all those people that are to be deported should be
the domain of the Department of Home Affairs. The director-general should
determine the place of detention, as this will allow the detention of
illegal foreigners at police stations and other places in terms of the
principal Act.

Chairperson, the amendment to section 35 of the principal Act is to ensure
that reference made to any mode of transport, including ships, vehicles and
aircraft, provides appropriate description to a person in charge of that
conveyance. It also seeks to ensure that the person in charge of that
particular conveyance complies with requirements, to ensure that the
passengers are properly documented.

So, we are all ensuring that everybody takes responsibility. Section 39 of
the principal Act is also amended in order to introduce a requirement for
all businesses offering accommodation to keep a register of all its foreign
guests. That is also important – I do not think we are demanding too much
in any way.

Chairperson, we therefore want to assure all citizens of this country, the
continent and SADC that the laws that we pass in this Parliament are going
to ensure that life goes on and are tantamount to the level and the
standard of the required legislation internationally.

Madam Chairperson, I therefore submit the acceptance of the ANC in as far
as this Bill is concerned. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I want to thank the portfolio
committee and all the members who participated in this debate for the
manner in which they dealt with the issues in this Bill, setting aside
their political interests and party agendas, and really focusing on the
challenges facing us as a country in the real spirit of patriotism.

I want to assure you that there was adequate public consultation and
participation, in spite of the fact that we had three months within which
we had to deal with this Bill. There was adequate consultation by the
department with government departments, Cabinet clusters and the
Immigration Advisory Board. Through the public participation process the
portfolio committee was able to interact with various stakeholders such as
the legal profession, organised business, labour, immigration
practitioners, academics and so on.

There was adequate consultation in spite of the fact that we did not have
much time. In fact, I don’t believe that even in the 10-year process that
people claim we are reversing, we consulted as much as we did in the past
three months. [Applause.]

I also want to assure everybody, including the members of the public, that
the regulations will be published as soon we have passed this Bill and it
has gone through the NCOP process. We hope that by 30 August exactly the
regulations would be out for public comment.

I am not going to comment on the issue of the chartered accountants,
because I think the portfolio committee dealt with that. I want to comment
on the issue of the Immigration Advisory Board and the allegation, for
instance, that the role of civil society has been reduced. That is not
true, actually, because the representation of the civil society has been
reduced from nine to seven. There is no huge reduction of the number of
civil society representatives.

I also just want to caution members that the Immigration Advisory Board
should not be seen as a terrain for the contesting of opinions and views
between nongovernmental organisations and government, but should rather be
seen as a body which is there to advise the member of the executive who has
been assigned the responsibility of looking after immigration issues in
this country. [Applause.]

It should not be seen as a terrain of struggle. I don’t think it is proper
that we should always be talking about the numbers game. I also don’t think
it is true that I reneged on the agreements with Nedlac, because business,
labour and civil society are still going to be adequately represented on
the Immigration Advisory Board.

I want to say that, in spite of the concerns which have been raised through
the debate here this afternoon, I know for certain that all the members of
this House believe that today we have moved a milestone towards a new
immigration policy in this country.

I want to thank everybody who has supported the Bill, even those who have
abstained, because I do understand the circumstances in which people find
themselves with regard to these particular matters. [Applause.] I thank you
profusely for participating in the debate and I respect your opinions on
these matters. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Bill be read a second time.

Question agreed to (Inkatha Freedom Party abstaining).

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:12.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Finance Bill [B 13 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 77)

         (ii)    National Payment System Amendment Bill [B 14 - 2004]
              (National Assembly - sec 75)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         19 August 2004 and 20 August 2004, respectively.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    National Payment System Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Finance on 17 August 2004. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


     (2)    Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted
         by the Minister of Finance on 17 August 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Finance and the Select Committee on
         Finance.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
         Southern Africa Limited for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

     (b)    Projects of the Development Bank of Southern Africa Limited for
         2003-2004.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Health on the Traditional Health
     Practitioners Bill [B 66 - 2003] (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 17
     August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Health, having considered the subject
         of the Traditional Health Practitioners Bill [B 66 - 2003]
         (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it and classified by the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill
         with amendments [B 66A - 2003].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Energy Regulator Bill [B 9 - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated
     18 August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
         the subject of the Energy Regulator Bill [B 9 - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
         amendments [B 9A - 2004].

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the Geneva
     Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
     Industrial Designs, dated 18 August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the request for approval by Parliament of the Geneva Act of the
         Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
         Industrial Designs, referred to it, recommends that the House, in
         terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Act.

     Request to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
     Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
     Registration of Trade Marks, dated 18 August 2004:

         The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered
         the request for approval by Parliament of the Protocol Relating to
         the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
         Trade Marks, referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms
         of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

     Request to be considered.


