---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 26 August 2004'
layout: debate
year: 2004
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2004/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2004-08-26
---

THURSDAY, 26 AUGUST 2004
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Chairperson of Committees took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Ms H LAMOELA: Chair, I give notice that on the next sitting day I shall
move:

  That the Council –


  (1) wishes to thank and encourage the 14 young persons, representing
        different cultures of the Pinelands High School in the Western Cape,
        namely Lea Le Roux, Elroy Bell, Gino Okkers, Gadjiya Jephta, Alia
        Hendricks, Monique Hess, Kwezi Mayosi, Carri-Ann Little, Dominique
        Leibrand, Danielle Pemental, Shaney Fortuin, Ragdmat Pool, Shamiega
        Isaacs and Wafieka Isaacs who now, during cross-curriculum week for
        schools, are helping at G H Stark Old Age Home in Hanover Park, by
        feeding older persons and assisting in all ways possible to add to
        the wellbeing and comfort of these persons in the home; and


  (2) sincerely appreciates this fine gesture of these youngsters and
        encourages all other provinces to follow their example.

Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Mev die Voorsitter, ek gee kennis dat ek op die
volgende sittingsdag sal voorstel:

  Dat die Huis -


  (1) kennis neem dat in die munisipale verkiesing van 2000 in Wyk 9,
        Emfuleni in Vanderbijlpark, die Vryheidsfront 80 stemme en die
        Demokratiese Alliansie 3229 verower het; en


  (2) verder kennis neem dat in die munisipale tussenverkiesing in dieselfde
        wyk op 25 Augustus 2004  die  Vryheidsfront  Plus  846  stemme,  die
        Demokratiese Alliansie 832 en  die  African  National  Congress  107
        stemme verower het.
 (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr F J VAN HEERDEN: Madam Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move:


  That the House –
  (1) notes that in the municipal elections of 2000 in Ward 9, Emfuleni in
        Vanderbylpark, the Freedom Front received 80 votes and the
        Democratic Alliance 3229; and


  (2) further notes that in the municipal by-election of yesterday, 25
        August 2004, in the same ward the Freedom Front Plus received 846
        votes, the Democratic Alliance 832 and the African National Congress
        107 votes.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on
the next sitting day:

  That the Council–


  (1) notes with dismay the parade of government Ministers, parastatal
        bosses and newly enriched ANC elite at the Athens Olympics;


  (2) believes it is inappropriate for those earning and spending taxpayers’
        money to flaunt their high living while too many South Africans
        continue to live in poverty;


  (3) regrets that the Telkom CEO is one of those lavishing vast amounts of
        money to indulge himself and his political friends on his Olympic
        “gravy boat” at a time when the company he oversees is retrenching 4
        000 workers; and
  (4) calls on the governing elite to show a little more humility in the
        face of the continued suffering of the people who pay their
        salaries.

Ms N D NTWANAMBI: Chairperson, on a point of order: I want to know if it is
correct for a member to mislead the House when she has been briefed about
Telkom’s situation and retrenchments? Is it correct for her to misrepresent
Telkom here?

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Hon member, I will ask the Table staff to
assist in this matter.


                       ATTACK ON NCOP MEMBER MR WATSON


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D ROBINSON: Madam Chair, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


  (1) condemns the recent attack on one of our members, Mr Watson, in broad
        daylight when travelling to Cape Town International Airport on
        Vanguard Drive;


  (2) notes that in this attack Mrs Watson was injured, the vehicle was
        damaged and Mr Watson’s briefcase, containing important personal
        documents, including travel vouchers, air tickets and his
        parliamentary access card, passport and driving licence were stolen;

  (3) further notes that this crime hot-spot is a major link with the
        airport and exposes travellers to constant risk;


  (4) calls for effective policing along this stretch of road, and the
        erection of visible warning signs to inform travellers of the risks;
        and

  (5) expresses its sympathies to the Watsons on their ordeal and thanks to
        British Airways for the professional way in which they assisted the
        Watsons and got them onto their flight in time.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                  POOR PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL CRICKET TEAM


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N M RAJU: Chairperson, I move without notice:


  That the Council–
  (1) notes with deep disappointment the pathetic performance of the Proteas
        cricket team in losing the third one-dayer, and in so doing losing
        the eighth consecutive one-dayer and bringing disappointment to this
        Council;


  (2) calls upon the United Cricket Board to get its house in order; and


  (3) further notes with disgust that the president of the UCB, Dr Gerald
        Majola, like Nero, is fiddling while Rome is burning by his presence
        in Athens rather than being in Sri Lanka taking care of the problems
        besetting our national team.

The CHAIRPERSON OF COMMITTEES: Order! Is there any objection to the motion?
[Interjections.] In the light of the objection, the motion may not be
proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become notice of a
motion.


                         IMMIGRATION AMENDMENT BILL


 (Consideration of Bill and of Report of Select Committee on Social Services
                                  thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Madam Chairperson, hon members, in the
past few weeks we have come before this esteemed House to present several
Bills which needed immediate finalisation.
From the outset, I should like to thank hon members for their
understanding, co-operation and support, which has made it possible for us
to finish much of the work relating to our outstanding pieces of
legislation.

This level of understanding has meant even more to us at Home Affairs,
given the important process in which we are engaged to turn our department
around, so that it is better able to play its part in the pursuit of the
people’s contract for a better life.

Today we have returned at the instance of the President of the Republic,
who in his state of the nation address at the opening of the third
democratic Parliament committed government to finalising the immigration
regulations within three months.

In pursuit of this, it was clear to us that we would have to effect certain
changes to the principal Act in order to correct the fundamental flaws
contained in the Act, to produce a sound immigration policy that would
facilitate economic development, attract foreign skills and investment, and
reflect our commitment to human rights and the security of those who live
within our borders, both citizens and residents.

Such a policy should be consistent with our foreign policy objectives,
particularly with regard to SADC and the continent, and it must be
consistent with our commitment not to discriminate on the basis of gender.

In this regard, and precisely because in the medium term government intends
developing and refining its immigration policies, this amending Bill we are
tabling here today and the regulations which will follow represent a short-
term intervention. We shall in due course come back to the House to make
more comprehensive amendments.

We are pleased to inform this august House that we have in the short period
afforded us engaged in extensive consultations. What this amending Bill
therefore contains is a number of drafting and technical amendments, some
of whose more noteworthy and progressive changes will make the principal
Act more user-friendly and equitable, I have the honour herein to outline.

The preamble has been amended properly to reflect the purpose of the Act,
and to emphasise the need for the country to attract scarce skills, and the
role of the government in the development and growth of the region and
continent.

A number of definitions have also been clarified. The definition of
“marriage” and “customary marriage” will be brought into line with existing
legislation.

Instead of “powers of the department”, in terms of the replacement section
the Minister retains executive powers, and the power to take administrative
decisions is vested in the director-general.

The amending Bill provides for the inclusion of the National Intelligence
Co-ordinating Committee and the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development on the Immigration Advisory Board established by the principal
Act, and requires that representation be at deputy director-general level,
which will ensure accountability at a sufficiently senior level.

As far as the representation from civil society is concerned, the Minister
will appoint one representative of organised labour and one of business, as
well as up to five members of the board on the basis of relevant expertise.
The operations of the board will be prescribed by regulation.

Amendments to the principal Act reflect the advisory nature of the board,
and emphasise the role of the board in facilitating interdepartmental co-
operation on immigration matters. The section that mandated the director-
general to establish a liaison committee of departments involved in border
control will be repealed, as it is felt that existing forums already serve
that purpose.

A new section dealing comprehensively with regulations will remove the
cumbersome requirements concerning public comments, which required the
Minister to respond to each comment in footnotes to the regulations. The
Minister will, however, under any normal circumstances, still be required
to publish the regulations for public comment, including consultation with
the Immigration Advisory Board.

Amendments have been made to section 8 of the Immigration Act to streamline
the process of internal appeals and reviews of administrative decisions
taken by officials in the department, and to bring it into line with the
Promotion of Administrative Justice Act.

In order to bring the principal Act in line with other legislation, powers
and functions are attributed to the director-general and not the
department, as is currently the case in the principal Act.

The amending Bill completely repeals the mandate to levy fees such as for
the Training Fund under the principal Act, as such a legal mandate falls
under the Department of Labour.

In line with our conviction that the implementation of immigration law and
policy should not be privatised and should always fall under the mantle of
government, the requirement for a chartered accountant certificate has been
removed from the Act, and foreigners or employers will now have to prove
certain matters to the satisfaction of the director-general, which may
include the submission of a chartered accountant’s certificate. These will
be specified in the regulations.

While immigration law is a specialised field which requires specialised
expertise, it is not appropriate to establish immigration courts under the
law, and reference to such courts will be removed from the principal Act.

The principal Act prohibited the recording of entry into and departure from
the Republic by citizens. In response to concerns of Statistics South
Africa, the Reserve Bank and the SA Police Service, among others, an
amendment will provide for such recording in order to simplify the process
of determining which countries are visa-exempt and enable proper
consultation by the Minister with other government stakeholders. Therefore
two new sections have been inserted to deal with visas and transit visas.

While the principal Act provides for an asylum permit, the amending Bill
refers to an asylum transit permit, which is to be valid for 14 days. This
will enable an asylum seeker to report in person to apply for an asylum
seeker’s permit in terms of the Refugees Act. If the asylum transit permit
expires before the holder has reported to a refugee reception office, the
holder becomes an illegal foreigner and will be dealt with as such in terms
of the principal Act. This amendment is designed to protect bona fide
asylum seekers, while at the same time discouraging abuse of the process.

Amendments to the principal Act will require a foreigner married to a South
African citizen or permanent resident to wait for a period of five years
before being able to apply for permanent residence on the basis of
marriage. Foreign spouses will be entitled to a temporary residence permit
which will allow them to work and study. This, amongst other things, will
assist us to deal with the problem of the marriages scam.

Amendments requiring that police officers or immigration officers interview
any person whose status is in doubt, before taking such person into
custody, will ensure that the rights of citizens and noncitizens alike will
be respected.

Madam Chair, I would like to close by thanking all the officials in the
department, and especially the Minister, who unfortunately could not be
here today because of a bereavement in the family, together with the state
law advisers, who all worked so hard on these amendments, and who are
poised to ensure that regulations are published without delay. I am sure
that you will agree that these amendments will improve and streamline the
operation of immigration management and control, as well as provide a basis
for transparent and workable regulations as promised by the President.

I present the Immigration Amendment Bill, 2004, for your consideration.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J MASILO: Madam Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, colleagues and
friends, director-general and senior officials; the President, in his state
of the nation address at the opening of the third democratic Parliament,
committed government to finalising immigration regulations within three
months. We are also aware that amendments to the principal Act were urgent
to address serious problems the department was experiencing in the
implementation of this Act.

The Bill we have before us is fundamental in trying to regulate who comes
into our country’s ports of entry and exit. All of us are aware of some of
the difficulties that we have experienced before with the implementation of
the principal Act. It therefore becomes imperative that this amending Bill
ensures that the Department of Home Affairs has strong enough tools to
control the flow of people to and from our shores efficiently and
effectively.

Without the proper controls at our ports of entry, South Africa becomes
vulnerable to crime syndicates, escaped convicts and all manner of
undesirable and prohibited persons. At the same time, South Africa has the
responsibility to provide a safe haven for those people, especially those
on our own continent who seek asylum from wars, pain and torture, or who
are otherwise forcibly driven from their homes.

Indeed, we need also to extend a hand of welcome, even to those who simply
want to have a pleasant, memorable holiday in our country, and enjoy the
many and unique natural habitats of wild animals or our rich cultural
diversity. It is this careful balance between making welcome and control
that this amending Bill, and indeed any immigration legislation, seeks to
address.

As a new democracy of the African continent, we also cannot ignore all our
political responsibilities to Nepad, the African Union, the SADC region,
and more recently the Pan-African Parliament. Our immigration legislation
therefore should make it possible for our continent to engage in an
exchange of scarce skills, have those skills transferred from foreigners to
our citizens, and provide for learning and training opportunities across
our borders.

Therefore the preamble seeks to recognise the need to attract scarce
skills, to transfer these skills and to outline the new role that South
Africa plays in the SADC region.

The Bill also seeks to amend the composition, powers and representatives of
the Immigration Advisory Board. This means that the Minister is now able to
appoint five people to the board. This could mean that civil society
representation could be increased in this manner. The Department of Justice
and Constitutional Development and the National Intelligence Co-ordinating
Committee have been added.

At the same time the powers of the board have been limited to a strictly
advisory function which then allows the department to do their job without
having to wait for an extensive consultation process to be completed before
they can do what they need to do.

Without effective legislation, enforcing all the controls we envisage to
keep our ports of entry secure becomes an extremely difficult exercise for
our officials on the ground. We also sometimes unwittingly create loopholes
for people to abuse our country’s generosity, and as a result our own
people become targets for these foreign criminal elements.

A case in point has happened in Richards Bay recently. The Organised Crime
Unit of the SAPS apprehended the leader of one of the main drug syndicates
in that area. He was an illegal foreigner. He claimed the right to be
allowed out on bail because of his marriage to a South African citizen.
Research into the records of the department showed that on the very day
that he was apprehended in Richards Bay, his “wife” supplied her
residential address to the Department of Home Affairs as being in Inanda
township. On being questioned, this drug dealer was not even aware of his
“wife’s” home address. It was found that he had passports from his country
of origin in various names, and South African ID documents in other names.
It was also found that he had previously been apprehended and charged in
Plettenberg Bay, but that he had skipped bail there. These are the kinds of
foreigners we do not want in our country.

We are not saying that every visitor who presents himself or herself at our
borders comes with evil intent, because we know that the majority of
foreigners coming to South Africa have a genuine interest in our country
and want to feel part of our unique democracy, but it is because of the
minority, unfortunately, that we have to be particularly vigilant.

Without that vigilance with regard to our permits, visas, passports and
other travel documentation, we lose all credibility with the international
community, and our citizens who wish to travel abroad find themselves
exposed to intense scrutiny and all their documents are examined with a
fine-toothed comb at most international ports of entry. Already our
Minister had an interview with her counterpart when there was suspicion
that four South African passports were found in England and that these
passports were intended for use in Al-Queda-related activities. It is my
understanding that our travel documentation is still highly regarded
internationally.

It is important that we have clauses in our legislation that create an
environment that envisages a spirit of co-operation with our neighbouring
states, such as some of the provisions contained in the preamble. Already
within the SADC forum there are moves to put processes in place geared
toward harmonising legislation in an effort to stop the abuse of the
immigration system.

With regard to securing our job market against abuse by illegal foreigners,
we need to understand that the entry of illegal foreigners into the job
market has a major influence on the unemployment rate of South African
citizens. Confidence tricksters have been able to take jobs that were
intended in the first place for South African citizens and for which they
were not even qualified. This has even placed the administration of
government at risk. It is of utmost importance to remember that these
confidence tricksters have even managed to get jobs in government
departments.

In this regard there is the example of a person who came illegally to our
country and obtained the position of a director in the National Treasury.
He was in possession of two different false identity documents, and both
his degrees by which he “qualified” for the post were forgeries of Unisa
degrees. It was also found that a bank and a major corporation wanted him
for fraud and that he was wanted in his country of origin for fraud to the
tune of US$250 000. This is but one example of many such cases that were
reported in the media recently.

This clearly shows that the tightening of measures to prevent this entry of
illegal foreigners is of the utmost importance in the combating of crime.
The strengthening of the Immigration Act is therefore not only of
importance to the Department of Home Affairs, but will also assist the
security community to combat crime in general.

Finally, some allege that South Africans are xenophobic. This is not true
if one considers that we are tolerant of all the groups speaking 11
official languages, as well as others. We have always accepted immigrants
into South Africa, if they enter our country through legitimate means and
they add value to South Africa as a new democracy. However, it is the
influx of illegal immigrants involved in crime and abuse of the women of
South Africa in their efforts to become residents here that is
unacceptable.

The amendments today therefore seek to do two things: Firstly, to
facilitate the immigration of skills and qualifications, and secondly, to
curb the abuse of our system, especially the abuse of our women and the
smuggling of persons into our country.

Baditšhaba ba tla mo Aforika Borwa ba nyala bonnake le bokgaitsadiarona. Fa
a sena go monyala, o a mo tlogela, o a mo tlhala a ba a tsena mo
dipolotiking tsa makoko a a rileng. A ba a kgethiwa go nna mopalamente a
tlhadile mme yo wa rona wa Moaforika Borwa. A tswelela pele. Re le bomme ba
Aforika Borwa ra re, ka melao e e tseneng e, go a fela. Go fedile. Ba tlile
labofelo mo palamenteng. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Foreigners come to South Africa and marry our sisters. After marrying her,
he divorces her, leaving her in the lurch and joins certain political
parties. He is then elected as a member of Parliament after divorcing this
South African woman. Life goes on. We, the women of South Africa, are now
saying that, with this new law, all that is coming to an end. They got into
Parliament for the last time.]

Madam Chairperson, the Select Committee on Social Services supports the
Immigration Amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, the Minister of Home Affairs has
called on all South African women to check their marital status. For those
of us who are not aware of this call, the need arose when people,
especially young women, went to the offices of Home Affairs to declare that
they were getting married, only to find that they were already married to
someone and they did not even know about that.

Cabanga-ke mphathisihlalo, emthethweni usuwaziwa ngokuthi ushadile, ushade
no``Mr so-and-so’’ ongakaze umbone ngisho nasejuteni. [Just imagine,
Chairperson, in terms of the law, you are recorded as married to Mr so-and-
so, whom you have never seen before.]

It then becomes a long process of unravelling this misdeed and finding out
exactly what happened. Women discovering that they were married without
their knowledge became more common over the past year, and all of us as
women are vulnerable to this new phenomenon.

Laba besimame kutholakala sebebhekene nenkinga yesehlukaniso, behlukanisa
nomuntu abangamazi nhlobo.[Then these women found themselves in the dilemma
of facing a divorce action, having to divorce a person they do not know at
all.]

All of us, but particularly those of us coming from Gauteng, like me, know
how people wanting to gain quick entry into our country misuse our women.
Unfortunately, sometimes these fraudulent marriages happen completely
without the person’s knowledge.

In Bloemfontein, the SA Police Service uncovered a syndicate selling drugs.
Of the seven illegal foreigners involved, six were married to South African
citizens. Bail was given to these syndicate members because they were
married to South Africans, and the conditions of their residence permits
allowed them to apply for and be granted bail.

Once these men were out on bail, they continued selling drugs, putting a
far larger portion of our population at risk than simply the women they
married. In this case the women to whom they were married could not be
found anywhere. Without permanent residence permits they would have
continued to be illegal foreigners and deported immediately.

In my province these people gaining permanent residence through fraudulent
marriages got even more creative than we anticipated. It was reported that
in Tswane an illegal foreigner involved in a so-called 419 scam had a
permanent residence permit. He had entered our country illegally and
remained undetected for several years. Later, with the assistance of a
corrupt Home Affairs official, he created a woman through the process of
late registration of birth. Firstly, it is important to understand that
this woman never actually existed. A marriage officer married him
fraudulently to this nonexistent woman.

Sihlalo, ngisho ukuthi wabumba owesimame ongekho, elekelelwa ngumsebenzi
womNyango wezaseKhaya. Ukuthi bakwenza kanjani lokhu, uSathane kuphela
owaziyo. Lezi ezinye zezinkinga ezibhekene nalo mNyango wezaseKhaya.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, I mean to say that this person created a woman who did not
exist, assisted by an official of the Department of Home Affairs. As to how
they went about this, only Satan knows. Those are the problems faced by
this Department of Home Affairs.]

Secondly, the facility of late registration exists because of our apartheid
past and the failure of the apartheid government properly to register
especially those in the remote rural areas, or because the information was
recorded incorrectly on birth certificates, allowing a person to make an
application for late registration.

In some cases these late registrations consist only of an application form,
with very little information on the parents of these individuals. The
accompanying affidavits are also forged. These affidavits are obtained
through corrupt members of the SA Police Service; this corruption also
needs to be uprooted by this department.

Finally, this person in Tswane, on the basis of this fraudulent marriage,
then applied for a temporary residence permit, and subsequently a permanent
residence permit, based on the fact that he now had a South African spouse.
It was as easy as that.

We also need to understand that some women are used through enticement.
Illegal foreigners lure them with promises of lots of money, and because
they are poor, it seems to them that the offer of money for their signature
on a marriage certificate is not a big deal. They then go with the illegal
foreigner to Home Affairs and sign the marriage documents. Once the
marriage transaction is completed, the two go their separate ways.

Abaphinde bahlangane neze. Owesimame uzuza imali engatheni ngenxa
yendlala.Owesilisa yena uzuza ukuba yisakhamuzi esiphelele saseNingizimu
Afrika.[They will never meet again. The woman receives a small amount of
money just because she is poor. The man benefits by obtaining full South
African citizenship.]

The new section 26B of this amending Bill will hopefully close this gap for
easy access into our country through marriage. This section says that the
director-general may issue a permanent residence permit to a foreigner who
has been the spouse of a citizen or permanent resident for five years, and
the director-general is satisfied that a good-faith spousal relationship
exists, provided that such a permit shall lapse if at any time within two
years from the issuing of the permit the good-faith spousal relationship no
longer exists, except in the case of death.

We were concerned as a committee about how the director-general would know
that a good-faith spousal arrangement exists, without peeping through the
window …

… abone phela lokho okwenzekayo ekamelweni. Kube yinkinga-ke lokho
ekomidini. [… to see what happens in the bedroom. That became a problem for
the committee.]

We understand now that the officials of the department will arrange for
interviews with the couple and they will then follow up with other
interviews, at which both parties will be present. The ANC supports the
Bill. [Applause.]

Ms H LAMOELA: Madam Chair, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, director-
general and friends, people travel the world over in search of various
opportunities, some of which include job opportunities, business and
sightseeing. Some enter a country for asylum purposes, since democracy is
not implemented in all countries of the world. Sportspeople enter a country
and stay for a short period before they leave again.

Although the amendments to the principal Act are urgent, also in order to
address critical problems identified through the controversial process
around the immigration regulations, as well as the experiences of the
department since the principal Act became operative, it must not be seen as
a quick-fix, aimed mainly at enabling implementation of the Act and in
keeping with the presidential deadline in the state of the nation address
in April of this year.

The constitutional democracy of our country is being exploited by illegal
foreigners. Too many innocent South African women have fallen prey to
opportunistic foreigners offering so-called employment prospects, only to
find themselves married without their permission or caught in a business-
type marriage to enable their foreigner husbands to gain permanent
residence in South Africa.

The DA calls on all members of this House to encourage young female
constituents to check their marital status and to support the Department of
Home Affairs in its national “Know your marital status” campaign.

In keeping with international trends, the proposed amendment to record both
the entry and exit of South African citizens will go a long way to
enhancing our internal security, especially in view of recent allegations
that citizens from South Africa were connected to terrorist organisations.

The proposed amendments in respect of transit and asylum transit permits
are welcomed, as are the suggested stricter conditions for the application
of permanent residence by foreigners on the grounds of marriage to South
African citizens.

Because of the uncertain economic and military situation in many parts of
Africa, South Africa has become a popular destination for foreigners and
continual care should be exercised that the necessary control mechanisms
are in place to ensure that they are here legally. We support one of the
main objects of the amending Bill, which is to attract scarce skills to the
country.

It is the DA’s considered opinion that civil society plays a vital role in
keeping the checks and balances. There has not been sufficient motivation
for diminishing the role of civil society, and the DA would like to urge
the Minister to revisit this aspect in the interests of transparency.

The biggest concern, though, is whether the department has the capacity to
implement the Bill once enacted. We have heard recently how understaffed
the department is. It is our hope that funds will be made available to
enable the staffing of the department for the purposes of implementing this
piece of legislation. The DA supports the amending Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Rev E ADOLPH: Chairperson, members of this House, the diversity of South
African society, the injustices of the past and the difficulties created by
injustice, intolerance, inequality, poverty and crime still haunt the
fragile society of our new democracy. We all understand and experience that
currently.

However, we are optimistic and we have hope for this country, because of
the miracle of our new Constitution. Our Constitution is already proof that
the majority of South Africans, irrespective of colour, creed and
background, are more than willing to put the past behind them, and to build
a new nation based on mutual acceptance, respect and tolerance, as
portrayed in the Immigration Amendment Bill.

The changes contained in the Bill, we realise, are rather technical in
nature. The ID supports such amendments, because they will enhance the
efficiency of the department in managing and controlling the influx of
foreigners. We are cautious about people who come into this country
illegally and rob our indigenous people of jobs.

On the one hand we have to deal with the dichotomy of xenophobia. South
Africa is indeed a home for Africa, on the one hand, and on the other hand
we need to safeguard, with regulations, job opportunities for our own
people in this country. That is what this Bill tries to emphasise.

We are also very encouraged by the participation of civil society and the
NGOs in making the rules and regulations in terms of the new amendments.
This is hope for us. There are still many questions and details that need
to be worked out, and the courts will have to provide considerable
guidance, but we have confidence in our Constitution, which is a solid and
acceptable point of departure for all of us.

We have to be mindful of the reality and the legacy of xenophobia in South
Africa. To this end we need to adopt a spirit of flexibility and move away
from ideological thinking, and rather be more tolerant of people in this
country.

Our policy and willingness to join hands across the awesome divides in
constructive co-operation for the benefit of all people living in South
Africa need to be commended. Therefore the ID is grateful to the national
Minister of Home Affairs for starting the “Know your marital status”
campaign. She needs to be supported and encouraged, and all other sectors
should help to assist her in this regard. Our people should not be abused,
especially our women, to find all of a sudden that they are married to
foreigners. That is a disaster.

We need scarce skills in our country, yes, and the amending Bill seeks to
refine this scenario.

There will still be many questions with regard to combating xenophobia in
South Africa, but we believe that in the spirit of ubuntu we shall
overcome. Therefore we have to safeguard against illegal foreigners who
will eventually rob our people of their job opportunities.

We support this Bill and we want to allay the fears of all our countrymen:
Don’t be scared of xenophobia. Thank you.

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Madam Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister and my colleagues,
the purpose of this Bill, as already indicated by the hon Minister and
other speakers, is to address a number of defects and weaknesses in the
principal Act. These shortcomings were a source of concern to the
department itself, and to other stakeholders, in its implementation.

The new provisions will enable the Minister to delegate some of his powers
to a director-general as head of the department. This is most welcome and
will facilitate the implementation process of the Bill.

However, on a more serious note, this Bill, as good as it seems to be, will
not achieve its objective if the necessary infrastructure is lacking at the
areas of implementation. The Department of Home Affairs up to last year was
inadequately provided in terms of office accommodation and transport in the
North West. However, I hope that, with the turnaround strategy that the
department has propounded recently, my fears may be addressed.

The functions of the Immigration Board, which are advisory, are spelt out
clearly and are subordinate to the authority of the Minister. The UCDP is
in total agreement with this arrangement. Very often some boards are a law
unto themselves and they usurp functions which they were not delegated to
perform.

The preamble sets out in no uncertain terms very clear procedures to be
followed in the acquisition of transit visas and residence permits by
foreigners seeking such documents for entering the Republic, and the UCDP
supports this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Madam Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon members, the
ANC has spent a great deal of time over the past few years trying to create
an ideal piece of legislation that will deal effectively and efficiently
with immigration control in our country.

We have had to state quite emphatically on more than one occasion to the
powers that be in the Department of Home Affairs that we disagreed with the
processes and sections envisaged in the principal Act. We even tried to
create checks and balances in the principal Act, especially under the
provisions contained in section 7, that would ensure that before
regulations are made, the department comes back to the committees of
Parliament and engages with them and the public to ensure complete and
total transparency. As we all know, this did not happen in the way we
envisaged.

Even now we are sensitive to the fact that this amendment brought to
Parliament will only serve to kick-start the process of formulating a
transparent and democratic framework in which South Africa can begin to
engage with other countries on immigration matters. Needless to say, we are
by no means completely satisfied that all aspects of immigration have now
been covered by this amendment, but we welcome the efforts made by the
department to try to remedy an impossible situation. We have, in our
committee deliberations, encouraged the department to come back so that
together we can further interrogate the intricacies of immigration matters
even after the passage of this amending Bill before us.

The ANC is particularly encouraged by the removal of the provision in
section 2(2) of the Act, which levied a percentage of salaries of foreign
work permit holders for training purposes. Such a training levy is already
within the ambit of the Department of Labour under the provision contained
in the Skills Development Act, and we saw it as inappropriate in
immigration legislation. We welcome the relief that the lifting of such a
burden brings to foreign workers, even while the department has assured us
that the provision was never implemented and the training account is still
at zero.

The issue of chartered accountants being at the centre of most permit
applications has also been removed by the present amendment. Of course the
ANC welcomes the financial relief this removal brings, especially to our
poor neighbours, who had to try to find money to pay a chartered accountant
before their applications for permits could be approved. The principal Act
was effectively privatising the normal function of the department. The ANC
felt that the retention of a chartered accountant certificate should be
retained for those requiring business permits. The extent of research
needed to investigate all the finances of a business owner would place a
heavy burden on the staff of the department.

Of course, for all the other categories of permits the department needs to
be sufficiently staffed to undertake the large numbers of applications that
will now begin to make their way directly to the department. We understand
that already in the turnaround strategy the department is focusing its
attention on immigration matters. The deputy director-general for
immigration may already be appointed, but we will wait in anticipation for
the formal announcement from the department.

The ANC was horrified to hear that our airports and harbours were being
undermined by illegal foreigners in transit to other destinations by
gaining quick access into our country, after which they simply disappear.
It seems that the department did not have an effective mechanism dealing
with people in transit. Now the new section 10B will oblige people who are
travelling to other destinations and want a short-term stopover in South
Africa to apply for a transit visa. Without this transit visa they will not
be able to enter our country.

Similarly, illegal foreigners were presenting themselves at our borders
seeking asylum. Again, they abused this opportunity to enter the country
illegally and the department experienced difficulties in tracing them. With
the amendment of section 23, asylum seekers now have to obtain an asylum
transit permit from the director-general at the port of entry, which will
give them 14 days to present themselves to a refugee reception officer at a
refugee reception office. They will then have to apply for asylum in terms
of section 21 of the Refugees Act.

This is not an ideal solution, because the asylum seeker, even with the
asylum transit visa, may still disappear after the 14 days have expired.
Hopefully, with the intended expansion of the refugee reception centres
envisaged by the department, all the ports of entry will have such
designated areas in the not-too-distant future. In addition, we anticipate
that the long-term policy review process will interrogate this matter
further.

The ANC is also conscious of the fact that we seem to be attracting some
prohibited and undesirable persons into our country. We certainly do not
wish to become the “dumping ground” for the world’s crime syndicates. It is
our wish that these amendments will bring to to an end the illegal
activities of crime syndicates or individuals found guilty of committing
serious crimes in their countries of origin. They must find it extremely
difficult to enter and depart from our country. They must find it
impossible to exploit our women to enter our country.

Finally, the amendments begin a process of creating an immigration policy
that facilitates tourism and brings investments into our country, while at
the same time discouraging international crime. The ANC therefore supports
this amending Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, thank you to all hon
members, firstly, for supporting the amending Bill, and secondly, for the
positive comments that they all made.

Ours is a Bill thrust along positive lines. It proceeds from the premise
that we seek to promote economic development, attract scarce skills and
investments, and ensure commitment to human rights and the security of our
citizens. Thereafter we begin to worry about undesirable elements who will
seek to exploit these objectives that we set for our immigration
legislation, in order also to gain entry into our country.

I want to make this point: What we are trying to do is to establish
legislation that is Africa-friendly and Africa-focused, legislation that
does not make it easy for a big European thug to enter our country and
difficult for a genuine asylum seeker from the African continent to do the
same. The reality that we face is that in many instances the faces of the
people who enter our country illegally are African, people from
neighbouring African countries and other parts of our continent, but there
are other people who enter our country and commit much more serious crimes.
They are European, they are Asian, they are Latin-American. They have the
money to buy their way into the country, to buy their stay in the country,
and if they are caught they can fly themselves out of the country. They can
buy a return ticket immediately and buy their way back into the country.

These are the people who are causing much more serious problems for our
immigration processes than the people who we now and again catch on the
streets of Johannesburg and in other parts of our country.

These are the realities we have to deal with, because in responding to the
reality of illegal immigration into South Africa, we must not create a
problem, create the wrong impression that it is only Africans who enter the
country illegally and commit crimes. Yes, some of them do, some of them
commit very serious crimes, but the main problems we have do not emanate
from the African people who enter South Africa. We have to be able to deal
with these things, because in how we then respond, we may create
xenophobia, by creating the false impression that Africans enter South
Africa to commit crime and to steal the jobs of the people of our country.
We therefore have to be guarded in how we deal with these things, and this
legislation tries to assist us in dealing with precisely those challenges.

Of course, much of the work that we will need to do will not be done by
legislation on its own. There are a whole lot of things we need to do in
Southern Africa, in co-operation with other Southern African and African
countries, to ensure that we deal with problems of crime, but above all
else, to ensure that we all utilise our immigration legislation in a manner
that will lead to common development and growth in our countries.

The second point I would like to make is that we are trying very hard in
the department to deal with the challenges of corruption. There is new
energy that we are injecting into the department. There is new focus, a new
urgency that we are trying to inject, to try to deal with the different
things we have to deal with, whether you are dealing with matters of civic
services or with matters of immigration, and any other thing that our
department has to deliver as a service, either to South Africans or to
foreigners who seek legally to enter our country. And dealing with
corruption is one of those things, so that we ensure that the problems
caused by those who enter our country for wrongful purposes are dealt with
by putting in place proper systems, but on the other hand by ensuring that
the type of public servant that works in the Department of Home Affairs is
not the public servant who was employed in the Department of Home Affairs
of Jan van Riebeeck and Dr Simon van der Stel … [Laughter.] … but a new
type of public servant who works for the new government that came into
power during the previous decade.

The question was raised about civil society. I would want to bring this to
the attention of hon members. The principal Act made provision for nine
civil society nongovernmental representatives. There has not been a drastic
reduction in the amending Bill, because it says that the Minister will
appoint one person from labour, which, as we know, is a very large
constituency, and will further make provision for one appointment from
business, which is also a very large constituency, and five other
representatives of civil society, selected on the basis of particular
interests that they represent and which have a bearing on our immigration.
To that extent we do not think that there is a major problem, because you
may select one hundred, only to find that they represent the minority in
society. The issue is not so much to have a huge advisory board, but to
have an effective and representative advisory board. It does not matter how
many or how few they may be.

I would also want to thank the hon Tlhagale for his comments on
infrastructure. As hon members know, we are looking at various things which
relate to our ports of entry and immigration. These would include putting
up IT infrastructure at our ports of entry. That IT infrastructure would
include quite advanced IT, also at refugee centres, to enable us to record
the people who enter our country and the people who leave our country. We
would have to train our staff that work in those centres, and we would also
have to combat corruption at those centres, working alongside the state
security agencies.

And so we hope that with all these mechanisms, we will be able to deal with
problems of corruption, and ensure that the infrastructure we put up is
quite good and effective infrastructure, to enable us in the next few years
to improve drastically on the types of services that we offer to those who
seek to enter our country, whether as refugees, or to seek employment, or
coming here on holiday. But the infrastructure must also enable us to
apprehend those who unlawfully enter our country and to deal with them
according to the laws of the country.

But as I said earlier, the most important thing for us is to ensure that
the immigration legislation we introduce is friendly towards the African
people from the SADC region, as well as from the African continent as a
whole. Therefore, the messages that we communicate must be that the
immigration legislation we are introducing is designed along positive
lines.

There are other things in the principal Act to which we would still want to
come back and deal with, some of which relate to the fact that a person of
my complexion, walking along the road in Johannesburg … [Laughter.] … can
be stopped and taken to Lindele. The security agencies will not make the
assumption that I am from Limpopo or from northern KwaZulu-Natal. They will
look at me once and think that I am from Ivory Coast or Nigeria or so.
[Laughter.] These are some of the problems that we still need to deal with,
first in the legislation, but also with regard to our immigration officers.
We must train them to be able to think carefully about these things.

There are other challenges posed by children who are being trafficked into
various countries, of which South Africa is a target, for sexual
exploitation or other reasons. When those children are taken away from
their original countries, their travel documents and other documents are
taken away by the thugs that are transporting them into South Africa. When
you apprehend those children, they have no documents whatsoever. And the
child will be petrified to tell you, no, I was brought into this country by
a person I don’t know. This person instructed me never to expose them, to
disclose who they are, and I have no documents.

Now, if you were told that information, you would then be able to deal with
that child in a particular fashion, not as a person who broke the law
willingly. And so these are all the types of things and programmes that we
are still trying to put together in order to have a proper immigration
regime, to have a proper system of dealing with foreigners who come into
our country for all manner of reasons. Thank you very much, Chairperson and
hon members. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 15:08.

                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          WEDNESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2004



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 26676 of
              16 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         26 August 2004.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


     (1)    Financial Services Ombud Schemes Bill, 2004 and Securities
         Services Bill, 2004, submitted by the Minister of Finance on 15
         July 2004. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the
         Select Committee on Finance.


     (2)    Petroleum Products Amendment Bill, 2004, submitted by the
         Minister of Minerals and Energy on 16 August 2004. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy and the Select
         Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.

National Council of Provinces

1.    Messages from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 25 August 2004 and
         transmitted for concurrence:


         (i)     National Energy Regulator Bill [B 9B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) (introduced as Energy Regulator Bill [B 9 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75)

         The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Economic and
         Foreign Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

     The referral of the following papers on 24 August 2004 to the Select
     Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and
     report, replaces the incorrect referral to the Select Committee on
     Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Monitoring Committee
     on the Improvement of the Quality of Life and Status of Women for
     consideration and report on 5 August 2004:


     (a)    Decisions of the 1999 Beijing Congress - Universal Postal Union
         (Final Text of the Acts signed at Beijing), tabled in terms of
         section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Decisions of the 1999 Beijing
         Congress - Universal Postal Union.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Botanical Institute for
     2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
     Statements for 2003-2004.

2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela National Museum
     for 2002-2003, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2002-2003.

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     Report and Financial Statements of the National Research Foundation
     (NRF) for 2003-2004, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
     Financial Statements for 2003-2004.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     Notice received from the MEC for Housing, Local Government and
     Traditional Affairs in the Eastern Cape Province regarding the
     intervention in the King Sabata Dalindyebo Municipality, in terms of
     section 139(1)(a), (b) and (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of
     South Africa, 1996 (Act No 108 of 1996).

     The notice is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
     Administration for consideration and report.




COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Social Services on the Immigration
     Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 25
     August 2004:

         The Select Committee on Social Services, having considered the
         subject of the Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] (National
         Assembly - sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to
         the Bill.

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - Insert No 2 from "ATC0825e"

                          THURSDAY, 26 AUGUST 2004


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (i)     Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill [B 15 -
              2004] (National Assembly - sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of
              its introduction published in Government Gazette No 26676 of
              16 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         26 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.


     (2)    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


         (i)     Petroleum Products Amendment Bill [B 16 - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              26648 of 4 August 2004.]

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Minerals
         and Energy of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 27 August 2004.

         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Bill passed by Houses - to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 August 2004:


         (i)     Immigration Amendment Bill [B 11B - 2004] (National
              Assembly - sec 75)


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     Report of the Secretary to Parliament for 2003.

2.    The Minister of Labour


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector Education
         and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 126-
         2004].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Bank Sector Education and
         Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 39-
         2004].

     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Insurance Sector
         Education and Training Authority for 2003-2004, including the
         Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2003-
         2004 [RP 50-2004].

     (d)    Report and Financial Statements of the National Productivity
         Institute 2003-2004, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2003-2004 [RP 140-2004].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     Statement from the MEC for Local Government, Housing and Traditional
     Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal regarding the investigation into the
     Ntambanana Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal in terms of section 106(3) of
     the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

     The statement is referred to the Select Committee on Local Government
     and Administration.


