---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol39 - TUESDAY 13 JUNE 1972'
layout: debate
year: 1972
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 13TH JUNE, 1972</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1972-06-13T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<p><b>QUESTIONS</b> (see &#x201C;QUESTIONS AND REPLIES&#x201D;).</p>

<debateSection name="#general_law_amendment_bill">

<heading><span class="col_9239-9240" refersTo="page_1575"/>GENERAL LAW AMENDMENT BILL</heading>

<summary>(Consideration of Senate amendment)</summary>

<p>Amendment in clause 4 put and agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#retirement_of_deputy_secretary_to_the_house_of_assembly">

<heading>RETIREMENT OF DEPUTY SECRETARY TO THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY (MR. W. P. L. VAN ZYL).</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, since we have now reached the end of this Session, you will allow me to express a few words of thanks to the Chair. A session is always tiring, but we should like to give you the assurance that we as members of the House have very great appreciation for the way in which the Chair has at all times set an example to this House. We should like to wish you a very pleasant rest.</p>

<p>You will also allow me, Sir, since this is the first Session during which the Secretary has acted in that capacity, to convey to him our sincere thanks for the exceptional way in which he has at all times performed his duties in the best tradition of this House, and for the way in which members on both sides of the House have at all times received only the best service from him.</p>

<p>Then, Sir, you will also allow me, since you have already announced that the Deputy Secretary, Mr. W. P. L. van Zyl, is retiring from the service of the House owing to ill-health, to address a few words of appreciation to him. The details of Mr. Van Zyl&#x2019;s service are briefly as follows: After he had been appointed to the staff of the House of Assembly in a temporary capacity on 3rd January, 1935, he was appointed in a permanent capacity on 16th November, 1937. On 1st April, 1946, he was appointed as Chief Translator, and on 1st August, 1959, as Assistant Secretary. On 1st September, 1971, he was promoted to the post of Deputy Secretary, which post he still occupies at present. As a translator, and particularly during the approximately 13 years for which he served as Chief Translator, he not only left his mark on the official documents of the House of As sembly, but also on our legal terminology, and specifically the terminology used in our laws. In addition he played a major role in the translation into English of <i>Van Riebeeck&#x2019;s Journal,</i> which was published by the Van Riebeeck Society during the Van Riebeeck Festival in 1952.</p>

<p>At the Table his knack of forming an objective opinion on a matter and stating his view of it clearly and unemotionally always made a great impression on all those who came into contact with him. Above all, his sense of humour, his friendliness and his gift for dealing with people will cause everyone at present associated with the House of Assembly to regret having to take leave of him.</p>

<p>We hear, Sir, that Mr. Van Zyl is going to retire to the town of his birth, Clan- william. He is a person who loves that part of the world, and particularly the Cedarberg mountains. I am convinced, Sir, that I am speaking on behalf of all members of the House when I wish Mr. Van Zyl a complete recovery, as well as a pleasant retirement.</p>

<p>To you, and the Chair, and the officials of the House, we express our most sincere thanks as members of this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to associate ourselves with the words that have come from the hon. the Prime Minister, the words of thanks to you, Sir, and the officials who sit in front of you. As you know, Sir, we have a particular interest in the Speaker as the guardian of the minority interests in this House. Therefore we view thanks to you in a manner peculiar to ourselves.</p>

<p>We should like to associate ourselves also with the good wishes that go to Mr. Van Zyl on his retirement. Some of us on this side of the House remember him as a hardworking student at the University of Cape Town who, so far as I know, took part in no demonstrations! He was, however, known for his sense of humour and his devotedness to his work. During his period in the service of this House, as the hon. the Prime Minister has indicated, he has made a very real contribution to the legal background of South Africa in the accurate manner in which the Statutes which have been before us have appeared when they have been through his hands. During the <span class="col_9241-9242" refersTo="page_1576"/>time that he has been at the Table, he was in charge of questions and as such he came into close contact with members. I must say that he always exhibited the greatest helpfulness and that sense of humour which was so essential to good relations with us. In fact, one feels that we have been very fortunate in the standard of man who has served us at the Table of this House. During the short period in which he was Assistant Secretary, Mr. Van Zyl showed that he more than measured up to that standard. With that promise in mind, we view his early retirement with the greatest regret and we wish to be associated with every good wish to him for a speedy recovery and, at all events, for a pleasant retirement in the champagne air of Clan- william.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from>Mrs. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, as the smallest minority in this House, I should like to associate myself with the words of the Leader of the Official Opposition and to say how grateful I am to you for your protection and to the Secretary of the House for his unfailing good-humoured help to me.</p>

<p>To Mr. Van Zyl, who has over the years when I have been rather an inquisitive puter of questions in this House, always assisted and guided me where necessary, I should like to say that I wish him and Mrs. Van Zyl very well in his retirement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>From the Chair I, too, should very much like to avail myself of this opportunity to express my appreciation for the services rendered to the House of Assembly by Mr. Van Zyl. He is a person who has been singularly devoted to his work. He is accurate in everything he does. Whenever one entrusts work to Mr. Van Zyl, one may rest assured that one will get good service from him and will receive a faultless piece of work from him.</p>

<p>&#x2020;He has been a devoted official. He has served Parliament with distinction. He deserves our gratitude for what he has done. As has been said before, we are exceptionally fortunate that we have men of this calibre to serve Parliament. They are outstanding, they are devoted and they are completely honest. It is a pleasure for me to be associated with them. I also wish to thank the Secretary&#x2014;this was his first session as Secretary&#x2014;for his co-operation and devotion to duty. Everybody concerned with the working of Parliament I can only commend and say that I am thankful and grateful to be associated with men like these.</p>

<p>*I am very grateful. On behalf of my colleagues I also thank the hon. the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and all the parties in this House for their friendly co-operation and assistance. We found the work pleasant. It was a joy to us to be able to serve you, and I am sure my colleagues share my sentiments when I say that there is no better Parliament in the entire world than the South African Parliament.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#members">

<from>* <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear!</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#retirement_of_controller_and_auditor-general">

<heading>RETIREMENT OF CONTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL</heading>

<summary>(Mr. H. R. P. A. Kotzenberg)</summary>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, with your leave I should like to inform the House that the Controller and Auditor-General, Mr. H. R. P. A. Kotzenberg, has announced his intention of retiring from his post on 31st August, 1972.</p>

<p>Mr. Kotzenberg began his career in 1929 in the then Department of Lands. After four years he was transferred to the Treasury where he worked until 1936. In that year he transferred to the Department of Foreign Affairs, and served in Kenya for three years. After further periods of office in the then existing office of the Controller of Foodstuffs, Mr. Kotzenberg was appointed senior trade commissioner in London in 1950. In 1952 he became Undersecretary in the Department of Nutrition, in 1955 Deputy Secretary of Commerce and Industry, and in 1958 he became head of this Department. He vacated this post and numerous statutory offices which he had also held in the meantime when he reached the highest rung of the ladder, <i>viz.</i> his appointment as Controller and Auditor- General on 1st February, 1968.</p>

<p><span class="col_9243-9244" refersTo="page_1577"/>The wide range of experience which Mr. Kotzenberg acquired in his career, together with his exceptional personal gifts, prepared him pre-eminently for this important office. On behalf of the Government, and in my personal capacity as well, I want to thank Mr. Kotzenberg for his long and loyal service to the State. He has been a credit to the fine traditions of this office. I think I may speak on behalf of the entire House, and in a special sense on behalf of the Select Committee on Public Accounts, when we wish him and Mrs. Kotzenberg many more years of health and prosperity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#emdin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. EMDIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side should like to associate ourselves with the words of tribute paid by the hon. the Minister of Finance to the Controller and Auditor-General. For some three years we on the Select Committee on Public Accounts have had the help and guidance and knowledge which Mr. Kotzenberg acquired over many, many years of long service to South Africa. We shall regret his going and we wish him well for the future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. C. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the Select Committee on Public Accounts for three out of the four sessions in which Mr. Kotzenberg acted as Controller and Auditor-General, it gives me great pleasure that you. Sir, have afforded me the opportunity of paying a few words of tribute to him. Through his long service to the State Mr. Kotzenberg proved himself to be extremely well qualified for this post. He was very well acquainted with the Departments, and he distinguished himself by keeping a particularly watchful eye on the expenditure of State funds. He always took great pains to ensure that the resolutions passed by this Parliament were put into effect by all the different Government departments. In addition, he also made it his task to see to it that, as far as he had any say in the matter, the officials of the State were adequately remunerated so that the State would be able to attract only the best talents for its particular work. On behalf of the Select Committee we want to thank him very much for his outstanding services, for his assistance and accommodating attitude towards the Select Committee. We wish him and Mrs. Kotzenberg many more years of happiness and prosperity.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, before moving the adjournment of the House, I want to announce that a proclamation will be issued summoning Parliament to meet again on 2nd February, 1973.</p>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1972-06-13T14:35:00">2.35 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_dropped">

<heading>BUSINESS DROPPED</heading>

<p>At the prorogation of Parliament on 13th June, 1972, the following matters had not been disposed of and consequently dropped:</p>

<p>Orders of the Day:</p>

<ol>

<li>1. Second Reading,&#x2014;Designation of Broadcasting Stations Bill [A.B. 73-&#x2019;72]&#x2014; (Minister of National Education).</li>

<li>2. Second Reading,&#x2014;Sea Fisheries Amendment Bill [A.B. 96&#x2014;&#x2019;72]&#x2014;(Deputy Minister of Economic Affairs).</li>

<li>3. Consideration of Fourth Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs (page 261)&#x2014;(Minister of Bantu Administration and Development).</li>

<li>4. Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Railways and Harbours [S.C. 2&#x2014;&#x2019;72]&#x2014;(Minister of Transport).</li>

<li>5. Consideration of amended Second Report and Fourth Report of Select Committee on Public Accounts [S.C. 1&#x2014;&#x2019;72]&#x2014;(Minister of Finance).</li>

<li>6. Consideration of Report of Select Committee on Charges by Member [S.C. 3&#x2014;&#x2019;72]&#x2014;(Mr. J. W. Rall).</li>

</ol>

<p><b>PROCLAMATION</b></p>

<p>By the State President of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>Prorogation and Summoning of Parliament.</p>

<p>UNDER and by virtue of the power and authority vested in meby section <i>twenty-five</i> of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday,the Second day of February, 1973, and I declare that the FourthSession of the Fourth Parliament of the Republic of South Africawill commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town on this Thirteenth day of June, One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-two.</p>

<p>J. J. FOUCH&#x00C9;,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council.</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

<p>No. 151, 1972.]</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appendix">

<heading><span class="col_I01" refersTo="page_1580"/>APPENDIX</heading>

<debateSection name="#index_to_speeches">

<heading>INDEX TO SPEECHES</heading>

<p>Abbreviations&#x2014;(R.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Reading&#x201D;; (C.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Committee&#x201D;; (A.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Amendment&#x201D;; S.C.&#x2014;&#x201C;Select Committee&#x201D;.</p>

<p><b>AUCAMP, Mr. P. L. S. (Bloemfontein East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1730.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.). 1854; (3R.), 2201.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5268; Health, 7243; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8599.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BADENHORST, Mr. P. J. (Oudtshoorn)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Tourism, 5879; (3R.), 8821.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANDS, Mr G. J. (Umhlatuzana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3181; (C), 3345.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. A. L. (Sea Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2280.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4805, 4810; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5335; Agriculture, 5713; Bantu Administration and Development, 6897; Public Works, 7436.</li>

<li>Wine, Other Fermented Beverages and Spirits (A.) (2R.), 7938.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. D. du P. (Bezuidenhout)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2321, 2324, 2326&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2960.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4934; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5210, 5301; Foreign Affairs, 6454, 6509; Bantu Administration and Development, 6824; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8438, 8446; (3R.), 8919.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5007; (C.), 5073&#x2013;4, 5082&#x2013;4, 5100.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 775.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2182.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BAXTER, Mr. D. D. (Constantia)&#x2014;&#x2013;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1193.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1814.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2266, 2400.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3131.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4049, 4072.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4518; (C), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Treasury, etc., 5464, 5477; Agriculture, 5742; Tourism, 5876; Labour, 6628; Commerce and Industries, 7480; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7778; Planning and Statistics, 8315.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (C.), 6449.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8985.</li>

<li><span class="col_I2" refersTo="page_1581"/>Finance (C.), 9013.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (A.) (C.), 9078.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 365.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3606.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BODENSTEIN, Dr. P. (Rustenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3190; (C.), 3325, 3367.</li>

<li>Dental Mechanicians (A.) (2R.), 3924.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 4012.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4910, 4914; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6661; Planning and Statistics, 8305.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (C.), 9235.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. G. F. (Ermelo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Deeds Registries (A.) (2R.), 465.</li>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (C.), 1493.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C), 2675.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5305; Provincial Administrations, 5490; Agriculture, 5676; Forestry, 6408; Justice and Prisons, 7098.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (C.), 6154, 6180.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 6198.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7960.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. H. J. (Aliwal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 516; (C.), 843; (3R.), 2442.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2839; (3R.), 2898.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5571; Forestry, 6425; Bantu Administration and Development, 6814; Police, 7597; Planning and Statistics, 8263.</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8038.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. L. J. (Bethlehem)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1219.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C), 3367.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 3492.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4069.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (G), 6109.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5389; Agriculture, 5658; Tourism, 5895; Sport and Recreation, 6253.</li>

<li>Weather Modification Control (2R.), 8170.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. M. C. (Roodepoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Bantu Administration and Development and of Bantu Education</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2328&#x2013;31, 2333&#x2013;47.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (3R.), 2923.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6739, 6864, 6942, 8643; Bantu Education, 6959; (3R.), 8863.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 292.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3052.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I3" refersTo="page_1582"/><b>BOTHA, the Hon. P. W. (George)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Defence</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Defence (A.) (2R.), 2133, 2247; (C.), 7969, 7983, 7988; (3R.), 8062, 8063.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2318.</li>

<li>Land Titles (Division of George) Adjustment (Hybrid) (2R.), 2611.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4670; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Defence, 5783, 5827, 5859; Public Works, 7431.</li>

<li>Armaments Development and Production (A.) (2R.), 7991, 8006; (C), 8064.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1389.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. R. F. (Wonderboom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5346.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. S. P. (Soutpansberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Water Affairs and of Forestry</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2403.</li>

<li>Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) (A.) (2R.), 4414, 4421; (C.), 4423.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 6086, 6103; (C.), 6107, 6112. 6115.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 6189, 6201; (C.), 6234, 6237, 6239.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6330, 6386; Forestry, 6435, 6450.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (C.), 6450.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3567.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTMA, Mr. M. C. (Omaruru)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Commerce and Industries, 7534.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRANDT, Dr. J. W. (Etosha)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3905.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (C.). 5078, 5081, 5124.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5695; Defence, 5850; Forestry, 6431; Mines, 7182.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5948.</li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5979.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 623.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3107.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRONKHORST, Brig. H. J. (North Rand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Civil Aviation Offences (2R.), 1762; (C.), 1827, 1829, 1833.</li>

<li>Defence (A.) (2R.), 2239; (C.), 7968, 7976.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2318.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2843.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4042.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4482.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 5766; Health, 7241; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7730.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I4" refersTo="page_1583"/><b>CADMAN, Mr. R. M. (Zululand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2319, 2353.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3799.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4745; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Prime Minister, 5246; Agriculture, 5724, 5734; Indian Affairs, 6534, 6536; Bantu Administration and Development, 6832; Justice and Prisons, 7084; Commerce and Industries, 7531; Immigration, 7816, 7845; (3R.), 8826.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5929.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 241.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 737.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3025.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Personal Explanation, 5041.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CILLI&#x00C9;, Mr. H. van Z. (Port Elizabeth Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (3R.), 2226.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2261.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3259; (C.), 3355.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4626; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Sport and Recreation, 6250; Bantu Administration and Development, 6910; Commerce and Industries, 7537; Planning and Statistics, 8260; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8461.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETSEE, Mr. H. J. (Bloemfontein West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 507.</li>

<li>Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation (C.), 546.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1804, 1813.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2814, 2818, 2848.</li>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (G), 4292.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5160; Justice and Prisons, 7081; Police, 7617.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (2R.), 6059; (C.), 6161, 6167, 6186.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 926.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1432.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1937.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3084.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, the Hon. B. (Vereeniging)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>[Minister of Community Development and of Public Works</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2384&#x2013;97.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4255, 4329, 8658, 8666; (C), 9125&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 4336, 4343; (C), 4424.</li>

<li>Professional Engineers&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 4345&#x2013;6; (C), 4425.</li>

<li><span class="col_I5" refersTo="page_1584"/>Church Square, Pretoria, Development (2R.), 4346, 4429; (C.), 4452&#x2013;9, (3R.), 4977, 4987.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4598; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Community Development, 7273, 7338, 7403; Public Works, 7461.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Urban Development, Appointment of, 16</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, Mr. S. F. (Karas)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (C.), 5071, 5088.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5618.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (2R.), 5969.</li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (3R.), 6142.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRUYWAGEN, Mr. W. A. (Germiston)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Community Development (A.), (2R.), 4269.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6941; Community Development, 7286; Public Works, 7412; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7727.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2539.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3019.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEACON, Mr. W. H. D. (Albany)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 557; (C), 982.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 1543, 2583; (C.), 2674, 2701, 2716, 2724, 2743, 2993, 3503, 3507.</li>

<li>The Eastern Province Guardian Loan and Investment Company Amendment, Indemnity and Further Powers Further Amendment (Private) (2R.), 1872.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2333.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (2R.), 2604.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5567, 5652; Defence, 5810; Water Affairs, 6310; Forestry, 6416; Public Works, 7429; Immigration, 7822; Planning and Statistics, 8340.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (C.), 6107.</li>

<li>Rhodes University (Private) (A.) (2R.), 8164.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1983.</li>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3539.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8100.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE JAGER, Mr. P. R. (Mayfair)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3868.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6853; Community Development, 7310.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE VILLIERS, Mr. I. F. A (Von Brandis)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1210.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2376, 2377&#x2013;9, 2397, 2409&#x2013;11.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3241; (C), 3321.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4504; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Inland Revenue, 5499, 5504; Agriculture, 5661; Foreign Affairs, 6465, 6514; Mines, 7168; Commerce and Industries, 7517; Information, 7679; (3R.), 8754.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I6" refersTo="page_1585"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 81.</li>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 596.</li>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1111.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2146.</li>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2495.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE WET, Dr. the Hon. C. (Johannesburg West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Mines and of Health</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2374&#x2013;83.</li>

<li>Mines, Works and Minerals in S.W.A. (A.) (2R.), 2653; 4146; (C), 4216, 4217; (3R.), 4283.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3900, 3906.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (A.) (2R.), 3907, 3912; (C.), 4149&#x2013;50.</li>

<li>Dental Mechanicians (A.) (2R.), 3915, 3933; (C.), 4153&#x2013;4, 4157.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3938, 3952; (C), 4157&#x2013;63.</li>

<li>Nursing (A.) (2R.), 4163, 4182; (C), 4218, 4219, 4220, 4223, 4224, 4228.</li>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (2R.), 4229, 4251; (C.), 4287, 4289, 4293&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4969; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Mines, 7153, 7194; Health, 7254, 8644.</li>

<li>Chiropractors (A), (2R.), 9170, 9172.</li>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation Laws (A.) (2R.), 9173, 9177.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (Cl 9233.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 612.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1443.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE WET, Mr. M. W. (Welkom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1705.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6625; Immigration, 7842.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 593.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DIEDERICHS, Dr. the Hon. N. (Losberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Finance</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 949, 1470; (3R.), 1672.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 2256, 2259; (C), 2263, 2265&#x2013;6, 2269.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4363, 5041; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Treasury, etc., 5484; Provincial Administrations, 5492; Customs and Excise, 5505; Amendments to Votes, 8632; (3R.), 9037.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (2R.), 6446.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8691, 8695; (C.), 9010, 9015.</li>

<li>Unauthorized Expenditure (2R.), 8717.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8979, 8987.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8990, 9003; (C.), 9066.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 41.</li>

<li>Recommittal of Reports of S.C. on Public Accounts. 5690.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I7" refersTo="page_1586"/>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Retirement of Controller and Auditor- General, 9242.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, the Hon. A. H. (Windhoek)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Finance and of Economic Affairs</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1558.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (G), 2263&#x2013;4, 2266&#x2013;8, 2272&#x2013;3, 2279, 2285, 2292&#x2013;4, 2302.</li>

<li>Provincial Finance and Audit (2R.), 3467.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 3791, 3794; (C), 3850.</li>

<li>Provincial Licence Duties (2R.), 4185.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Mint, 5496; Inland Revenue, 5502, 5504; Audit, 5512; Commerce and Industries, 7540.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 8190.</li>

<li>Hire-Purchase (A.) (2R.), 8191.</li>

<li>Explosives (A.) (2R.), 8193.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 8194&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Prevention and Combating of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (A.) (2R.), 8655.</li>

<li>Customs and Excise (A.) (2R.), 9006.</li>

<li>Finance (C.), 9012.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (A.) (2R.), 9016, 9073; (C.), 9080.</li>

<li>Business Names (A.) (2R.), 9210.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 127</li>

<li>Select Committee on charges by Mr. J. W. E. Wiley, M.P. for Simons- town, appointment of, 1640.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2549.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3095.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. G. C. (Kempton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C), 3390.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4039.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6719; Bantu Administration and Development, 6920.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. G. F. C. (Heilbron)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety, (2R.), 1718.</li>

<li>Appropriation (G), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5697.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1975.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. P. T. C. (Lydenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1576, 1642.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4632; (G), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Agriculture, 5580.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU TOIT, Mr. J. P. (Vryburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (G), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5704.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>EMDIN, Mr. S. (Parktown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 957, 1135; (3R.), 1549.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 2257; (G), 2261, 2263&#x2013;4, 2267, 2271, 2277, 2285, 2290, 2292, 2398.</li>

<li><span class="col_I8" refersTo="page_1587"/>Provincial Finance and Audit (2R.), 3470.</li>

<li>Provincial Licence Duties (2R.), 4185.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4407, 4485; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5156, Treasury, etc., 5456, 5470; Inland Revenue, 5496; Customs and Excise, 5505; Commerce and Industries, 7466, 7552, 8645; (3R.), 8839.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 8191.</li>

<li>Hire-Purchase (A.) (2R.), 8193.</li>

<li>Explosives (A.) (2R.), 8194.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 8195.</li>

<li>Prevention and Combating of Pollution of the Sea by Oil (A.) (2R.), 8657.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8691; (C), 9011.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8982.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8998; (C.), 9066.</li>

<li>Customs and Excise (A.) (2R.), 9008.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (A.) (2R.), 9026.</li>

<li>Business Names (A.) (2R.), 9211.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 61.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Retirement of Controller and Auditor- General, 9243.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ENGELBRECHT, Mr. J. J. (Algoa)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2964.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3251.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6500; Bantu Administration and Development, 6858; Bantu Education, 6975; Community Development, 7303; Commerce and Industries, 7556; National Education, 7894; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8540.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 892.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2529.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ERASMUS, Mr. A. S. D. (Pietersburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1865, 2009.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (3R.), 3521.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4546; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Treasury, etc., 5459; Foreign Affairs, 6476; Commerce and Industries, 7483.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8984.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 9001.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 146.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FISHER, Dr. E. L. (Rosettenville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2374&#x2013;6, 2379&#x2013;83.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3903.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (A.) (2R.), 3908; (C), 4149.</li>

<li>Dental Mechanicians (A.) (2R.), 3920; (C.), 4152.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3942; (C.), 4158&#x2013;9, 4161&#x2013;3.</li>

<li><span class="col_I9" refersTo="page_1588"/>Mines, Works and Minerals in S.W.A. (A.) (2R.), 4143; (C.), 4216, 4217.</li>

<li>Nursing (A.) (2R.), 4174; (C); 4221, 4226, 4228.</li>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (2R.), 4236; (C.), 4289, 4294, 4297.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (C.), 6448.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6729; Bantu Administration and Development, 6923; Mines, 7150; Health, 7215.</li>

<li>Chiropractors (A.) (2R.), 9171.</li>

<li>Pneumoconiosis Compensation Laws (A.) (2R.), 9176.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 9232.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 580.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1410.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, First Report of, 3670.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FOURIE, Mr. A. (Turffontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3376.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3871; (C), 4135.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4873; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Indian Affairs, 6577; Bantu Administration and Development, 6881, 6883; Bantu Education, 6987; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7724.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 8683; (C), 9141.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3631.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GERDENER, the Hon. T. J. A. (Klip River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of the Interior</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1298.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (3R.), 3684.</li>

<li>Provincial Affairs (2R.), 3770, 3786.</li>

<li>Age of Majority (2R.), 4436, 4440; (C.), 4465; (3R.), 4992, 4994.</li>

<li>Public Service (A.) (2R.), 6116, 6118.</li>

<li>Admission of Persons to the Republic Regulation (Consolidation) (2R.), 7150.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8482, 8564, 8613, 8617, 8624, 8626.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GRAAFF, Sir de V., M.B.E. (Rondebosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Leader of the Opposition</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4831; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5129, 5149, 5202, 5218, 5288, 5362; (3R.), 8718.</li>

<li>Security Intelligence and State Security Council (2R.), 7930; (C.), 8061.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 16, 412.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 729.</li>

<li>Select Committee on charges by Mr. J. W. E. Wiley, M.P. for Simonstown, appointment of, 1642.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Alleged Statement i c.w. Agliotti case), 4451.</li>

</ul></li>

<li><span class="col_I10" refersTo="page_1589"/>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Retirement of Deputy Secretary to House of Assembly, 9240.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GREYLING, Mr. J. C. (Carletonville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1339.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (3R.), 1892.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3422.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4925; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5250; Defence, 5813; Bantu Administration and Development, 6934; Mines, 7176, 7192; National Education, 8209.</li>

<li>Weather Modification Control (3R.), 8294.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Half-hour adjournment (Students Publication <i>Wils Student</i>), 6215.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GROBLER, Mr. M. S. F. (Marico)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Mines, Works and Minerals in S.W.A. (A.) (3R.), 4280.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4650; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5732; Bantu Administration and Development, 6900; Planning and Statistics, 8323.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GROBLER, Mr. W. S. J. (Springs)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Nursing (A.) (2R.), 4179.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6512; Labour, 6617; Mines, 7160; Commerce and Industries, 7567, 7569; Immigration, 7833; National Education, 8134.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HARTZENBERG, Dr. F. (Lichtenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Prime Minister, 5214; Agriculture, 5614; (3R.), 8906.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1926.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2178.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HAYWARD, Mr. S. A. S. (Graaff-Reinet)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 711.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C), 2745.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.). 3444.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5588.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7946.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1599.</li>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3584.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HENNING, Mr. J. M. (Vanderbijlpark)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3330. 3426.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (3R.). 4099.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4892; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6610, 6674; Commerce and Industries, 7559; Immigration, 7825.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 9233.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 231.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HERMAN, Mr. F. (Potgietersrus)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Suppression of Communism (A.) (2R.), 459.</li>

<li><span class="col_I11" refersTo="page_1590"/>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Treasury, etc., 5474; Agriculture, 5596; Foreign Affairs, 6506; Bantu Administration and Development, 6820; Justice and Prisons, 7011; Police, 7611.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 771.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HEUNIS, Mr. J. C. (False Bay)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Insolvency (A) (2R.), 473.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1236.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 1533; (C.), 2671, 2685, 2704, 2999. 3497.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2357.</li>

<li>Appropriation (3R.), 8848.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 760.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HICKMAN, Mr. T. (Maitland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1802.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1860; (C.), 2113.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2058; (C), 2123, 2126.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2363.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3211; (C.), 3419.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4064.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4704; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Labour, 6664; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8421.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 8181; (C.), 8300 <i>et seq;</i> (3R.), 8377.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 9139.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 175.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3042.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOON, Mr. J. H. (Kuruman)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5655; Sport and Recreation, 6261; Planning and Statistics, 8336; (3R.), 8913.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Development of St Croix as Ore Harbour, 1105.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOPEWELL, Mr. A. (Pinetown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1154.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1790.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C), 2269, 2279, 2292, 2408.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3850.</li>

<li>Mines, Works and Minerals in S.W.A. (A.) (2R.), 3851.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4554; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6862; Commerce and Industries, 7486.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (2R.), 6447.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 8893.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HORN, Mr. J. W. L. (Prieska)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3358, 3417.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6357.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I12" refersTo="page_1591"/><b>HOURQUEBIE, Mr. R. G. L. (Musgrave)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Suppression of Communism (A.) (2R.X 460.</li>

<li>Insolvency (A.) (2R.), 475; (C.), 549, 552.</li>

<li>Animals Protection (A.) (C.), 542.</li>

<li>Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation (3R.), 625.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 1514; (C.), 2676, 2698, 2703, 2714, 2126, 2736, 3490&#x2013;3, 3500, 3505; (3R.). 3749.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C), 2269, 2286, 2358, 2367, 2385.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4323, 8661; (C.), 9124&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Professional Engineers&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 4346.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4483.</li>

<li>Church Square, Pretoria, Development Bill (3R.), 4977.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6504; Justice and Prisons, 7015, 7138; Community Development, 7334, 7335, 7400.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 764.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HUGHES, Mr. T. G. (Transkei)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 485; (C.), 1016, 1034, 1035, 1042&#x2013;4, 1045, 1059; (3R.), 2416.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 660; (C.), 1080, 2568.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 2010; (C.), 2103; (3R.), 2203.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2294, 2327, 2330, 2337, 2346, 2350, 2354.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 2625; (C.), 2771, 2789, 2800, 2803&#x2013;4, 2812, 2817, 2824, 2830, 2844, 2851; (3R.), 2891.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2862; (C.), 3261, 3265; (3R.), 3267.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4479.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister. 5263, 5270; Transport, 5435; Bantu Administration and Development, 6750, 6936, 8643; Agriculture, 8636&#x2013;40.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 9119.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence. 262.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1920.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands. 3013.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Personal Explanation, 8892.</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, First Report of, 3656; Third Report of, 8007; Fifth Report, 9068.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JACOBS, Dr. G. F., O.B.E. (Hillbrow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1226, 1227.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4786; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Prime Minister, 5179, 5221; Tourism, 5891; Foreign Affairs, 6490, 6520; Labour, 6691, 6698; Bantu Administration and Development, 6782; Planning and Statistics, 8241.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I13" refersTo="page_1592"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 118.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1931.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JANSON, Mr. T. N. H. (Witbank)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4951; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Health, 7224; Public Works, 7426, 7443; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8588; (3R.), 8746.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 354.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JURGENS, Dr. J. C. (Geduld)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3944; (C.), 4161.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Immigration, 7820.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KEYTER, Mr. H. C. A. (Ladybrand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 1511.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture 5649.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KINGWILL, Mr. W. G. (Walmer)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 712.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2307.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3393.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5542, 5593, 8635, 8641; Water Affairs, 6325; Bantu Administration and Development, 6855; Health, 7234; Community Development, 7319; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8410.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 8068.</li>

<li>Land Survey (A.) (2R.), 8071.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1088.</li>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3550.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOORNHOF, Dr. the Hon. P. G. J. (Primrose)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Administration and Education</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 477, 636; (C.), 816, 830, 841, 985, 1010, 1015, 1017, 1019, 1026, 1028, 1031, 1033&#x2013;35, 1038, 1043&#x2013;4, 1050, 1069; (3R.), 2453.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 654, 682; (C.), 1074, 1077, 1080, 1084, 2565, 2571&#x2013;5; (3R.), 2667.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2330, 2347.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2853, 2977; (C.), 3262&#x2013;5; (3R.), 3271.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5152; Bantu Administration and Development, 6762, 6828, 6913; Bantu Education, 6990.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 273.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1948.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Mr. S. F. (Parow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1695; (C.), 1778, 1816.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3159.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 4339.</li>

<li><span class="col_I14" refersTo="page_1593"/>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5371; Community Development, 7293, 7330; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8393; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8506, 8625.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 9132; (3R.), 9216.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Dr. W. D. (Odendaalsrus)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1183.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.), (2R.), 2599.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4718; (C.), <i>Votes</i> Prime Minister, 5176; Agriculture, 5686; Defence, 5816.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1989.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KRUGER, Mr. J. T. (Prinshof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2353&#x2013;4, 2362.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4733; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7018; (3R.), 8759.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 251.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 741.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Alleged Statement i.c.w. Agliotti case), 4446.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LANGLEY, Mr. T. (Waterkloof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5168.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 780.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE GRANGE, Mr. L. (Potchefstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2782, 2784.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 3737.</li>

<li>Marriage (A.) (2R.), 3764.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 5769; Sport and Recreation, 6274; Bantu Administration and Development, 6893; Justice and Prisons, 7090.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 9095.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 163.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3033.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. F. J. (Brakpan)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4622; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Police, 7629; (3R.), 8976.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. F. J. (Hercules)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2939.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4051, 4054.</li>

<li>Church Square, Pretoria, Development Bill (3R.), 4984.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6702; Bantu Education, 6969; Community Development, 7388; National Education, 8148; Planning and Statistics, 8312.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. J. P. C. (Vryheid)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Indian Affairs, 6561; National Education, 8127; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8526, 8561, 8617.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I15" refersTo="page_1594"/><b>LOOTS, the Hon. J. J. (Queenstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Planning, of Coloured Affairs, of Rehoboth Affairs and of Statistics</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2408.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A) (C.), 2729.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 4468, 5030 (C.), 5064&#x2013;8, 5073, 5075, 5077, 5081&#x2013;5, 5089, 5095, 5098, 5100&#x2013;10, 5116&#x2013;28, 5964; (3R.), 6043, 6047.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (2R.), 5965, 5972; (C.), 6006 <i>et seq.</i>; (3R.), 6133, 6134.</li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5976, 5982; (C.), 6035 <i>et seq.;</i> (3R.), 6139, 6143.</li>

<li>Namaland Consolidation and Administration (2R.), 8196, 8205; (C.), 8304.</li>

<li>Appropriation Bill (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Planning and Statistics, 8270&#x2013;4, 8348; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8463, 8470.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 8667, 8687; (C.), 9130&#x2013;2, 9137, 9142&#x2013;4; (3R.),</li>

<li>9224.</li>

<li>Group Areas (A.) (2R.), 9163, 9168.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 71.</li>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 874.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2185.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3623.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. E. G. (Orange Grove)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2263, 2265&#x2013;6, 2293, 2321, 2325, 2327, 2339&#x2013;40, 2343, 2375, 2390, 2394.</li>

<li>Broadcasting (A.) (2R.), 2413; (3R.), 2429.</li>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (2R), 2881; (C.), 2882, 2889.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3440.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3844, 3962; (C.), 4034; (3R.), 4085.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (C.), 4423.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4681; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6319; Mines, 7185; Public Works, 7453; Information, 7665; National Education, 8130, 8137; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8537, 8544; Agriculture, 8640.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 8195.</li>

<li>Finance (C.), 9009&#x2013;11.</li>

<li>Post Office Re-adjustment (A.) (2R.), 9180.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (2R.), 9184; (3R.), 9237.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 343.</li>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 604.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, Appointment of, 783.</li>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 868.</li>

<li>Services rendered by Department of</li>

<li>Information, 2466.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2514.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. G. F. (Humansdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (2R.), 695.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2305.</li>

<li>Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales (A.), (2R.), 2614.</li>

<li><span class="col_I16" refersTo="page_1595"/>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.). 3347.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5668; Forestry, 6402.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (C.), 6235.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3564.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. J. J. (Swellendam)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3437.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5599; Forestry, 6414.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1584.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. W. C. (Paarl)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1146.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4496; (C.), <i>Votes</i> Commerce and Industries, 7477.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8694.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 91.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Retirement of Controller and Auditor- General, 9243.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. D. J. (Johannesburg North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3228.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4572, 4575; (C.), Foies&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5350; Sport and Recreation, 6240; Labour, 6614; Police, 7614.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 156.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. P. S. (Moorreesburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6316; Planning and Statistics, 8257.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1093.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3601.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MAREE, Mr. G. de K. (Namakwaland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6307; (3R.), 8884, 8895.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARTINS, the Hon. H. E. (Wakkerstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Transport</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1684, 1739; (C.), 1782&#x2013;7, 1789&#x2013;91, 1793, 1799, 1822; (3R.), 1873, 1894.</li>

<li>Civil Aviation Offences (2R.), 1750, 1764; (C.), 1823, 1825, 1828, 1833&#x2013;8; (3R.), 1898, 1900.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1766, 2027; (C), 2104, 2111, 2115, 2122; (3R.), 2215.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2041, 2091; (C), 2124, 2127, 2128, 2130, 2132.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4847; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Transport, 5406, 5422, 5440.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (2R.), 5985, 6076; (C.), 6146 <i>et seq.;</i> (3R.), 6225, 6231.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5912, 5950; (3R.), 6001, 6002.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (A.) (2R.), 5958, 5963; (C.), 6005.</li>

<li><span class="col_I17" refersTo="page_1596"/>Weather Modification Control (2R.), 8166, 8173; (C.), 8287 <i>et seq;</i> (3R.), 8291, 8296.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 8175, 8185; (C.), 8299, 8302.</li>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (A.) (2R.), 9160.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Personal Explanations, 2133, 5041.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>McLACHLAN, Dr. R. (Westdene)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 7683; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7763.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1916.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MEYER, Mr. P. H. (Vasco)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1201.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4512; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Foreign Affairs, 6469; Community Development, 7363.</li>

<li>Financial Institutions (A.) (2R.), 9033.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3586.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MILLER, Mr. H. (Jeppes)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 500; (C.), 821, 973, 983, 1036, 1062.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C.), 965.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1646.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3338, 3453; (3R.), 3530.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 4020.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.), (2R.), 4273, 4301.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4959; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6678; Bantu Administration and Development, 6766, 6849; Justice and Prisons, 7101; Mines, 7161; Community Development, 7307; National Education, 8214; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8530.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (C.), 6155, 6163, 6169.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 590.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2554.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. D. E. (South Coast)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 527.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 681; (C.), 1074, 1076.</li>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (2R.), 697; (C.), 1493.</li>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (C.), 1504.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2270, 2273, 2280, 2303, 2325, 2331, 2332, 2403.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2826, 2829.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (3R.), 3695.</li>

<li>Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) (A.) (2R.), 4418; (C.), 4421.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4476.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5939.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 6090; (C.), 6105, 6109. 6113&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 6192; (G), 6238.</li>

<li>Appropriation (G), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6292; Forestry, 6399, 6411, 6433; Commerce and Industries, 7563; Planning and Statistics, <span class="col_I18" refersTo="page_1597"/>8327; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8581, 8617.</li>

<li>Weather Modification Control (C.), 8285, 8291; (3R.), 8291.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 844.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. M. L. (Durban North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Animals Protection (A.) (2R.), 446; (C), 541.</li>

<li>Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation (2R.), 451; (C.) 543, 545&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (A.) (2R.), 456.</li>

<li>Insolvency (A.) (2R.), 471.</li>

<li>Prisons (A.) (2R.), 555.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1287.</li>

<li>Civil Aviation Offences (C.), 1825, 1830.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2348&#x2013;51, 2354, 2365&#x2013;71, 2401.</li>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (3R.), 2578.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4477, 4483.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4723; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Prime Minister, 5225; Justice and Prisons, 7001, 7132; Police, 7589, 7638; (3R.), 8739.</li>

<li>Police (A.) (2R.), 8652.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 9090; (C.), 9122.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 323.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2172.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Alleged Statement i.c.w. Agliotti case), 4440.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Question&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Incident between S.A. Police and certain Demonstrators outside St. George&#x2019;s Cathedral, Cape Town, 8705.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MOOLMAN, Dr. J. H. (East London City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1461.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2395, 2401.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3398.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5602, 5611; Tourism, 5863; Water Affairs, 6362; Bantu Administration and Development, 6840; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7772; (3R.), 8896.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7944.</li>

<li>Control of the Meat Trade in S.W.A. (A.) (2R.), 8065.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 9234.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1398.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MORRISON, Dr. G. de V. (Cradock)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Defence (A.) (2R.), 2242; (C.), 7977.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6836; Health, 7231.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1422.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8077.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULDER, Dr. the Hon. C. P. (Randfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Information, of Social Welfare and Pensions, and of Immigration</i>]</li>

<li><span class="col_I19" refersTo="page_1598"/>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2404.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4816; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Public Works, 7419; Information, 7686; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7738, 7797; Immigration, 7852.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2500.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, Dr. the Hon. H. (Beaufort West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Foreign Affairs</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2322&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6478, 6527.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, the Hon. S. L. (Ceres)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Economic Affairs and of Police</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1276.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2281, 2398&#x2013;402.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Public Works, 7458; Commerce and Industries, 7500, 7544, 7570, 8645; Police, 7642; (3R.), 8772.</li>

<li>Police (A.) (2R.), 8647, 8654; (C.), 9124.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 108.</li>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1117.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Alleged Statement i.c.w. Agliotti case), 4447.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Question&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Incident between S.A. Police and certain Demonstrators outside St. George&#x2019;s Cathedral, Cape Town, 8705.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MURRAY, Mr. L. G., M.C. (Green Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Deeds Registries (A.) (2R.), 463; (C.), 548.</li>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (C.), 972, 1018.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (3R.), 1884.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2087; (C.). 2122. 2125. 2127&#x2013;8.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2266, 2304, 2349, 2356, 2383&#x2013;91.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (2R.), 2596; (C.), 3471, 3474&#x2013;6; (3R.), 3716.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 2688, 2696.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2785, 2819, 2843&#x2013;4.</li>

<li>Marriage (A.) (2R.), 3762; (C), 3848&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>Provincial Affairs (2R.), 3779.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3950.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (C.), 4112, 4123, 4133.</li>

<li>Nursing (A.) (C.), 4218&#x2013;9, 4220, 4223&#x2013;4, 4225.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4261.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 4338.</li>

<li>Church Square, Pretoria, Development (2R.), 4350; (C.), 4453&#x2013;5.</li>

<li>Age of Majority (2R.), 4439; (C.), 4464.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4483.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4916; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Transport, 5392, 5414, 5422; Defence, 5819; Justice and Prisons, 7075, 7095; Health, 7227; Community Development, 7277, <span class="col_I20" refersTo="page_1599"/>7374; Public Works, 7409; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8497, 8609, 8623, 8628.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (2R.), 5997, 6048; (C.), 6145 <i>et seq.;</i> (3R.), 6226.</li>

<li>Public Service (A.) (2R.), 6117.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 9112, 9118, 9120.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 9129&#x2013;30, 9133, 9142, 9146; (3R.), 9219.</li>

<li>Group Areas (A.) (2R.), 9166.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Urban Development, appointment of, 16.</li>

<li>No Confidence. 197.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 756.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1438.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>NEL, Mr. D. J. L. (Pretoria Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3379.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4740; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7128.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 9113.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 791.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>NEL, Mr. J. A. F. (Krugersdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2952.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7073; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8432; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works. 8595.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OLDFIELD, Mr. G. N. (Umbilo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C.), 962.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1712; (C.), 1791, 1806.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2387, 2389, 2404.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3447.</li>

<li>National War Fund (A.) (2R.), 3756.</li>

<li>Dental Mechanicians (A.) (2R.), 3926; (C.), 4151, 4154.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (C.), 4113, 4130, 4142; (3R.), 4186.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Indian Affairs, 6571; Health, 7245; Public Works, 7415; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7717, 7783; National Education, 8157, 8205.</li>

<li>Pensions (Supplementary) (2R.), 9128.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 9153; (C.), 9230.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OLIVER, Mr. G. D. G. (Kensington)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 573, 626; (C.), 817, 997; (3R.), 2433.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1846.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2262, 2278&#x2013;9, 2294, 2393.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 2638; (C.), 2779, 2787, 2795, 2805, 2815, 2820. 2835.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3364.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5430; Agriculture, 5701; Information. 7673; Interior, Public <span class="col_I21" refersTo="page_1600"/>Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8510, 8592; (3R.), 8780.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2490.</li>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3048.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3089.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8057, 8072.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OTTO, Dr. J. C. (Koedoespoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 671.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2871.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3174.</li>

<li>Provincial Affairs (2R.), 3781.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3805; (C.), 4116; (3R.), 4203.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (3R.), 4092.</li>

<li>Church Square, Pretoria, Development (2R.), 4354; (C.), 4457.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5020.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5432; Tourism, 5888; Indian Affairs, 6540, 6575; Bantu Education, 6962; National Education, 7887, 8154.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (C.), 6008.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 915.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PALM, Mr. P. D. (Worcester)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (2R.), 2602.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C), 2723.</li>

<li>Educational Services (A.) (C.), 4463.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5352; Agriculture, 5628; Defence, 5822; Community Development, 7394; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8457.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration of Southern Africa, 1402.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PANSEGROUW, Mr. J. S. (Smithfield)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4565; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5606; Commerce and Industries, 7490; Planning and Statistics, 8252.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7954.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 855.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2155.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PELSER, the Hon. P. C. (Klerksdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Justice and of Prisons</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Animals Protection (A.) (2R.), 445; (C.), 542.</li>

<li>Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation (2R.), 447, 453; (C.), 544; (3R.), 626.</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (A.) (2R.X 453.</li>

<li>Deeds Registries (A.) (2R.), 461; (C.), 548&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>Insolvency (A.) (2R), 466, 476; (C.), 551.</li>

<li>Prisons (A.) (2R.), 553.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2348&#x2013;53, 2355, 2361, 2365, 2367, 2371.</li>

<li><span class="col_I22" refersTo="page_1601"/>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7026, 7078, 7089, 7114, 7142; Public Works, 7451.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 8696, 9082; (C), 9115, 9118, 9119, 9120, 9123.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 335.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PIENAAR, Mr. L. A. (Bellville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1808; (3R.), 1881.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2077.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3373, 3403.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5426; Commerce and Industries, 7496.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (C.), 6182.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 891.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3101.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3611.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PIETERSE, Mr. R. J. J. (Pretoria West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 5843; Labour, 6711; Community Development, 7323.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POTGIETER, Mr. J. E. (Brits)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4691; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5322; Agriculture, 5547, 5708.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POTGIETER, Mr. S. P. (Port Elizabeth North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2311.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3335.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Community Development, 7301; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7775.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3557.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PRINSLOO, Mr. M. P. (Innesdal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (3R.), 4189.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4317.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Sport and Recreation, 6268; Indian Affairs, 6569; Justice and Prisons, 7104; Community Development, 7316.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PYPER, Mr. P. A. (Durban Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1811.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2320, 2347, 2406.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2570.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2971, 2974.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3386.</li>

<li>Provincial Affairs (2R.), 3783.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.). 4007.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5014; (C.), 5067, 5072, 5074&#x2013;6, 5078, 5084, 5090, 5094&#x2013;6, 5101&#x2013;3, 5111&#x2013;3, 5117, 5122&#x2013;8, 5964 (3R.), 6043.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (2R.), 5966; (C.), 6009 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5977; (C.), 6036 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Indian Affairs, 6566: Bantu Administration and Development, 6773; Bantu <span class="col_I23" refersTo="page_1602"/>Education, 6959; Community Develpoment, 7397; National Education, 7890, 8123; Interior, Public Commission and Government Printing Works, 8523.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 920.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2535.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, Mr. J. J. (Harrismith)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 707.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (3R.), 3746.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3978.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6907.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (2R.), 9198.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, Mr. J. W. (Middelburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Civil Aviation Offences (2R.), 1758; (C.), 1829, 1832, 1835, 1837.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5206; Defence, 5806.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5921.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1361.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Charges by Member, Extension of date for Report of, 3742, 6316.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, Mr. M. J. (Mossel Bay)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (C.), 1494.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4045.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5609; Water Affairs, 6360; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8417.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAUBENHEIMER, the Hon. A. J. (Nelspruit)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Development</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 2622, 2646; (C.), 2786, 2789, 2794, 2798, 2802&#x2013;4, 2810, 2828, 2840, 2844.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6785, 6844.</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, First Report of, 3654, 3673; Third Report of, 8106; Fifth Report, 9068.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAW, Mr. W. V. (Durban Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (C.), 826, 976, 1012.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 960; (C.), 960&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1567.</li>

<li>Civil Aviation Offences (2R.), 1752; (C.), 1823&#x2013;4, 1826, 1830&#x2013;8; (3R.), 1898.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2042; (C.), 2129, 2131; (3R.), 2222.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (C.), 2107, 2115; (3R), 2194.</li>

<li>Defence (A.) (2R.), 2143, 2229; (C.), 7964, 7973, 7982 <i>et seq.;</i> (3R.), 8062.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2261&#x2013;2, 2268, 2271&#x2013;3, 2283, 2292&#x2013;3, 2299, 2318, 2334, 2343.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2804, 2806, 2809, 2833, 2841, 2846; (3R.), 2918.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3197; (C.), 3382.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3946.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4077.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 4340.</li>

<li><span class="col_I24" refersTo="page_1603"/>Church Square, Pretoria, Development (C.), 4456.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4481.</li>

<li>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5916; (3R.), 6001.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (A.) (2R.), 5960 (C), 6004.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4608; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5232, 5343; Transport, 5379; Defence, 5754, 5847; Tourism, 5885; Bantu Administration and Development, 6889, 6930; Justice and Prisons, 7107; Community Development, 7384; Public Works, 7423; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8551; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8646; (3R.), 8791.</li>

<li>Armaments Development and Production (A.) (2R.), 8003.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 9109, 9116.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (2R.), 9201.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 136.</li>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1372, 1376.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>REINECKE, Mr. C. J. (Pretoria District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (C.), 4289.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5229; Agriculture, 5565; Defence, 5774; Tourism, 6126; Sport and Recreation, 6247; Information, 7676; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8533.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2486.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>REYNEKE, Mr. J. P. A. (Boksburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 4075.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4303.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6670, 6725; Community Development, 7381; Police, 7604, 7635; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7786; National Education, 8142; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8435.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ROSSOUW, Mr. W. J. C. (Stilfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6365; Labour, 6695; Bantu Administration and Development, 6887; Mines, 7165.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 576.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ROUX, Mr. P. C. (Mariental)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5012.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (2R.). 5970; (C.), 6024, 6028.</li>

<li>Namaland Consolidation and Administration (2R.), 8203.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3559.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. A. L. (Kroonstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 1522; (C), 2732.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3206.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5737; Justice and Prisons, 7069; Police, 7592; (3R.), 8788.</li>

<li><span class="col_I25" refersTo="page_1604"/>Harbour Construction (2R.), 5936.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of; 754.</li>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1958.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. J. A. (Bloemfontein District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 2679.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3236; (3R.), 3535.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5438; Water Affairs, 6369; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7780.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. B. J. Maraisburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Transport</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 958; (C.), 961&#x2013;8.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (C.), 1796.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1842; (3R.), 2206.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2261&#x2013;2, 2270&#x2013;1, 2275&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2749, 3281; (C.), 3315, 3361, 3405, 3456; (3R.), 3640.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (3R.), 2894, 2923.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4475&#x2014;84.</li>

<li>Appropriation (G), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5330; Transport, 5401, 5417, 5423; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8627, 8630; (3R.), 8798, 8800.</li>

<li>Railway Construction Bill (3R.), 8377, 8380.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 734.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statements&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business of the House, 377.</li>

<li>Hijacking, 7991, 8159, 8165.</li>

<li>Hours of Sitting of the House, 8893&#x2013;4.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. H. (Standerton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of Agriculture</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (2R.), 691, 700; (G), 1492&#x2013;4, 1497.</li>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 702, 713; (C.), 1499, 1501, 1503&#x2013;4, 1506; (3R.), 2581.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 716, 2586; (C.), 2692, 2712&#x2013;16, 2733, 2738, 2741, 3003; (Instruction), 3490; (C.), 3499, 3507&#x2013;9, 3739; (3R.), 3751; Senate A, 7149.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1319.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (G), 2278, 2288, 2303&#x2013;4, 2307&#x2013;9, 2313&#x2013;6, 2317&#x2013;8.</li>

<li>Tobacco and Wine Research Accounts (A.) (2R.), 2591.</li>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 2592, 2593.</li>

<li>Agricultural Research Account (A.) (2R.), 2594.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (2R.), 2594, 2606; (G), 3473&#x2013;6; (3R.), 3720.</li>

<li>Land Titles (Division of George) Adjustment (Hybrid) (2R.), 2607, 2612.</li>

<li>Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales (A.), (2R.), 2612, 2615; (G), 3478&#x2013; 81.</li>

<li><span class="col_I26" refersTo="page_1605"/>Dairy Industry Laws (A) (2R.), 2615, 2618; (C.), 3482, 3487; (3R.), 3733.</li>

<li>Veterinary (A), (2R.), 2621.</li>

<li>Fertilizers, Farm Feeds, Agricultural Remedies and Stock Remedies (A.) (2R.), 3489.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4780; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Agriculture, 5624, 5682, 5718, 8635&#x2013;41; (3R.), 8953.</li>

<li>Wine, Other Fermented Beverages and Spirits (A.) (2R.), 7938.</li>

<li>Control of the Meat Trade in S.W.A. (A.) (2R.), 8065, 8066.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 8066; (C.), 8162.</li>

<li>Land Survey (A.) (2R.), 8068; (C.), 8163.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (3R.), 8159, 8161.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry. 1631.</li>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land. 2000.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, Mr. J. C. B. (Randburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3122; (C.), 3450.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5339; Justice and Prisons, 7136; Planning and Statistics, 8342.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SMIT, Mr. H. H. (Stellenbosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1356, 1457.</li>

<li>Defence (A.) (2R.), 2236; (C.), 7967, 7975, 7986.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5182; Defence, 5763; Tourism, 5882; Sport and Recreation, 6212, 6243; Foreign Affairs, 6523; (3R.), 8930.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1381.</li>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information 2459.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SMITH, Capt W. J. B. (Pietermaritzburg City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C), 964.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1735.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2373.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3168; (C.), 3333.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Police, 7608.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEPHENS, Mr. J. J. M. (Florida)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (C), 2884, 2889.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3985; (3R.), 4097.</li>

<li>Age of Majority (3R.), 4992.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (C.), 6012 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (C.), 6038 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (C.), 5070, 5086, 5090, 5104, 5114, 5117, 5120.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 5824; National Education, 8144; Planning and Statistics, 8333; (3R.), 8855.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 930.</li>

<li>Communist Infiltration of Southern Africa, 1405.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEYN, Mr. S. J. M. (Yeoville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1266.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1690; (C.), 1780, 1783, 1793, 1798, 1821&#x2013;3.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 1769, 1838.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2340&#x2013;2.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2767, 3109; (C.), 3304, 3328; (3R.), 3510.</li>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (C.), 2886.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4587; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5164, 5171, 5308, 5317, 5326; Transport, 5366, 5373; Labour, 6599, 6656; (3R.), 8964.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 303.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 796.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1941.</li>

<li>Half-hour adjournment (Students Publication <i>Wits Student</i>), 6217.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STREICHER, Mr. D. M. (Newton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 633.</li>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (2R.), 694.</li>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 705; (C.), 1500; (3R.), 2576.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (2R.), 718, 1508; (C.), 2681, 2707, 2721, 2729, 2747, 3001, 3005, 3505, 3508, 3509, 3737; (3R.), 3743; Senate A, 7149.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1310.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R), 2070.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2305, 2308, 2313&#x2013;6, 2318.</li>

<li>Tobacco and Wine Research Accounts (A.) (2R.), 2592.</li>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 2592.</li>

<li>Agricultural Research Account (A.) (2R.), 2594.</li>

<li>Land Titles (Division of George) Adjustment (Hybrid) (2R.), 2610.</li>

<li>Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales (A.) (2R.), 2614.</li>

<li>Dairy Industry Laws (A.) (2R.), 2616; (C.), 3481.</li>

<li>Veterinary (A.) (2R.), 2622.</li>

<li>Fertilizers, Farm Feeds, Agricultural Remedies and Stock Remedies (A.) (2R.), 3489.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 3793; (C.), 3850.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4769; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Treasury, etc., 5482; Agriculture, 5514, 5631; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8397; (3R.), 8813.</li>

<li>Namaland Consolidation and Administration (2R.), 8199.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 9130, 9144; (3R.), 9212.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Development of St. Croix as Ore Harbour, 1128.</li>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1623.</li>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1966.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3595.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUTTON, Mr. W. M. (Mooi River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A) (2R.), 1526.</li>

<li><span class="col_I28" refersTo="page_1607"/>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3810; (C.), 4108&#x2013;10, 4117, 4133, 4138.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4898; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5552, 5679; Tourism, 6127; Water Affairs, 6304, 6353, 6382; Forestry, 6405, 6427; Planning and Statistics, 8344.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (C.), 6235.</li>

<li>Weather Modification Control (2R.), 8168; (C.), 8288 <i>et seq.</i></li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 885.</li>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 1993.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2158.</li>

<li>Planning i.r.o. Coloured Population, 3617.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUZMAN, Mrs. H. (Houghton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 564; (C.), 1057.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 663; (C.), 2569; (3R.), 2664.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1246.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 2017; (C.), 2110.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2081.</li>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (2R.), 2600; (C.), 3470, 3473; (3R.), 3708.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2776, 2783&#x2013;5, 2792; (3R.), 2899.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2945.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3820; (3R.), 4191.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4659, 4661; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5254; Defence, 5802; Sport and Recreation, 6265; Foreign Affairs, 6472; Indian Affairs, 6550; Labour, 6620,6714; Bantu Administration and Development, 6790; Bantu Education, 6972; Justice and Prisons, 7022; Health, 7250; Community Development, 7366; Police, 7600; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7734, 7793; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8558, 8601; (3R.), 8763.</li>

<li>Security Intelligence and State Security Council (2R.), 7934.</li>

<li>Defence (A.) (C.), 7987.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 9108; (C.), 9118, 9121.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 9137.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (2R.), 9194; (C.), 9235; (3R.), 9237.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 219.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 744.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1426.</li>

<li>Migrant Labour System, 1902.</li>

<li>Half-hour adjournment (Students&#x2019; publication <i>Wits Student</i>), 6220.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8083.</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Retirement of Deputy Secretary to House of Assembly, 9241.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SWANEPOEL, Mr. J. W. F. (Kimberley North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5376; Treasury, etc., 5479.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I29" refersTo="page_1608"/><b>SWIEGERS, Mr. J. G. (Uitenhage)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3220; (C.), 3341.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6631; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7770.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TAYLOR, Mrs. C. D. (Wynberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Education Services (A.) (2R.), 4435; (C.), 4459&#x2013;64; (3R.), 4991.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 4995; (C.), 5065, 5087, 5097, 5105&#x2013;7, 5119, 5126.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (3R.), 6133.</li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (3R.), 6139.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6497; Bantu Administration and Development, 6810; Justice and Prisons, 7063, 7071; Immigration, 7838; National Education, 7875; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8374, 8385, 8392, 8646.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 8672.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 902.</li>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1448.</li>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2477.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>THOMPSON, Mr. J. O. N, D.F.C. (Pinelands)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 518; (C.), 813, 840, 1007, 1068; (3R.), 2447.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2270, 2276, 2279&#x2013;80, 2283, 2286, 2289, 2361, 2367, 2401.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2565, 2574; (3R.), 2663.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2791, 2809, 2818, 2831, 2837&#x2013;9; (3R.), 2907.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (C.), 4135.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.) (Motion on adjournment of debate on), 4475; (C.), 5075.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4858; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Sport and Recreation, 6204, 6271; Bantu Administration and Development, 6817; Police, 7626; (3R.), 8875.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 284, 286.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2545.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TIMONEY, Mr. H. M. (Salt River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C.), 961, 965, 967.</li>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1701; (C.), 1776, 1784.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (C.), 4134.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 4309.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5385; Mint, 5493; Defence, 5779, 5781; Mines, 7173; Community Development, 7390; Police, 7619; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7766.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 8178; (C.) 8297, 8303.</li>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (A.) (2R.), 9162.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I30" refersTo="page_1609"/><b>TREURNICHT, Dr. A. P. (Waterberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1259.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5258; Foreign Affairs, 6517; (3R.), 8956.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TREURNICHT, Mr. N. F. (Piketberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4884; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;State President, 5063; Water Affairs, 6301; Forestry, 6419; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8389.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 6098.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>UYS, Senator the Hon. D. C. H.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Agriculture</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (3R.), 3705.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4757; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5524, 5635, 5743.</li>

<li>Marketing (A) (2R.), 7941, 7961.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN BREDA, Mr. A. (Tygervallei)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2051.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3353.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, &#x2014;5383; Community Development, 7378; Social Welfare and Pensions, 7721; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8425.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (C.), 6011.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN BERG, Mr. G. P. (Wolmaransstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4866; (C.), <i>Votes</i>Prime Minister, 5313; Bantu Administration and Development, 6806; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8520.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Constitutional Development of Bantu Homelands, 3006.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8052.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN HEEVER, Mr. S. A. (King William&#x2019;s Town)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1329, 1333.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5574, 5691.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7953.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1591.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8027.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. C. V. (Fauresmith)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 3949.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4945; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Water Affairs, 6323; Health, 7218, 7249, 8644.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1416.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. H. D. K. (Rissik)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 536, 555; (C.), 825.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 2632; (C.), 2774, 2821, 2826, 2832; (3R.), 2901.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3826, 3851; (C.), 4109.</li>

<li><span class="col_I31" refersTo="page_1610"/>Basters of Rehoboth Education (C.), 6031.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Indian Affairs, 6547; Bantu Administration and Development, 6776, 6778; Bantu Education, 6983; National Education, 7902; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8605.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 208.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. P. S. (Middelland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5728; Defence, 5800; Foreign Affairs, 6461.</li>

<li>Namaland Consolidation and Administration (2R.), 8201.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. the Hon. S. W. (Gordonia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Deputy Minister of the Interior, of Social Welfare and Pensions, of Coloured Affairs and of Reho- both Affairs</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2409&#x2013;11.</li>

<li>National War Fund (A.) (2R.), 3755, 3757.</li>

<li>Marriage (A.) (2R.), 3757, 3767; (C.), 3848&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (C.), 5085.</li>

<li>Second Additional Appropriation (C.), 6448.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Social Welfare and Pensions, 7789; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8406, 8413, 8449, 8646; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8547, 8554.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 9114.</li>

<li>Pensions (Supplementary) (2R.), 9128.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 9147, 9157; (C.), 9231, 9234.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. W. L. (Heidelberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3385.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5739; Defence, 5855; Bantu Administration and Development, 6927.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3546.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER SPUY, Senator the Hon. J. P.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of National Education.]</i></li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2407.</li>

<li>Broadcasting (A.) (2R), 2412, 2415.</li>

<li>Educational Services (A.) (2R.), 4432, 4436; (C.), 4460&#x2013;4; (3R.), 4991.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;National Education, 7906, 8217.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>The Government and the Universities, 939.</li>

<li>Investigation of S.A. Film Industry, 2557.</li>

<li>Half-hour adjournment (Students Publication <i>Wits Student</i>), 6222.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER SPUY, Mr. S. J. H. (Somerset East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3396.</li>

<li><span class="col_I32" refersTo="page_1611"/>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Tourism, 5898; Water Affairs, 6328; Planning and Statistics, 8331.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER WALT, Mr. H. J. D. (Christiana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 493; (C.), 1001; (3R.), 2423, 2429.</li>

<li>Agricultural Credit (A.) (2R.), 698.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 3501.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4713; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 6313; Bantu Administration and Development, 6769; Justice and Prisons, 7111; Police, 7622.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 863.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ECK, Mr. H. J. (Benoni)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3999.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5561; Mines, 7179; Planning and Statistics, 8320.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pollution of the Environment, 858.</li>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3560.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN HOOGSTRATEN, Mr. H. A., E.D. (Cape Town Gardens)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1173.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2326, 2399.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.). 3149; (C.). 3430.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4537; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 6635; Community Development, 7314; Commerce and Industries, 7492, 7558; National Education, 8151; Planning and Statistics, 8254.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 98, 102.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3079.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN STADEN, Mr. J. W. (Malmesbury)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2066.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4617; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Commerce and Industries, 7528; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8381; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8513.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 8681.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN TONDER, Mr. J. A. (Germiston District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 4003.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN VUUREN, Mr. P. Z. J. (Langlaagte)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 520; (C.), 820, 979.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (3R.), 2910.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 6802; Community Development, 7370; Public Works, 7438.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 186, 189.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8016.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I33" refersTo="page_1612"/><b>VAN WYK, Mr. A. C. (Winburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 562.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture 5664; Water Affairs, 6372; Planning and Statistics, 8317.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1617.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN WYK, Mr. H. J. (Virginia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Mines, 7171; (3R.), 8834.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 587.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ZYL, Mr. J. J. B. (Sunnyside)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1163.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2290.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3990.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4526; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Treasury, etc., 5467; Inland Revenue, 5501; Audit, 5510; Commerce and Industries, 7520; Information, 7669.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Services rendered by Department of Information, 2472.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3072.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VENTER, Mr. M. J. de la R. (Colesberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1658.</li>

<li>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (2R.), 2085.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 3138.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8442.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VENTER, Dr. W. L. D. M. (Kimberley South)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Social Welfare and Pensions, 7732; National Education, 8212.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, the Hon. M. (Alberton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Labour and of Posts and Telegraphs</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Additional Appropriation (2R.), 2880; (C), 2884&#x2013;91.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 3827, 4024; (C.), 4054, 4080; (3R.), 4104.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4580; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014; Labour, 6638, 6681, 6732.</li>

<li>Unauthorized Post Office Expenditure (2R.), 8717.</li>

<li>Post Office Re-adjustment (A.) (2R.), 9178.</li>

<li>Post Office (A.) (2R.), 9182, 9207; (3R.), 9238.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 315.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, Dr. P. J. van B. (Newcastle)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Sea-shore (A.) (3R.), 3713.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3815; (C.), 4118; (3R.), 4196.</li>

<li>Anatomical Donations and Post-Mortem Examinations (A.) (2R.), 3909.</li>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (2R.), 4237.</li>

<li><span class="col_I34" refersTo="page_1613"/>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5299; Indian Affairs, 6555; Health, 7237.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1453.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VON KEYSERLINGK, Brig. C. C. (Umlazi)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2333, 2346.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2840.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3435.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 5858; Bantu Administration and Development, 6918; Public Works, 7440; Police, 7594, 7632.</li>

<li>Police (A.) (2R.), 8653; (C.), 9123.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VORSTER, the Hon. B. J. (Nigel)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Prime Minister</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2261.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 5136, 5187, 5234, 5274, 5354; (3R.), 8730.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>State Intelligence and State Security Council Bill (2R.), 7923, 7937; (C.), 8060&#x2013;1.</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 373. 377.</li>

<li>Select Committee on Certain Organizations, appointment of, 723, 805.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House, 9244.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statements: Speaker on Question by Mr. J. W. E. Wiley, M.P., 4335.

<ul>

<li>Hijacking, 8061.</li>

<li>Retirement of Deputy Secretary to House of Assembly, 9239.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VORSTER, Mr. L. P. J. (De Aar)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3433.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture 5722; Defence, 5778; Tourism, 5873; Water Affairs, 6379; Justice and Prisons, 7141; National Education, 7900.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VOSLOO, Dr. W. L. (Brentwood)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (2R.), 4249; (C.), 4286.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 6494; Labour, 6708; Immigration, 7850.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of Mineworkers, 600.</li>

<li>Parliament and Scientific and Technological Developments, 2167.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WAINWRIGHT, Mr. C. J. S. (East London North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C), 3370.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture 5621; Defence, 5772; Water Affairs, 6367; Forestry, 6422; Labour, 6722; Bantu Administration and Development, 6904.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Communist Infiltration into Southern Africa, 1385.</li>

<li>Consolidation of Agricultural Land, 2008.</li>

<li>Prevention of Flood Damage, 3579.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, Third Report of, 8041.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WARING, the Hon. F. W. (Caledon)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>Minister of Tourism, of Sport and Recreation and of Indian Affairs</i>.]</li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2277, 2320.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3794, 3887; (C.), 4110, 4119, 4125, 4127, 4131, 4134, 4140, 4141&#x2013;3; (3R.), 4205.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4796; (C), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Tourism, 5905, 6118, 6130; Sport and Recreation, 6278; Indian Affairs, 6581; Public Works, 7452.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WEBBER, Mr. W. T. (Pietermaritzburg District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Contributions in respect of Bantu Labour (2R.), 510; (C.), 968, 1005, 1024&#x2013;28, 1029, 1065.</li>

<li>Second Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 673; (C.), 1082, 1086.</li>

<li>Land Tenure (A.) (2R.), 709; (C.), 1498, 1500&#x2013;4, 1508.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1666.</li>

<li>Bantu Transport Services (A.) (2R.), 2024; (C.), 2117; (3R.), 2213.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2264, 2268, 2294, 2301, 2314&#x2013;5.</li>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 2709, 2738, 2741, 2996, 3494.</li>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 2797, 2799, 2807, 2812, 2834; (3R.), 2913.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3414; (3R.), 3637.</li>

<li>Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales (A.) (C.), 3477&#x2013;9, 3481.</li>

<li>Dairy Industry Laws (A.) (C.), 3483; (3R.), 3724.</li>

<li>Church Square, Pretoria, Development (2R.), 4359, 4425.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 4643; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Audit, 5505; Agriculture, 5583, 5672; Sport and Recreation, 6256; Water Affairs, 6375; Bantu Education, 6978; Community Development, 7326; Public Works, 7422, 7446; Planning and Statistics, 8308; Interior, Public Service Commission and Government Printing Works, 8515; (3R.), 8941.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (C.), 5066, 5078, 5091, 5099&#x2013;100. 5108, 5125.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 7957; (3R.), 8159.</li>

<li>Defence (A.) (C.), 7978.</li>

<li>Land Survey (A.) (C.), 8163.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Position of the Agricultural Industry, 1607.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs, First Report of, 3666; Third Report of, 8090.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WENTZEL, Mr. J. J. G. (Bethal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Subdivision of Agricultural Land (A.) (C.), 2994, 3493.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 5557; Mines, 7189.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WILEY, Mr. J. W. E. (Simonstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1348.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2364&#x2013;5.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence 5852; Tourism, 5901; Commerce and Industries, 7524.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement by Speaker on Question by, 4335, 4412.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WINCHESTER, Mr. L. E. D. (Port Natal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>National Road Safety (2R.), 1721, 1728; (C.), 1786, 1789&#x2013;91, 1818; (3R.). 1873.</li>

<li><span class="col_I36" refersTo="page_1615"/>Transport Services for Coloured Persons and Indians (C.), 2131; (3R) 2222.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 3350, 3423.</li>

<li>S.A. Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3860; (C.), 4115, 4126, 4129, 4136, 4140; (3R.), 4200.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5424; Indian Affairs, 6543; Labour, 6704; Community Development, 7290, 7297; Immigration, 7829; Planning and Statistics, 8266, 8273; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8453.</li>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance (2R.), 6066; (C.), 6149, 6168, 6177 <i>et seq.</i></li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Compulsory Motor Vehicle Insurance, 3062</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WOOD, Mr. L. F. (Berea)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Animals Protection (A.) (C.), 543.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 2317, 2320, 2328, 2381.</li>

<li>Bantu Education Account Abolition (2R.), 2876, 2935.</li>

<li>S.A Indian Council (A.) (2R.), 3881; (C.), 4118, 4127, 4129, 4132, 4137, 4141.</li>

<li>Dental Mechanicians (A.) (2R.), 3930; (C.), 4155.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (C.), 4160.</li>

<li>Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants (2R.), 4243; (C.), 4284, 4289, 4293, 4295&#x2013;6, 4298&#x2013;9, 4300&#x2013;1.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons in S.W.A. Education (2R.), 5023; (C.), 5063, 5066, 5074, 5088, 5099.</li>

<li>Basters of Rehoboth Education (C.), 6012 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Nama in S.W.A. Education (C.), 6039 <i>et seq.</i></li>

<li>Appropriation (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Indian Affairs, 6558; Bantu Education, 6965; Health, 7221; National Education, 7897; Coloured Relations and Rehoboth Affairs, 8429.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Law relating to Abortion, 1418.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Select Committee on Bantu Affairs, First Report of, 3664.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateBody>

</debate>

</akomaNtoso>
