---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 22 March 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-03-22
---

WEDNESDAY, 22 MARCH 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:03.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the NCOP I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the Council-

  (1) notes with shock and disgust that on Friday, a policeman’s 16-year-old
       daughter was stabbed and indecently assaulted by two men in the S A
       Police Service’s own block of flats in Triomf that are rented out to
       police employees;


  (2) further notes that, according to the residents, this is not the first
       time that children have been attacked in the building as two separate
       incidents were also reported last year, among them an attempted rape;


  (3) acknowledges that we must do our utmost to protect our children from
       being targeted by criminals, and therefore urges the relevant
       authorities to implement the necessary measures to ensure the safety
       of all, especially the children; and


  (4) wishes the victim a speedy recovery and hopes that the perpetrators
       will be apprehended and brought to book as a matter of urgency.

Ms D ROBINSON: Madam Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move on the
next sitting day of the House:

  That the Council -

    1) congratulates former Member of Parliament Helen Zille on her election
       as Mayor of Cape Town;


    2) wishes her and her multiparty executive well in running this city in
       an open and transparent manner, according to due process; and

    3) notes and welcomes the statement of co-operation from Premier Ebrahim
       Rasool aimed at ensuring that local and provincial government co-
       operate for the benefit of all people.



                      CONDUCT OF NEW MAYOR OF CAPE TOWN


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr E M SOGONI: Chairperson, perhaps it’s a good thing that I move this
motion after the hon member Robinson, over there, has spoken. I move
without notice:

  That the Council -

    1) condemns the racist Mayor of Cape Town for giving notice of the
       release of Dr Mgoqi from his contract; and


    2) also condemns the witch-hunt that she wants to embark on with regard
       to investigating the tenders that were awarded during the ANC
       government’s term in the Western Cape.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Sogoni. Is there any objection to the motion?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chair, I would like to object. I would also like to
state, on a point of order, that we have reached an agreement at the
multiparty Whips’ meeting that all motions without notice that have
political content will be circulated to all other parties. This motion
wasn’t circulated.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): In the light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become notice of a motion.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                          (The late Mr Matlanyane)

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –


  (1) notes with sadness the unexpected passing on of Comrade Helen
       Matlanyane’s brother on 21 March 2006; and


  (2) extends its sincere condolences to Comrade Matlanyane and her family
       in their time of bereavement.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                        MS N D NTWANAMBI HOSPITALISED


                             (Draft Resolution)

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Sekela Sihlalo lohloniphekile,
ngiphakamisa sishukumiso lesingakabikwa ngaphambilini:

  Kutsi leNdlu-

    1) ikhone kubeka emithandazweni yayo Lilunga laleNdlu, umhlonishwa
       Nosipho Ntwanambi, lesikhuluma nje usesimeni lesibi ngobe sekubonwa
       ngekusa lapha esibhedlela eGroote Schuur;


    2) ikhumbule kutsi kusukela ngemnyaka lophelile umhlonishwa Ntwanambi
       abengena aphuma esibhedlela;


    3) ngako-ke iyacela kutsi emalunga aleNdlu amsingatse emithandazweni
       yawo; kantsi

(4)   iyakwemukela kutsi bengingajabula, njengaSosiswebhu waleNdlu, kutsi
ngalelinye lilanga sesibe nesikhatsi sekuyawubeka umkhuleko nome ekhaya
kakhe naangabe sewuphumile esibhedlela. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of Siswati draft resolution follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council-


1) should please remember one member of this House, the hon Nosipho
  Ntwanambi, who, as we speak is in great agony in Groote Schuur hospital;


2) keep in mind that, since last year, the hon Ntwanambi has been in and
  out of hospital;

3) therefore requests members to embrace her in their personal prayers; and

4) notes that if wishes were horses, I would love it, as the Chief Whip of
  the Council, if one day we as the House could go together to offer some
  words of encouragement and prayers for her at the hospital, or even at
  home once she has been discharged. I thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Is there any
objection to the motion?

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I would just like to ask that someone
should interpret the motion because most of it couldn’t be understood since
there was no English interpretation. We couldn’t understand most of what
was said.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will you please sit
down. Thank you. Are there any further motions without notice?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, on a point of order, and this is a reasonable
request: We should have an interpreting service. I also tried to listen to
the Chief Whip and I know it’s a sad motion. I don’t see why you should
reject the point of order just because it’s coming from the DA.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Will you please sit
down.

Mr A WATSON: Yes, Chair, I will indeed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you. We will
therefore proceed to the subject for discussion as printed on the Order
Paper. [Interjections.] Will you please be quiet.

We would like to welcome our Minister for Justice and Constitutional
Development, the hon B Mabandla. You may proceed, hon Minister.


          HUMAN RIGHTS ARE PEOPLE’S RIGHTS: DEVELOPMENT SINCE 1994


                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson,
hon members, today’s debate is a very important one, more so since this
year is the 10th anniversary of our Constitution.
The major theme of our government’s human rights programme has been that of
transformation and equity. The 69 people who were shot dead on 21 March
1960 by apartheid policemen lost their lives for demanding a very basic
human right - the right to be free to walk the streets of the land of their
birth without restrictions imposed by a passbook. The passbook was used, as
we all know, by the then apartheid regime as a tool to limit and deny human
rights and violate the human dignity of Africans wherever they went in the
land of their birth.

The struggle against the dompas therefore was a struggle for human rights,
a struggle for the freedom to move about as one chooses. Thus, it is
correct for me to say that Sharpeville played a pivotal role in the history
of this country. It is for this reason that it was chosen as a site for
signing the new Constitution into law.

On 10 December 1996, International Human Rights Day, the then President
Nelson Mandela, when signing our new Constitution into law remarked that:
``Out of many Sharpevilles which haunt our history was born the unshakeable
determination that respect for human life, liberty and well-being must be
enshrined as rights beyond the power of any force to diminish.’’

In this age of hope, and as a result of the heroic actions of many South
Africans, human rights have become the cornerstone of our democracy. Our
Constitution is founded upon human dignity, the achievement of equality and
the advancement of human rights and freedoms. And most importantly, the
enshrinement of socioeconomic rights in our Bill of Rights is an indication
of our commitment to the fundamental transformation of our society. It
anchors what we call a developmental state, an interventionist state that
intervenes to improve the quality of life for its people.

This year human rights celebrations also coincide, as I indicated to you,
with this anniversary, which is the 10th anniversary. Our Constitution was
also influenced, I must remind you, by the Freedom Charter, a historic
document that bears testimony to our deep commitment to the eradication of
racism in all its forms and to our respect for human rights for all. In it
our movement declares that ``South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
black and white’’ and that ``All national groups shall have equal rights’’;
that ``All shall be equal before the law’’ and ``All shall enjoy human
rights.’’

I want to use this occasion as Minister for Justice to indicate our
commitment to accelerating transformation and bringing justice closer to
our people. Access to justice is a fundamental human right.

We will approach this in so many ways. One area of great challenge is that
of improving efficiency in our court system; in other words, dealing
effectively with the case backlogs that we are experiencing. It is a matter
that we are discussing with the National Prosecuting Authority and with our
magistrates. It is a matter that my predecessors have had discussions on
with the judges themselves. It is a matter that serves as a priority area
within the JCPS cluster.

One other important challenge that we will seek to address is that of
transforming our court system. The Superior Courts Bill and the 14th
Constitution Amendment Bill are important Bills that lie at the core of
transformation of the judiciary. I want to say very quickly that there are
many important areas of transformation that everyone agrees to, for
example, the rationalisation of the courts.

Colleagues, you will know the hardships of many South Africans situated or
living far away from the courts. The experiences of hardship are all well
known to us. So, we must make sure that in the course of this year this
Bill will be passed. That should be the objective. The discussions around
the Bills have been drawn out. My comrades and colleagues, the Chairperson
of the Portfolio Committee of Justice in the National Assembly and Kgoshi
in this House, are aware of how long and extensive the deliberations have
been around these Bills.

Discussions around the Bills started during the time of our late Comrade
Dullah Omar into the period of service by Justice Minister Mr Maduna, the
former Minister, and it now serves before the portfolio committee during my
tenure as Minister of Justice. Surely we owe our people justice. We have to
ensure that the House does pass those Bills.

We are also going to work very hard to fast-track the Child Justice Bill. I
am pleased to say that work has been concluded in this regard and that this
Bill should be dealt with by Parliament soon.

The Bills I have just mentioned are important and critical for the
transformation of the justice system, and for bringing justice closer to
the people. Let me also take this opportunity to indicate to you that my
department is in the process of completing a draft legal services sector
charter, and in time we will place this before the public. I am hoping that
this will happen in the course of this year.

As a cluster, we are particularly concerned about contact crime and we are
prioritising this area. We have heard about a number of cases of abuse of
young persons and children, and of the abuse of women. I must say that it
is a matter that not only the JCPS cluster should be seized with, in other
words finding the solutions to these challenges it presents, but there must
be prosecutions that are effective; and the NPA should work hard towards
working with the police, the magistracy and judges towards addressing this
particular challenge in our country.

I must say I know that a number of people here, who know Judge President
Ngoepe, were moved at the loss he suffered when his
grandchild was murdered and the nanny of the grandchild was raped. So we
are indeed challenged and always reminded of the challenge when it receives
prominence in the media.

Let me conclude by saying that on Monday I had the honour of receiving from
my counterpart, Minister Pandor, the torch of peace, which has now been
passed on to my department for the next two months. My department will use
this period to highlight the plight of many women and children in our
country who are caught in the cycle of violence. Our programme for dealing
with this matter will be strengthened by allocating to them more human and
financial resources.

Let me then complete my address by citing our President on Human Rights Day
in 2004 because what he said is pertinent to our time and appropriate for
me to refer and cite as I talk to you here today. This is what the
President said:


   As South Africans we are all partners in the great enterprise of ensuring
   that the promise of our Constitution is fully realised, making a positive
   impact on the lives of all our citizens. Like the generations before us,
   I urge all of you to stand together and not rest until the human rights
   set in our Constitution are realised.


I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F NYANDA: Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekileyo... [Chairperson, hon
members...]

... it is indeed important that this event takes place on this Human Rights
Day to celebrate it. It emphasises the central role of the Constitution in
protecting the rights that our people won through a protracted and costly
struggle.

Kumele amalungelo abantu emapulazini ahlonishwe futhi abhekisiswe kahle,
ngoba ngezikhathi zonke abantu basemapulazini basebenza amahora amade.
Futhi, esikhathini esiningi abantu bavalelwa amanzi yilaba bantu
ababasebenzelayo ukuthi bangawatholi ngesikhathi abawafuna ngaso.
Babanikeza amanzi ngesikhathi esifunwa yibo. Okunye futhi ukuthi abantu
basemapulazini basebenza amahora amade kodwa ekupheleni kwenyanga bathole u-
R400,00 – imali ongeke uthenge ukudla ngayo. Siyabonga kuhulumeni
kaKhongolose.
Kwesinye isikhathi uthola umndeni wonke uhlezi eduze komgwaqo, uxoshiwe
epulazini ungazi ukuthi kufanele uyephi. Umzabalazo awukapheli,
sisazabalaza. Sizabalazela amalungelo okuwukuthi kufanele ngesikhathi sonke
silwe. Ngeke sithi konke kuphelile kodwa abanye abantu besanikezelwa
emabhubesini ukuthi abadle. Abanye basaboshelwa emva kwezimoto zibahudule
baze bafe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The rights of farm dwellers must be observed and respected. Farm dwellers
often work long hours. Also, these people are unable to drink water when
they want to, because their employers would cut off the water. These
employers only give these farm dwellers water at the times most convenient
to them. Farm dwellers work long hours and yet they only receive R400,00
per month, which is not even enough for buying food. We thank the ANC
government.

In certain instances you find the whole family living at the side of the
road, not knowing their next destination, because they had been evicted
from the farm. The struggle is not yet over. We are still struggling. We
are fighting for rights, and we need to fight at every turn. We cannot just
relax and say it’s all over if people are still being fed to the lions.
Others are still tied behind bakkies and dragged until they are dead.]

We clearly know that our struggle is unfolding, one campaign leading to
another in a never-ending stream until independence is won.

Sizozabalaza kuze kufike lapha konke kulunga khona singuKhongolose.
Siyakhumbula laphaya ngokubulawa kwabantu e-Sharpville. Abantu abanga-69
bafa ngalolo suku kwathi abanga-200 bagcwala ezibhedlela. Babebulawelwa
ukuthi babengafuni ukuphatha amapasi. Siyasho singuKhongolose ukuthi lokhu
siyokulwela kuze kube sekugcineni. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[We, as the African National Congress, will fight until we win. We remember
Sharpeville, where 69 people were killed in one day and at least 200 were
taken to hospital. People were killed merely for refusing to carry passes.
We, as the African National Congress, say we will fight for this until the
bitter end.]

Women are being used ...

... ezikhathini eziningi. Omama bayahlukunyezwa ezindlini. Sikhuluma
ngomzabalazo ophakathi endlini. Abantwana abancane abanezinyanga ezimbili
badlwengulwa obaba. Ukuhlukumeza konke lokho. Hhayi bo! Phansi
ngokudlwengula, phansi! [Uhleko]. Sicela ukuthi omama bangahlukunyezwa.
Esikhathini esiningi umama uma eyofuna umsebenzi, akazukuwuthola engakavuki
ngaphansi. [Ubuwelewele.] Siyabonga-ke ukuthi njengoba sisemzabalazweni
womama, sisalwa futhi sisasho ukuthi omama nabantwana mabangahlukunyezwa
emakhaya, emsebenzini nasemphakathini.

Njengoba sibonile, umntwana wemantshi ubulawe kabuhlungu engazange aphume
aye emgwaqeni. Ubulawelwe endlini yakubo. Isisebenzi salapha ekhaya
sidlwengulelwe phakathi endlini. Phansi ngokudlwengula, phansi! Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... in many instances. Women are abused in their homes. We are now talking
about the struggle inside the home. Children as young as two months old are
raped by their very own fathers. This is all abuse. Hell, no! Down with
rape, down! [Laughter.] We are pleading for women not to be abused. In most
instances women have to sleep with their potential employers before they
are employed. [Interjections.] We are, however, grateful that we as women
in the liberation struggle are still fighting and we are still saying that
women and children must not be abused, either in their homes, the workplace
or the community in general.

As we learnt from the media, the magistrate’s child was killed without her
going into the street. She was killed in her own house. The domestic worker
was raped inside the house where she was working. Down with rape, down! I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr O M THETJENG: Chairperson, I wish the Congolese government would know
the very same things that she has mentioned - that they have laws that they
have to implement to deal with the matters, as she has just said.

On 21 March 1960, as you said, people marched against the pass laws in
Sharpeville and many were slain by the apartheid regime. A peaceful march
led to the massacre of 69 defenceless people. The apartheid masters, who
were never brought to book, had no empathy with human life.

Yesterday was the day to remember them in various ways, including at mass
meetings that were held across the country. Our celebrations should not be
confined only to fallen heroes and heroines, but should also include those
who are still alive. We acknowledge the contributions made by people like
Mahatma Gandhi and many others.

There are many individuals who were denied these basics, such as Maki
Skosana, whose life was taken prematurely by a power-hungry mob that defied
pleas from people like Desmond Tutu. The necklacing of people was a
terrible way of denying them their human rights. The developments since are
not entirely pleasing, though. Our Constitution has bestowed these rights
on all South Africans. The Human Rights Commission is a statutory body
established to promote these rights in all spheres of our society. People
have been tainted for reasons that show hatred.

There is the continual abuse of women, through rape, by men; while some are
sjambokked by their husbands. We are observing an increase in the rape of
children. Recently a baby girl, whose parents loved her very much, was
killed in her house by thugs who went in with the sole purpose of robbing
the family of their belongings. The helper was also raped. Now the question
is: What’s going to happen to the culprits who actually committed this
heinous act? Are they going to be allowed to walk the streets of South
Africa after killing a young child?

It seems to me that since 1994 offenders have more rights than victims.
[Interjections.] They are given bail easily. In prison they are given five-
star treatment, and they are out of jail through parole sooner rather than
later. Full human rights should be restored to the victims of crimes,
particularly of murder, rape and hijacking, including cash-in-transit
hijackings. Let us allow South Africans to feel protected in their homes,
on city streets, in shopping malls - everywhere.

Murderers and rapists should not only receive life sentences – which, of
course, they never complete - but should also know that if they kill or
rape, they too may be killed by the state that is trying to protect its
citizens. [Interjections.] The Victim’s Charter will come in handy in this
country, outlining how victims are to be protected from the horrendous acts
they face in society.

Many South Africans are also denied their rights to medicine to deal with
their HIV/Aids conditions. Only antiretroviral drugs, ARVs, can allow them
to live a little longer and to oversee the growth of their little ones
rather than die while they are still very young. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Will the member take a question?

Mr O M THETJENG: No, Chairperson.

What about their rights to free basic water, as contained in our
Constitution? You are quite right to say that some people are given too
little water, but we see people in municipalities that have been given
large chunks of money. They can’t provide basic water to the rural
communities. Pipes are underground, but they are dry; they don’t have
water. This is one of the things that our people need to get: the water
that they need so much.

There are heroes and heroines who died, as we said, but there are also
those who are still alive. We talk about people like Nelson Mandela. We
salute his contribution to this country. No man could ever kill the vision
he had about this country.

We also salute women like Helen Suzman who stood here in Parliament against
all odds and opposed all laws that undermined the dignity of blacks in this
country. Her contribution will go a long way in history, despite objections
from other people who feel that they alone were the ones who determined
this country’s destiny. [Applause.]

We remember her gallant effort to highlight the plight of a man who was
killed on one of the farms in Limpopo in the 1980s. She stood alone,
wanting justice to be done to the perpetrators. There are many more
examples we can give, but this is just one of them. Regarding Desmond
Tutu’s contribution, when Maki Skosana was killed he pleaded for her, but
people never listened and her life was shortened.

When the Chief Whip was actually moving a motion in this House today, a
simple request was denied by the Chair for him to repeat what was said in a
language that people could actually understand, because the system was not
functioning. Whose rights are we talking about in this House when simple
things that are supposed to be done are not done? [Applause.]
[Interjections.] Laws have been passed ... [Interjections.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, in any country the decision of the Chair
will always be respected. It can’t be challenged. This member is out of
order, because he has challenged the decision of the Chair. The Chair ruled
on that matter, and he is questioning it. I think he is out of order,
Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I think the order is
maintained. You can proceed.

Mr O M THETJENG: It is surprising and disheartening to still find South
Africans that are being threatened and forced to vote for particular
political parties, failing which their social grants will be withdrawn.
Where are the human rights we are talking about? [Interjections.] People
are being threatened in that if they don’t vote, particularly for the
ruling party, their grants will be withdrawn. Where are the human rights we
are talking about? [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you, hon Chairperson, for the time that I have been
given to discuss ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, order! Can we have
order please so that we can have a smooth debate. You may continue, hon
member.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Minister for
the presentation she has given on the justice system and what we need to
look at, concerning the Bills that she mentioned.

The government has gone a long way in ensuring the upholding of human
rights by continuing to provide water, electricity, houses, roads and basic
social services. Transformation is an ongoing process and people’s needs
are never wholly satisfied because some people are born while others die.

Human rights are people’s rights, human and people’s rights are family
rights, family rights are community rights. These rights are intertwined
and the rights and responsibilities impact on all categories, individuals
or groups. And that is why the massacre of 21 March 1960 had such an effect
on all of us and, in fact, on the whole world. Even now, it’s effect is
still remembered and felt because the rights and responsibilities impact on
all people in the communities.

We now look at the rights of people from conception to birth. The rights of
the embryo and the foetus are the rights that are denied children to be
born when they are aborted, as we call it termination of pregnancy”. Some
of those embryos or foetuses would be Ministers and some of them would be
you and me sitting right here.

From birth to one year, the infant has the right to be fed with adequate
nutritious food, be it breast milk or substitutes and solids. The infant
has to bond and be taught how to love and be loved. The infant has the
right to be taught to communicate eye-to- eye and have contact through
being placed either on the chest, back or lap of the mother or relatives.
These are the things that are needed by a child early on if it is to be a
wholesome and well-brought-up human being.

Children’s rights, which have just been mentioned by our Minister, also
need to be looked at because children need to be given primary care,
including proper education and discipline. And the child has the right to
be brought up in a family environment in order to know how to relate to a
father or father figure, or mother or a substitute and also how to relate
to siblings. There are children who are unable to relate to other people.
Perhaps, that is why they end up as street children because this important
part was missing in their early lives.

As adults, women and men have basic and role-related rights and
responsibilities, as individuals or as family members, in the work place or
in the community. We cannot run away from the fact that these rights have
to go with responsibilities. That is why a man is expected to look after
his family and that is why a woman is the manager of the household. She is
the one who disciplines everybody in the home, because everybody in the
home situation is a child to the woman who is in the household.

The neglect of basic needs is abuse on its own. The rights are about
equality and equity, dignity, freedom of movement, safety and security,
property rights for all, freedom of association, freedom to choose one’s
religion and political and national freedom.

If we are going to say we are equal, what I wouldn’t like to say is that I
am equal to a man who is a drunkard because that equality is not complete.
I cannot be equal to a man who is a drunkard. Rather, let’s look at equity
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, your time has expired.
Be equal to the respect of the House.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mnu J S MAPHALALA: Sihlalo, lolu Suku lwamaLungelo eSintu luwusuku
olubaluleke kakhulu ngoba lusukela kulaba bantu abanga-69 abafa. Kodwa
okwenza kube lula uma kukhulunywa ukuthi ngisho ezikoleni udaba luwumusho
owodwa. Ngisho kwababelucwaninga, akekho usolwazi owayengavuma ukuthi
aphase umuntu owayekhuluma ngaleyo ndaba. Ababhala ngalolu daba ngendlela
ejulile ebizwa nge-thesis, bathola iziqu zabo emanyuvesi aphesheya ngoba
uma wawubhale ngalo lapha, wawungazithola usenkingeni. Ngakho-ke luwudaba
olubaluleke kakhulu, okususelwa kulo le ndaba yamalungelo esintu.

Mangisho ukuthi izwe lakithi laseNingizimu Afrika selenze, kusukela ngo-
1994, into ecishe iwedlule onke amazwe ase-Afrika maqondana nokugqamisa
udaba lwamalungelo esintu. Kodwa inkinga ekhona yinye: umphumela wakhona
awungangokufakwa kwezimali ukuthi lolu daba luzwakale kahle emphakathini.
UMthethosisekelo wethu uthi kunemiphakathi emine – amakhaladi, amaNdiya,
abelungu nama-Afrika. Kodwa inkinga enkulu eyenza ukuthi lolu daba lufane
nokuthela amanzi edadeni ukuthi luqhamuka kube sengathi kukhulunywa
nomphakathi owodwa, mhlawumbe waseNgilandi. Manje-ke umbuzo uthi, ngoba
imali iyafakwa kangaka, kwenzeka kanjani kube sengathi akwenzeki lutho,
kanti udaba lolimi okuyilona olushayela lolu daba.

Ngibona ukuthi kufanele sonke sivule amehlo, lolu daba silufake ngezilimi
zemiphakathi namasiko ayo imiphakathi bese sibheka ukuthi imiphumela ekhona
ithini. Asingavele nje sivulele isiNgisi, sivulele isiNgisi yonke indawo
nasemaphepheni ngoba izigidigidi zabantu bakithi – siyakwazi futhi
singofakazi - aziyizwa leyo ndaba.

Sikhulumile futhi ngiyasivumela isikhulumi uNyanda okhulume ngodaba
oluthinta umoya, udaba lwasemapulazini lapho okulusizi olwesabekayo khona.
Nokho kufanele kube khona izinto ezibhaliwe abazizwayo labo bantu
abazigqila emapulazini, bafunde kahle futhi bezwe ukuthi kuthiwani kubo.
Masingajahi ukuthi sinikeze abantu abazobanika ulwazi nabo bedlulele
kwabanye bafune ukuchazelwa ukuthi kushiwo ukuthini.

Kungakuhle uma imali eningi singayifaka ekutheni abantu bezwe ukuthi
kuthiwani – yonke le miphakathi, sikuvume futhi ukuthi asiwona umphakathi
owodwa, asiyona iNgilandi. Singafisa ukuba iNgilandi kodwa ngeke kwenzeke.
Mine imiphakathi ekhona. Uma sesikuvumile lokho, kufuneka sisebenzise imali
kakhulu ukusiza abantu bakithi.

Sesishilo ukuthi izwe lethu lenze okukhulu kakhulu okuwadlulayo amazwe
amaningi ezwekazini lethu elilapha. Elinye iphuzu elibalulekile maqondana
nalolu daba lwamalungelo esintu udaba lokuthi kufanele mhlawumbe sike
sicabange ukuthi kungaba njani ohlelweni lwezifundo uma singafaka isifundo
esizofundiswa bese simakwa, ukwenzela ukuthi kusukela kwenzekile lokhu
umphumela wabantu abedlule lapho basifunda lesi sifundo sebeyoba usizo
esikhathini esizayo.

Lokho kungasiza ngoba thina esafunda ngesikhathi sobandlululo yayingageji i-
Great Trek; ingageji i-Blood River – siyicula; engageji u-Jan  Van  Riebeeck
- simcula bese siphasa ngamalengiso futhi lokhu kubuye njalo, njalo,  njalo.
[Uhleko.] Kuyasiza lokho ukuthi sifake into ezobuya  njalo,  njalo  lapha-ke
isizosiza thina. Ngaleso sikhathi yayenza ukuthi uma  uthi  ubuza  ezomlando
ngivele ngishaye i-Great Trek, ngishaye u-Jan Van Riebeeck, ngishaye  ubani.
[Uhleko.] Kudingekile-ke ukuthi sikucabange lokho. Ngiyathokoza.  [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr J S MAPHALALA: Chairperson, Human Rights Day  is  very,  very  important
because it has its origins in an event when 69 people died.  What  makes  it
easy when we are  talking  is  that  even  at  schools,  the  issue  is  one
sentence. Even with regard to  those  who  were  doing  research  into  this
issue, no professor could agree to pass somebody who dealt with this  issue.
Those who wrote their theses on  this  subject  obtained  their  degrees  at
overseas universities because if you wrote about it  here,  you  could  find
yourself in trouble. Therefore the origins of human rights are important.

Let me say that our country, South Africa, since 1994 has done  much  better
than any  other  country  in  Africa  concerning  the  human  rights  issue.
However, there is only one problem: the results are not  comparable  to  the
money that we are investing so that this issue could  be  better  understood
in the community. Our Constitution recognises four  communities,  Coloureds,
Indians, whites and Africans. The problem that makes this issue  complicated
is that it always seems as if we are talking to one  community,  in  England
perhaps. The question is, as money is being invested in this area, why  does
it seem as if nothing is happening? It  is  language  that  is  the  driving
force behind this issue.

We all have to  open  our  eyes.  We  have  to  disseminate  information  to
communities about this issue in their own languages and  see  if  there  are
any results. Let us not use English everywhere, even in newspapers,  because
millions of people don’t understand this issue.

I concur with the hon Nyanda, who  spoke  about  the  issue  concerning  the
wind; the issue of farms where there is sorrow. There must  be  things  that
are written for people on farms so that they can understand  what  is  being
said to them.

In trying to make sure that people understand what we  are  saying,  let  us
put in more money. Let us also agree that we are not one community.  We  are
not England. We can wish to be England, but that will not happen. There  are
four communities. If we agree on  that,  we  must  use  money  to  help  our
people.

We have already said that our country has done better  than  most  countries
in Africa. Another point concerning the human rights issue is that  we  have
to think about introducing a subject in schools that is going to  be  taught
and marked. The result of that is that people who have studied this  subject
would be helpful to the community

That could help, because for us, who studied  during  apartheid,  the  Great
Trek and Blood River  were  always  there;  we  were  singing  it.  Jan  van
Riebeeck was always there, and we were singing it and  passing  with  flying
colours! [Laughter.] It helps to introduce something  that  will  come  back
again and again. In that period, whenever you asked about history,  I  would
tell you about the Great Trek and Jan van Riebeeck. [Laughter.] We  have  to
think about that. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs A N D QIKANE: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, undoubtedly,
1994 represents a human rights watershed moment in the development of human
rights in this country. Because of the symbolism and the significance of
equal political rights first exercised in 1994, later developments seem to
pale in comparison. However, the most significant human rights developments
came in 1996 with the adoption of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights
that it entrenches as the foundation of our democratic society.

These human rights required further expansion in the legal framework
through their own enabling legislation, as well as their development,
whereas the courts, and especially the Constitutional Court, have played a
significant role in pursuing the latter. The development of human rights
has faltered in certain critical areas due to delays in the drafting and
enabling of the legislation.

As far as the rights of children, women and the victims of sexual offences
are concerned, the long delays in the drafting of new legislation to give
expression to these human rights have caused untold and unnecessary harm.
But, by far the biggest challenge that we face in so far as human rights
development is concerned, is not the legal framework, but rather the
practical implementation and day-to-day realisation of human rights.

It remains a sad fact that there are many South Africans who suffer abuse
and exploitation in clear contravention of the Bill of Rights. It is thus a
question of the awareness and enforcement of these human rights that is
lacking and that is why we often speak of a culture of human rights. What
we should acknowledge is that building a culture will take significant
effort and resources in order to counter many centuries of discrimination.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I know that at some
point there were suspicions that we are manipulating our judgments in terms
of time. I’ll advise hon members to watch the clock so that they make their
own judgments on whether our ruling is consistent with what they observe in
front of them. However, I will proceed to call upon hon N D Hendrickse.

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Hon Minister, hon Chairperson, hon members, 21 March
marks the anniversary of the Sharpeville and Langa massacres where comrades
died in the struggle against the apartheid regime. This event also
mobilised the international community against the apartheid forces, and I
dare to say that it was a turning point in our history. And I would just
like to say that, today, we must not see this as a mere academic debate,
for those of us who lived through this time know that it was a terrible
time. I also want to say that I hope these families and the slain people
have been honoured at this time.

South Africa has achieved a lot in the past 12 years, but much more could
be done. There has been the legal dismantling of apartheid, though we still
see the effects of systemic racial discrimination in our society. Political
liberation has not been accompanied by the economic liberation although we
see BEE making progress. People are aware of the social welfare services
and benefits entitled to them, but they cannot experience them. In essence,
the poor in South Africa do not enjoy basic human rights, as the quality of
their lives has not improved.

I think we have set the bar too high when drafting the Bill of Rights,
especially the socioeconomic rights, access to health, free education, jobs
for all, etc. We must give effect to this; perhaps the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for SA, Asgisa, will assist in this regard. Until
social justice is achieved human rights will only be enjoyed by a
privileged few. An issue such as excessive police force in service delivery
protests is disturbing, as police action must play itself out in the
context of the culture of human rights. [Time expired.]

Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chair, hon Minister and the House, Human Rights Day,
as it is called today, is a commemoration of the ghastly events that
happened on the 21 March 1960. On that fateful day, 69 peaceful
demonstrators and marchers were killed in a hail of police gunfire at
Sharpeville and many others were wounded. Those tragic events were
triggered by the pass law system according to which black South Africans
were compelled by law to carry the hated dompas.

Since 1994, black South Africans have also enjoyed human rights, which they
were previously denied. They are no longer discriminated against in terms
of their skin colour or material possessions. However, looking at our
relationships as black South Africans, one sees that there are tribal and
ethnic differences among us where certain race groups are despised and
relegated to the background. This unpleasant state of affairs does not
auger well in terms of our human relationships and is bordering on the same
ills that we had been complaining about.

Le fa go ntse jalo, maemo a gompieno a botoka thata fa a tshwantshanngwa le
a maloba. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.] [However, conditions have improved very
much today when compared to the past. [Thank you.] [Applause.]]

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, well, we are happy that this instrument is
installed in front of us; thus we can see that there is no manipulation of
the system. I want to pass condolences to the family of Kubhayi, some of
whose members were wiped out on the eve of Human Rights Day in Protea,
Soweto, when five people died in a car accident.

I want to address myself to hon member Thetjeng when he argued that in this
country the ANC-led government doesn’t give people grants if they don’t
vote for it. I want to show you that what you are saying is far from the
truth. Over 11 million people are receiving grants in this country and the
ANC government has been voted in by far less than that. Therefore, hon
Thetjeng, what you are saying is far from the truth. In fact, you are
liberal with the truth.

Secondly, you wanted to know what will happen to the alleged murderers and
rapists who were arrested for killing Judge Ngoepe’s grandchild and raping
the housekeeper, and also raised the issue of calling for a death sentence.

You believe, as the DA, that there must be independence of justice; that
the justice system must enjoy independence, and that there must be no
political interference, but at the same time you know that the alleged
perpetrators in this regard will be arrested. It means the law is going to
take its course. Now, what do you want the government to do? Do you want us
to interfere?

Regarding the death sentence, the Constitutional Court, which is the
highest court in this land pronounced on the matter. When they weighed
these two options - the right to life and the issue of death sentence -
they took a decision that the death sentence in this country is not
allowed. Do you want us to interfere as politicians to tell the
Constitutional Court to change its decision? What about the independence of
the judiciary? It means you are forked-tongued! You have double standards
in the way you deal with the issues.

You are also saying that in this country, victims have fewer rights than
perpetrators, and you know that this not true. Hon Thetjeng, sir, you were
party to the processes that developed this Constitution. Not only that, you
have been party to the process of making laws in this country, but now you
speak against your own decisions. What type of a person are you? Can you
really be trusted?

Concerning Mrs Mchunu, she says that the issue of abortion is not OK. She
says it is not OK, but she was party to the development of this
Constitution, which was passed.

In terms of chapter 2, clause 12 of the Bill of Rights:


   Everyone has the right to bodily and psychological integrity, which
   includes the right –


      (a) to make decisions concerning reproduction;
      (b) to security in and control over their body ...

[Interjections.]


Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I think the speaker is not delivering to us
...[Laughter.]... he is busy correcting other people. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can you take a seat! Hon
member, can you take a seat! And Mr Shiceka, can you proceed with the
debate?

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Chair, the issue that Ma Mchunu is raising, is an
issue that is covered by our Constitution. Do you subscribe to a notion
that says South Africa is a constitutional state, which means whatever we
do is derived from the Constitution of this country? Do you want us to
deviate from the Constitution? It means then, Ms Mchunu, you must tell us
what your party believes in.

Mr A WATSON: Will the member take the question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, will you take a
question?

Mr S SHICEKA: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Yes, he will take a question.

Mr A WATSON: Are you saying to this House that you believe implicitly in
the Constitution?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member?

Mr S SHICEKA: Definitely!

Mr A WATSON: Then why do you want to change the provision on the Leader of
the Opposition?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Watson, you are out of order,
sit down! You want to make a statement. That is not a question. Can you
continue, hon member?

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Chair. Concerning the issue of children’s rights,
children’s rights are enshrined in the Constitution - this is the area that
we use. Now, you are raising an issue to say that we must have a
patriarchal society where women are subservient to men.

Ms Mchunu, do you mean that women in this country are children? That is
what you are saying. This means that you are undermining women as people,
and we are trying to educate you.

Siyakuhabulisa maqondana nokuthi omama bayalingana nobaba, kodwa wena uthi
masibuyele emuva. Yinkinga-ke leyo. [Ubuwelewele.]
[We want to update you by telling you that women are now equal to men.
However, you still want us to live in the past. That would be a problem.]
[Interjections.]]

I want to say that, today, we have been offered an opportunity to pause and
reflect on the long journey that has been travelled and traversed since
1994 by our democratic government. This journey is aimed at ensuring that
all and sundry, irrespective of their social and economic status or
stratification, enjoys the first, the second and the third generation
rights enshrined in the supreme law of the country.

The genesis of our Constitution, which is amongst the best in the world, is
based on the Freedom Charter. Our predecessors outlined, in 1955, what type
of society the people of the Republic should live under. We will always use
the Freedom Charter as a barometer to measure progress and development in
achieving the rights for all.

Today’s theme is, “Human Rights are People’s Rights: Development in South
Africa since 1994”. A lot has been achieved in this country, particularly
in the first and the third generation rights. Everyone enjoys dignity and
equality, especially in the eyes of the state. People are proud of being
South Africans, not only those in the country, but even those in other
parts of the world.

I think all of us heard when the UN Secretary-General was saying that South
Africa, as a country, has made strategic contributions in the world and it
is highly respected. And I think as South Africans we must be proud ...
[Applause.] ... that we have a government that is highly respected all over
the world. The instrument here is indicating that my time is over.

In conclusion, let us be patriotic! Let the Freedom Charter be taught in
schools. I hope that the Minister will take that to her colleagues. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I am
very happy that we have had such a good debate. I am just going to pick and
highlight some of the issues that have come up, and I just want to say to
Comrade Nyanda ...
Ngiyabonga kakhulu uma usikhumbuza ukuthi abantu bethu basakhalaza ngokuthi
amalungelo abo abawatholi kahle. IsiZulu ngiyasizamazama, kodwa ngifuna
ukukhuluma sona. [Thank you very much for reminding us that our people are
still complaining that they are not treated fairly. I am struggling with
isiZulu, but I want to speak it.]

Ke tla bua le ka Setswana. [Laughter.] [I will also speak Setswana.]
[Laughter.]]

Engikushoyo lapha ukuthi . . . [I mean to say that ...]

. . . justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done. We must
make sure at all times that our people begin to have confidence in our
justice system.

Many of us know that in real life, especially in remote areas, people still
feel that justice is not on the people’s side. In the JCPS cluster, it is
our responsibility that we really work towards making sure that people
trust and have confidence in the system. It does not help when people
sometimes feel that there is collusion.

Noma siya ezimbizweni abantu baye basho ukuthi kukhona abantu  okusengathi
banokucindezela abanye abantu, njengezinye izimantshi kanye namaphoyisa.
Ngalokho-ke abantu bangawatholi kahle amalungelo, nobulungiswa. [Even if we
go to izimbizo some people say that there are people who still appear to be
oppressed by people like magistrates and the police. Therefore justice is
not done and people do not get fair treatment.]

Some say that even in the manner in which cases are conducted, one finds
that victims can be excluded through the use of language where, in fact,
the language that is used may well be used among the people who speak it,
who are also black, but choose to speak English or Afrikaans. Those are
issues of access to justice and so, really, you have brought up a very
important issue. However, we must work together as Members of Parliament to
really strengthen the justice system to have proper oversight of what
actually is happening.

During elections I went to a remote area and I am told that there are
unresolved killings in the area and there is suspicion that there is
collusion. We need to find out whether such things do happen in fact. So,
we will have to address these particular issues and make sure that our
people access justice.

The member, hon Thjetjeng [Interjections.] ... I am sorry ... I really
apologise, but the point is that I really wanted to remind you that we do
have a Victims’ Charter and in fact the charter actually passed through the
House. What we need to do, and this would have been a valid critique, is to
monitor and ensure that people understand their rights in accordance with
the Victims’ Charter.

The other thing that I thought was very important and which was mentioned
here was the whole question of ... I think Comrade Shiceka has actually
responded so well to many of the issues, but I just want to highlight a few
that you have raised and that I think are very, very important.

We have to work together. We really have a responsibility. We all need to
work together to ensure that our people understand their rights. We have to
work in our constituencies. If we agree that the justice system is the
weaker link, ie if we say that we have made advances in the economic and
social area, but that in the area of justice, policing, etc, we are weaker,
then we have to work together to strengthen the justice system.

I think that much can be done to strengthen our communities, such as
working together as MPs, joining hands with NGOs and other members of
government at the various levels to really bring about a greater
understanding of our Constitution and our rights. We must lead by example -
by saying no to violence against women and children, for instance. We must
be seen to be very active in the sectors we operate. Whether we operate in
academia or in our churches, that impact must be felt.

Let me say that the Sexual Offences and Community Affairs Unit which is in
the National Prosecutorial Authority has actually been very innovative and
has done very well under Advocate Thoko Majokweni. One important innovation
is that they have linked up with the education department and have begun
what could be termed a process of prevention of gender-related and child-
related violence by doing something very important.

They are also running civic courses to educate young people about the
respect of men and women and about all issues relating to gender. What we
need to do then is to find those kinds of capacities where they lie, either
in government, civil society or NGOs and put in further resources to
strengthen people working in that area. She is going to be so happy to hear
me saying this. All of them will want resources so she will assume that
they will be allocated more money.

Nnyaa, bagarona le buile. Sa me, gompieno, e ne e le go le kgothaletsa gore
re dirisane; re tshwarane ka mabogo re age setšhaba. Go aga setšhaba, ke
utswa mafoko a sebui sengwe se ke sa gakologelweng gore ke mang, mme o kare
ke rre Tlhagale, fa a re ... (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[No, our people have spoken. My role today was to encourage you to work
together, to hold hands to build our nation. In building our nation, I
would like to quote one speaker whose name I cannot recall; however, it
appeared to be Mr Tlhagale who said ... ]

... transformation is an on-going process. “I really think we must know. We
mustn’t be too hard on ourselves but we must know that we have to increase
the pace. Real gains must be made with our transformation agenda. And, as I
said, more and more enabling frameworks in the form of Bills or laws are
coming out. I have heard that the Children’s Bill has passed through
Parliament now and will be signed into law and that again increases
possibilities for improving the quality of life of young persons or
children as it replaces the Child Care Act. Colleagues, I thank you for the
debate. [Applause.]

THE HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms T S Setona): Hon Minister, on behalf of this
august House I want to extend special thanks to you for your time and
contribution to this important debate. We are not just debating for the
sake of expressing our diversity, but also as part and parcel of educating
our broader public in terms of how we as the very frontline leadership of
society and as elected people, see challenges that are confronting men,
women and children in our country, insofar as issues of human rights are
concerned.

On that note, hon Minister and hon members, that concludes the debate and
the business of the day and the House is adjourned.

The Council adjourned at 15:14.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           THURSDAY, 9 MARCH 2006


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) International Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in
        Customs Matters adopted in Brussels on 27 June 2003: Your Customs
        Johannesburg Convention dated 13 July 2004, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum on International Convention on Mutual
        Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters.


2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2006 to 2009.


     b) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing Council for
        2006 to 2011.


     c) Strategic Plan of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2006/07.

          3. The Minister in The Presidency
     a) Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2006 to 2009.



                            FRIDAY, 10 MARCH 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance

      (a)   Government Notice No 44 published in Government Gazette No 28411
          dated 18 January 2006: Exemptions from Supply Chain Management
          Regulations in terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
          Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


      (b)   Government Notice No R.1105 published in Government Gazette No
           28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees in
           terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


2.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

      (a)   Strategic Plan of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
           for 2006 to 2007.


                            MONDAY, 13 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 13 March 2006, called a Joint
    Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
    as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

    The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7 (2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 14 March 2006 at 14:00 in order for Mr Kofi
    Annan, Secretary-General to the United Nations to address the Joint
    Sitting.

    B MBETE, MP                                    M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                                 CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES



National Council of Provinces


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
             during a performance audit of
           the approval and allocation of housing subsidies at Provincial
           housing departments,
           January 2006 [RP 13-2006].

    2.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local Government and
        Administration:

          a) Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
             financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
             reports as at 31 December 2005 for the financial year ended 30
             June 2005 [RP 16-2006].

    3.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Education and Recreation:



          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

    4.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2006 to 2009.

          b) Strategic Plan of Government Communication and Information
             System (GCIS) for 2006 to 2009.


          c) Strategic Plan of Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA)
             for 2006 to 2009.

    5.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Social Services for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Health for 2006/07 to
             2008/09 [RP 29-2006].


    6.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the South African Management Development
             Institute for 2005/06 to 2010/11.

     7.     The following papers are referred to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture for 2006.


        b) Strategic Plan of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank for
           2006/7.


        c) Strategic Plan of the Commission on Restitution of Land Rights
           for 2006/7 – 2008.


        d) Strategic Plan of the Agricultural Research Council for 2006/7 –
           2010/11.


        e) Strategic Plan of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2006/2007.


               f) Strategic Plan of the Onderstepoort Biological Products
                  Ltd for 2006 to 2009.
                  (g)  Strategic Plan of the Perishable Products Export
                  Control Board.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Social Development


   a) Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency for 2006/07
      to 2008/09.

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     (a)    Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
        section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), and supporting documents required in
        terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.



                           TUESDAY, 14 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

      1.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration:

        a) Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
           section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
           Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting
           documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Social Development


    a) Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency for
       2006/07 to 2008/09.


                          WEDNESDAY, 15 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

     1) Diamonds Amendment Bill [B 27B – 2005] – Act No 29 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 10 February 2006);


     2) Diamonds Second Amendment Bill [B 39B – 2005] – Act No 30 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 10 February 2006);

     3) Forestry Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2005] – Act No 35 of 2005
        (assented to and signed by President on 4 March 2006).


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Trade and Industry for 2006 to
        2009.


                           THURSDAY, 16 MARCH 2006


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry


   a) Annual Report of The Office of Consumer Protection for 2004-2005.


   b) Report of the Strategic Industrial Projects (SIP) for April 2002 to
      March 2005.


                            FRIDAY, 17 MARCH 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

   (a)      Report of the Auditor-General on the Declarations of Interest by
      Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Government Employees [RP 19-2006].


2. The Minister of Public Works

   a) Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out Particulars  of
      the Building Programme for 2006-2007 [RP 25-2006].


                            MONDAY, 20 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment Bill,
         submitted by the Minister of Transport on 7 March 2006. Referred
         to the Portfolio Committee on Transport and the Select Committee
         on Public Services.



                          WEDNESDAY, 22 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Membership of Committees


     (1)    The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees:


        Budget
        Appointed: Robinson, Ms D.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council
     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 22 March 2006 and
     transmitted for concurrence:


          i) Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
             Year) [B 4 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 77)


          The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Finance of
          the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



1. The Minister of Defence

   (a)      Strategic Business Plan for the Department of Defence [RP 33-
        2006].

2. Minister of Communications

   (a)      Strategic Plan for the Department of Communications for 2006-
        2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


 1.   Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises on
    the Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary Conference in Marrakesh, Morocco
    in 2002 of the International Telecommunications Union, dated 22 March
    2006:


    The Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises, having
    considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Final Acts of
    the Plenipotentiary Conference in Marrakesh, Morocco in 2002 of the
    International Telecommunications Union, referred to it, recommends that
    the Council, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve
    the said Final Acts.


Report to be considered.


