---
title: 'National Assembly - 12 September 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-09-12
---

TUESDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move at the next
sitting day of the House:

   That the House-

   notes that-


     1) ID president, Patricia de Lille, is the only South African
        parliamentarian invited by the UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, to
        attend a session convened by the United Nations Millennium Project
        and Columbia University’s Earth Institute;
     2) the September 17 meeting is a high-level meeting for examining
        global civil society’s participation in the implementation of the
        Millennium Development Goals, the world’s shared commitment to the
        fight against extreme poverty, hunger, disease and environmental
        degradation; and


     3) she will represent South Africa in an honest manner and will
        acknowledge both our achievements and failures.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, did we hear any
suggestion for a discussion on this motion? It seems I have missed it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Is the member clear that this is a
notice of motion? Is that how you understood it? It is a notice. He is
giving notice.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: It sounds like a statement to me.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Yes, but I am sure the Table will
look at the content thereof and advise him accordingly.

   PRECEDENCE TO SECOND MOTION ON THE ORDER PAPER, AND THEREAFTER TO FIRST
                              ORDER OF THE DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That -


     1) precedence be given to the second motion on the Order Paper in the
        name of Mr D H M Gibson, and that the Speaker be granted an
        opportunity to make a statement immediately thereafter; and


     2) after the statement by the Speaker, precedence be given to the
        first Order of the Day, which concerns the Filling of Vacancies on
        the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa)
        Council.


 Agreed to.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                        (The late Ms Hilda Bernstein)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the House –


     1) notes with shock and profound sadness the passing away of Ms Hilda
        Bernstein on Friday, 8 September 2006;


     2) further notes that Ms Bernstein was a member of the South African
        Labour Party League of Youth until 1940 and in the same year joined
        the Communist Party of South Africa;


     3) recalls that -


        (a)      Hilda was a member of the Johannesburg City Council from
             1940 to 1946;


        (b)      she was the first member of the Communist Party of South
             Africa to be elected as a public representative by an all-
             white electorate;


        (c)      she was a founder member of the first non-racial women’s
             organisation in South Africa, the Federation of South African
             Women; and


        (d)      she was also one of the organisers of the historic Women’s
             March of 9 August 1956;


     4) further recalls that in June 2004 she was awarded the Luthuli
        Silver Award by our democratic government in recognition of her
        contribution to the struggle against apartheid;


     5) acknowledges the great contribution that Hilda made as an activist
        and a great writer; and


     6) conveys its condolences to the Bernstein and Bermar families, her
        children and grandchildren, the African National Congress and the
        South African Communist Party.

 Agreed to.



 DURBAN WINS BID TO HOST THE INTERNATIONAL PARALYMPICS COMMITTEE’S SWIMMING
                             WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the House –


     1) notes with excitement Durban’s win of the bid to host the
        International Paralympics Committee’s Swimming World Championship
        from 2 to 5 December 2006;


     2) further notes that the event is set to bring 600 swimmers and 265
        officials from 60 countries to South Africa;


     3) recalls that South Africa came 19th out of 53 countries at the 2002
        championships held in Argentina, with three gold and two silver
        medals;


     4) acknowledges the strong partnership between Disability Sport South
        Africa, Swimming South Africa, the eThekwini Municipality and the
        major sponsor, Telkom, for making this bid successful; and


     5) conveys its congratulations and excitement on this auspicious event
        and wishes all contestants the best of luck and heartfelt South
        African support.

 Agreed to.


                             CONDUCT OF SPEAKER


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I move

  That the House –


     1) expresses its dismay at the fact that the Speaker, the Hon Baleka
        Mbete, made a public spectacle of herself outside Pollsmoor Prison
        while demonstrating her support for the convicted fraudster, Mr
        Tony Yengeni;


     2) notes that, instead of choosing to uphold the dignity and the
        importance of Parliament as the representative body of all our
        people, the Speaker chose to put her personal and party friendships
        before duty; and


     3) further notes that, in so doing, she diminished Parliament and the
        Office of the Speaker because she signalled that Mr Yengeni’s
        defrauding of the public, his failure to comply with his
        parliamentary duties and obligations, his abuse of the courtesy
        extended to him by the previous Speaker to make a public statement
        in the House and his untruthful and misleading statements, both in
        Parliament and outside, were condoned by her presence.

Chairperson, the DA supported the election of the Speaker and we continue
to do whatever we can to strengthen both Parliament as an institution and
the Office of the Speaker. Madam Speaker will confirm, I am sure, that I
treat her with politeness and respect which are her due, both as a woman
and as a distinguished person who stands at the head of all of us in
Parliament.

We have a good personal relationship and once travelled together to New
York. [Interjections.] The two of us shared one of the great experiences of
my life: We attended a church service in Harlem and were uplifted by the
exuberance and the brilliant singing by the 800-strong congregation and
choir. Those people surely know how to worship.

Because of that, I know that the Speaker feels a duty as a Christian to
show forgiveness and empathy for a friend who is in distress and I
understand that feeling. There is nothing wrong with Christian charity,
call it ubuntu if you wish, but there are ways to exercise it which comfort
the person in trouble without sending out a wrong message to the public.

A friend of the hon Leader of the Opposition was jailed for fraud. He did
not distance himself from his friend. On the contrary, the hon leader made
representations to the authorities for the prisoner not to be housed in the
large general cell. He visited the prisoner privately and quietly on a
number of occasions and kept in touch by telephone in the interim. The
Leader of the Opposition was caring for a friend without compromising his
office and without undermining the rule of law.

The hon Speaker chose a different path. She chose to join the street
theatre outside prison and was seen to be part of the hero’s reception
given to Mr Tony Yengeni. [Interjections.] He was treated not as someone
who had admitted to committing fraud, not as someone whose appeals were
turned down by every court in the land, not as someone who abused his
position in the people’s Parliament, but as someone who was to be admired
and applauded.

We know that Mr Yengeni did a great deal and sacrificed much during the
struggle. That is precisely why he reached such a senior position in this
Parliament. However, he did not remain true to the ethics of the ANC; he
let our people down. For this reason, he is not a hero of Parliament and
ought not to be supported in his claim that a miscarriage of justice has
occurred.

In fact, his conviction and his sentence are something of which South
Africa can be proud. It shows that our criminal justice system deals
equally with those who are charged. There is not one law for the political
elite and another for ordinary people.

When I, as a Member of Parliament, act, I act on behalf of those who
elected me and I hold the government to account. I do not bind Parliament
or compromise Parliament or embarrass Parliament. On the other hand, when
the Speaker acts in public, she is the personification of Parliament. She
does not have a private persona when she appears in public.

The Speaker needs to always ask, “Am I strengthening Parliament,
strengthening democracy, strengthening respect for the rule of law?” The
Speaker’s appearance in the street on behalf of Mr Yengeni did not
strengthen Parliament, democracy or the rule of law. I appeal to you,
Madam, not to allow your natural emotions to take precedence over your duty
as our Speaker. I therefore move this motion and ask Parliament to support
it. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, hon members, we
believe that it is important to define very clearly exactly what it is that
we are debating here today. We’re being asked by one member of this House
to condemn another member for showing support and solidarity with someone
in trouble with the law. We need to address certain issues that are
relevant to this request.

The first issue we need to address is the rule of law and respect for the
decisions of our courts. We wish to state in no uncertain terms that the
ANC is committed to the rule of law and to respecting the judgements of our
courts. Comrade Tony Yengeni was charged, tried, convicted and sentenced.
He exercised his right to appeal against his sentence and his appeals were
rejected. He is now serving the sentence imposed on him. The ANC respects
this and is committed to abiding by the outcome of this process, painful as
it might be and much as there might be differing views concerning the
merits of certain aspects of the matter. In a society committed to
openness, transparency and accountability, respectful and rational
discussion and debate regarding the decisions of court should never be
misconstrued as undermining these decisions.
The second issue we wish to raise is that of good governance,
accountability, transparency and the principle that no one is above the
law. Few organisations, if any, in the history of our country have
demonstrated as the ANC has the resolve to pursue these principles,
regardless of the pain and the political cost involved. No one has yet
convincingly argued how accompanying someone to the doors of a prison
undermines or detracts from any of these principles. Comrade Tony pleaded
guilty to defrauding Parliament on the basis of, amongst others, not
complying with the Rules relating to ethics and members’ interests. Lest we
forget, it was the ANC which insisted, against the will of many in this
House, on the introduction of these Rules after 1994. In this context it
does leave an unpleasant sensation in the ear to hear the shrill voices
with which the latter-day converts to the church of transparency are
singing their hallelujahs of condemnation. [Applause.]

The third issue that we wish to address is that of human dignity and the
values of humanity that we think should underpin our society. We are trying
to build a people-centred society, based on the inherent right to human
dignity that is a founding principle of our Constitution. Comrade Tony
Yengeni is a human being. He is a son, he is a brother, he is a husband, he
is a father, and he is a friend and a comrade and a freedom fighter. He is
also a citizen of our country, convicted of transgressing the laws of the
very democracy he fought so bravely for and for which he sacrificed so
much. The crime for which he has been convicted is a serious one, but to
reduce the entirety of his being to that, as the resolution before us
describes it, of a “convicted fraudster”, is to negate not only his
humanity, but also our own.

One of the hallmarks of the logic of apartheid was to reduce the rich
multidimensional humanity of persons to one-dimensional categories stripped
of all human content: the black, the Indian, the coloured, the Jew, the
woman, the gay. This may explain why those who refuse to recognise in
Comrade Tony all those different facets which define his humanity and which
bind him to other human beings, and who only recognise in him the convicted
fraudster, also find it so difficult to comprehend the richness and
complexity of the multiple identities that define us as South Africans. It
is sad that some find it so difficult to grasp and embrace the deep and
rich humanism that characterises the moral fabric of the society that we
are trying to repair after it was wrecked, but never destroyed, by the
ravages of apartheid and colonialism.

It remains a sad enigma that those who have benefited so much from the
suffering of so many with so little consequence, continue to possess so
little compassion, so little generosity of spirit. [Applause.]

Let us now turn to the draft resolution before the House. Firstly, the
motion asks the House: “to express its dismay at the fact that the Speaker,
the hon Baleka Mbete, made a public spectacle of herself outside Pollsmoor
prison, while demonstrating her support for the convicted fraudster, Mr
Tony Yengeni.” The House has to ask itself how exactly did the hon Mbete
make “a public spectacle of herself” by showing, in the most dignified
manner, human empathy and solidarity with Mr Yengeni and his family? Did
she speak publicly while doing so? No, she did not. Did she dance while
doing so? No, she did not. What then was spectacular about her actions,
other than her humanity? What is spectacular and publicly so is the
insatiable appetite for publicity demonstrated by those who saw it fit to
invade the private property belonging to President Mbeki and First Lady
Zanele Mbeki. [Applause.] We will return to this subject next week.

Secondly, the motion asks, “That the House notes that instead of choosing
to uphold the dignity and importance of Parliament as the representative
body of all our people, the Speaker chose to put her personal and party
friendships before duty.” This clause draws a false and unmotivated
distinction between “supporting the dignity and importance of Parliament”
and “personal and party friendships”. It then proceeds to assert by
implication that there is a necessary contradiction between these.

Thirdly, and thankfully lastly, the motion asks the House to note that, in
so doing, she diminished Parliament and the Office of the Speaker because
she signalled that Mr Yengeni’s defrauding of Parliament, his failure to
comply with his parliamentary duties and obligations, his abuse of the
courtesy extended to him by the previous Speaker to make a public statement
in the House, and his untruthful and misleading statements, both in
Parliament and outside, were condoned by her presence. The mean-
spiritedness of the hand behind this motion is demonstrated again by the
fact that the reader is not even rewarded with a morsel of meaning after
enduring the syntactic torture.

The clause, like so much of the draft resolution before us, commits what
textbooks in elementary logic call the fallacy of the inconsequent, a
scientific way of saying that an argument is of so loose and so
inconsequent a character that no one can discover any cogency in it and
that it amounts to little more than the assertion of a conclusion, which
has no connection with the premises.

We also wonder whether another problem might be what these same textbooks
describe as the fallacy of the irrelevant conclusion. It consists, these
textbooks tell us, of arguing a wrong point or proving one thing in such a
manner that it is supposed to be something else than that which is meant to
be proved. The fallacy usually occurs in the course of long harangues where
the multitude of words and figures leaves room for confusion of thought and
forgetfulness. This fallacy is in fact a great resource of those who have
to support a weak case. Be that as it may, the simple fact is that nowhere
in this draft resolution is any shred of evidence adduced to support the
proposition that the Speaker has in any way diminished the dignity of
Parliament and the Office of the Speaker.

What is it then that we have in the draft resolution before us? We have an
ill-conceived, poorly formulated and even more poorly argued piece of work
that is motivated by spite and publicity, which serves as a vivid
illustration of the predilection some members of the DA have developed for
consorting with untruth, whilst holding the quasi-religious belief that
these falsehoods, repeated often enough, will miraculously be transmuted
into widely held truths. Surely we cannot be expected to entertain this
seriously and it is shameful that a member of this House can contemplate
asking us to go along with what is little more than a poor attempt at
dancing on the pain of others.

When we heard of Madam Speaker’s intentions to go Pollsmoor we had serious
reservations, not because we doubted their courage and moral correctness,
but because we knew that the political jackals would not spare her. And
indeed, they have not. [Laughter.] We wish on behalf of the ANC caucus and
believe the majority of hon members of this House to say to Madam Speaker
that we are proud of her. She is a courageous and principled leader of our
people. She has led this House with dignity, humility and an unswerving
commitment to ensure a better life for all South Africans. [Applause.]

We wish therefore to end by proposing the following amendments to the draft
resolution before the House. I move this on behalf of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party. We should delete all the words after, “That” and to replace
them with:
   The House –


     1) recognises that the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa
        provides that:


        (a) the Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state
             founded on the values of human dignity, the achievement of
             equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms and
             the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law;


        (b) everyone has the inherent right to dignity and the right to have
             their dignity respected and protected; and


        (c) everyone has the right to freedom of association and also the
             right to freedom of conscience, religion, thought, belief and
             opinion;


     2) believes that –


        (a) by showing solidarity with Mr Tony Yengeni, the hon B Mbete was
             acting within the framework of the values and rights of our
             Constitution; and


          b) the hon B Mbete has lead Parliament with dignity and in
             accordance with our Constitution; and


     3) resolves to reaffirm its confidence in, and support for the hon B
        Mbete, MP, as Speaker of the National Assembly.


Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, the IFP has never adopted a holier than
thou attitude, especially when it comes to the misfortunes of others. At
the time of the dismissal of the then Deputy President, Mr Jacob Zuma, when
most opposition parties gloated, the President of the IFP, Dr M G Buthelezi
summed up the whole saga in an isiZulu aphorism and said: Inxeba lendoda
alihlekwa. [What goes around, comes around.]

This literally means don’t laugh at another man’s wound. Our appeal
therefore to the DA is: Don’t laugh at another man’s wound. However,
politics is about perceptions. The Speaker’s conduct sent differing and
conflicting messages to the different segments of our society, including
members of her own party. I would like to remind hon members of what the
Speaker of the Canadian Parliament recently told members of our Parliament
when he visited here. The Canadian Speaker made it abundantly clear that he
does not attend political gatherings or events of any nature whatsoever,
precisely because he does not want to expose himself to accusations of
political bias or indeed party affiliation. [Interjections.]

Would the ``democrats’’ be tolerant and listen to me, please? In addition,
by purposefully not attending such occasions, the Canadian Speaker avoids
creating any negative perceptions about the role of the Speaker in that
parliament. The IFP therefore urges the Speaker to apply the utmost care
and discretion to decisions that may create negative perceptions about this
Parliament and expose the Speaker to any number of accusations, whether
accurate or not. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Chairperson, firstly, two wrongs do not make a right. In the
tradition of the position of the Speaker, this position is normally
entrusted to a person who can rise above narrow party politics.

Our Constitution indeed confirms this position. The problem arises when
senior politicians are unable to discern between their party-political
affiliations and the high office to which they have been elected.

Parliament is not a corner shop, though some of the shenanigans that
emanate from here leave me in doubt. It is the highest seat of law in this
country and all of us must, through our collective actions, treat
Parliament with the dignity that it deserves. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: The ACDP aligns itself with comments in the Financial Mail
that government leaders and law-makers should be exemplars of the rule of
law, upholders of probity in public affairs and models of the clean
government they espouse.

In a society struggling to deal with crime and corruption, regrettably the
Speaker’s actions on this occasion have allowed a perception of disregard
for the law, and even the rules of the institution she heads.

The Speaker’s decision to align herself with the disturbing display outside
Pollsmoor, where prison officials literally hero-worshipped their incoming
prisoner, was most unfortunate.

The ACDP has always had the highest regard for the Speaker of the National
Assembly, but we are of the opinion that in order to uphold the dignity and
the importance of Parliament as the representative body of all the people
of South Africa, the Speaker should reasonably be expected to have
distanced herself on this occasion.

The ACDP will support neither motion, and will therefore abstain.

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Meneer die Voorsitter, baie voorstelle word gereeld in
hierdie Huis op ’n daaglikse basis voorgestel en feitlik nooit word daar
tyd gevind om hierdie voorstelle te debatteer nie. Nou skielik en sommer
vinnig word daar tyd gevind, nie vir een nie, maar vir vier voorstelle wat
bedoel is om lede oor en weer te sensureer: drie van die DA se kant af en
een van die ANC se kant af, wat mnr Gibson wil sensureer. Dit is tog baie
duidelik wat die spel hier is. Ons gaan vandag hier sien die volgende twee
voorstelle gaan afgestem word en wysigings van die ANC gaan deurgestem
word. Dit is ’n set om mnr Gibson by te kom en hom dan te sensureer. Die
spel is tog baie duidelik. Ons is nie hier omdat ons onnosel is nie. Ons
weet wat die geval is. Ek dink dit is ’n fout om die Parlement op hierdie
basis te gebruik vir interne gevegte tussen die regerende party en die
amptelike opposisie. Die Parlement behoort nie daarvoor gebruik te word
nie.

Ek het begrip vir die agb Speaker se benadering van ubuntu, wat ook deur
mnr Nel gestel is. Ons het baie begrip daarvoor. Ek wil tog vra: wanneer
sien ons dat daar empatie betoon word, hetsy dan deur die Speaker of ander
senior lede van die regering om by die slagoffers van misdaad hulle
simpatie en empatie te gaan betoon, hetsy by ’n wit of swart plaasmoord en
dan werklik hulle empatie daar te gaan betoon? Dit moet eerder gebeur as om
hier ’n geveg aan die gang te sit. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Mr Chairperson, many motions are regularly introduced
in this House on a daily basis and seldom do we find the time to debate
these motions. Now, suddenly and very quickly, time is found not for one,
but for four motions which are meant to discipline members to and fro:
three from the side of the DA and one from the ANC which aims to discipline
Mr Gibson. It is quite clear what the game here is. Today we shall see how
the following two motions will be rejected and amendments of the ANC will
be approved in order to set the stage to discipline Mr Gibson. The game is
very obvious. We are not here because we are stupid. We know what is
happening. I think it is wrong to use Parliament in this way for infighting
between the governing party and the official opposition. Parliament should
not be used in this way.

I understand the Speaker’s approach of ubuntu that was also put forward by
Mr Nel. We have a lot of understanding for that. I just want to ask: When
do we see any empathy being shown, whether by the Speaker or by other
senior members of the government, by going to the victims of crime and
showing their sympathy and empathy, whether it is a white or black farm
murder and then showing empathy there? That is what should happen, rather
than starting a fight here. [Time expired.]]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I want to say at the outset that it is a pity
that the hon Mr Nel has tried to reduce an important debate of this nature
to little more than an attempt to belittle the official opposition, because
this debate is one of great importance, not only for what gave rise to it,
but also for the future role that Speakers of this Parliament should and
will play.

We have to accept that no serious debate has ever taken place with regard
to the role we expect the Speaker of our Parliament to play. The only
definitive words written about this role appear in the National Assembly
Guide to Procedure, which was published in 2004. This guide makes it clear
that the Speaker is ``the spokesperson for the House in its relations with
the NCOP, the other arms of government, and with outside bodies and
persons’’.


It goes on to say: ``In this role, Speakers are careful to maintain the
authority of the House and to protect its rights and privileges’’. It goes
further and says ``in representing the House, the Speaker represents and is
responsible to the House and the totality of its members, whether in
government or opposition’’. The point is made in that guide that the
Speaker ``although affiliated to a political party, is required to act
impartially and to protect the rights of all parties’’.

From this we must acknowledge that when the Speaker appears publicly, and
especially at public functions, she does not appear there as an ordinary
person, but as a Speaker of the National Assembly. She is not there in her
personal capacity, but as the representative of all members in the National
Assembly. This then would apply as well to her appearance at the gates of a
prison in support of a convicted fraudster, which she knew would be a
matter of great public importance, and would be well-covered by national
and international media.

There are many, many members of this Parliament, from all parties, who
believe that Tony Yengeni received the punishment he deserved, and
consequently, to support him publicly was a serious error of judgment on
the Speaker’s part.

This is not only the view of members of this House. Many members of the
public have expressed outrage at the Speaker of their Parliament – and let
me remind this Parliament that it is the people’s Parliament – having
participated in the roadshow outside Pollsmoor Prison.

Most Commonwealth parliaments accept the general principle of the
impartiality of the Speaker, and that he or she represents all parties
while being responsible to the House, and the totality of its members.

We were fortunate recently to host the Speaker of the Canadian Parliament
who made some interesting revelations in terms of his election and his
role. Firstly, he is an opposition member, and was elected by all members
of parliament. He does not attend any party caucus meetings of any parties,
except the Christmas parties of each caucus. He is totally independent and
shows no bias towards any party.

In the House of Commons, there is a long tradition of impartiality which is
so strong that all Speakers are seen as genuinely independent of party. The
same applies to many other Commonwealth Parliaments, including many in
Africa.

However, our Speaker’s actions and support of Mr Yengeni were not the
actions of an impartial person. They showed a strong party bias. She is
perfectly entitled, as the hon Mr Gibson has pointed out, to support Mr
Yengeni privately, but publicly she is the Speaker, and she should
recognise and accept what is expected of her in this capacity.

The actions of the Speaker underline the importance of the need for a
debate on what we as South Africans expect of our Speaker. We do have, as I
have said, many international models to follow, but if we want our Speaker
to behave and act in a different way, let us have a constructive debate on
the matter and draw up guidelines, not just for the present Speaker, but
for the Speakers of the future.

Let us bear in mind when we do so that the ANC will not always be in power,
and that one day we will have a Speaker in this Parliament who does not
come from their ranks. [Interjections.]

We, jointly, as Members of Parliament, regardless of the party we
represent, have a right to participate in deciding what we expect and what
we do not expect of our Speaker. The sooner we do this, the better, for we
do not need to have a repeat of this debate in this House. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Ms N M MAHLAWE: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen ...

... kuyabonakala ukuba ngokufakwa kwesi sindululo yi-DA apha namhlanje
kukho umnqweno wokuba ngenye imini ibone inomntu wayo onguSomlomo. Kodwa ke
loo nto ayinakwenzeka.

Kananjalo, kufuneka sikhumbule ukuba uSomlomo lo wethu ukwalilungu
leSigqeba seKomiti eLawulayo yeSizwe ye-ANC. Zizinto ke ezo
esingenakuzitshintsha, kuba kaloku ngoku sikobunye uburhulumente; sisukile
kobaa burhulumente babuphatha amakhosikazi njengabantwana naphakade.
Ayisekho loo nto.

Ukuba ngaba ke i-DA mhlawumbi isamjonga uSomlomo wethu njengomntwana, ngoko
isesemva. Kunjalo nje akukho nto iza kutshintsha; amakhosikazi aza kuba
kwizikhundla zobunkokeli, into ke leyo ebalulekileyo.

Kananjalo, uSomlomo ngumntu. Unezinto akhule ezenza. Unezikhokelo zobomi
akholose ngazo kwaye unobuntu, unobubele. Zonke ke ezi zinto kufanelekile
ukuba azivakalise.
Kananjalo masikhumbule ukuba asingoQabane uTony Yengeni kuphela ofanele
ukuba axhaswe okanye owayexhasiwe ngelaa xesha. UQabane uTony Yengeni
unabazali, unenkosikazi kwanabantwana. Bonke ke abo bantu bafuna ukuxhaswa.

Ndiqinisekile ukuba ukubonakala kukaSomlomo phaya kwenza umahluko
kwintlungu ababekuyo ngalaa mini unyana, umyeni kwanotata wabo esiya
kungena entolongweni. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... it is clear that by submitting this proposal here today the DA has an
ambition that one day they will see one of their own members being a
Speaker, but that will never happen.

At the same time, we must remember that our Speaker is also a member of the
National Executive Committee of the ANC, the organisation in government.
Those are things that we cannot change because now we are in another
dispensation; we have moved away from the previous dispensation which
treated women like children forever. That no longer exists.

If the DA still regards our Speaker as a child, they are behind the times.
Furthermore, there is nothing that is going to change; women are going to
take leadership positions, a very important notion.

At the same time the Speaker is also a human being. There are things she
grew up doing. She has values on which she anchors her life and she is kind
and friendly. She has to display all these virtues.

At the same time we must remember that it is not Comrade Tony Yengeni alone
who has to be assisted or who was assisted at that time. Comrade Tony
Yengeni has parents, a wife and children. All these people need assistance.

I am certain that the appearance of the Speaker made a difference to the
pain they were in on that day when they saw their son, husband and father
going to prison.]

Delivering the third Bram Fischer lecture, former Chief Justice Arthur
Chaskalson said, and I quote:

  The Constitution offers a vision of the future. A society in which there
  will be social justice and respect for human rights, a society in which
  the needs of our people will be met, in which we will live together in
  harmony, showing respect and concern for one another.


Central to what the former Chief Justice said are the fundamentals of the
caring society we are currently building and nurturing; a society which
entails a genuine, sincere and, indeed, a natural desire within members of
society to go out of their way to provide a helping hand to those in need.

The society under construction should derive its content from African
philosophy in terms of which a human is divided into two parts, namely the
outside, which exists apart from the presence of the inside being, and the
inside, which gives life and shape to the outside.

From the inside of a human being emanate feelings, thoughts, love,
compassion and human will, which are fundamental tenets of ubuntu. Ubuntu,
a value that underpins the Constitution of our Republic and our vision of a
better life for all, must, therefore, find expression in all our deeds
without any exception.

This must be the case because we are called upon to protect the physical,
mental and spiritual being of all the masses of our people. The painful
reality is that the thinking of some in our society, even in this House,
especially of the people on my left, is still informed by the outdated and
undesirable classical liberalism advocated by Robert Nozick and others.

Neo-liberalism tries to make us believe that we must not look after one
another, but after ourselves as individuals. This is the thinking that must
be relegated to the dustbin of history because it has no place in our
constitutional democracy which is founded on the fundamental values of
ubuntu.

While all democratic institutions must respect and uphold the Constitution,
which is the supreme law of our land, what remains unfortunate is the fact
that this debate arises from the issues relating to a matter that was
supposed to have been handled internally, within this august institution.

Our Constitution provides that Parliament has a right to determine and
control its internal arrangements, proceedings and procedures, and to make
rules and orders concerning its business.

It also provides that Members of Parliament are not liable to civil or
criminal proceedings, arrest, imprisonment or damages for anything they say
in Parliament or committees thereof.

Andazi ke nokuba abayazi na loo nto aba bangakwisandla sam sokunxele. [I do
not know whether those on my left do not know that.]

Indeed, this is unfortunate. However, let me emphasise that we will
continue to respect and uphold the principle of separation of powers and
the rule of law, which are fundamental to our constitutional democracy.
Important in this regard is the fact that personal acts of solidarity with
a convicted person should never be misunderstood to suggest disregard for
the rule of law.

First and foremost, we are human beings before we were public office
bearers, hence we must not allow any confusion, whether deliberate or
otherwise, of actions taken by public office bearers in their personal and
private capacities, with those actions taken in their public capacity.

Let us refuse to be misled by those who are determined to undermine our
democratic institutions and constitutional democracy. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, we take the podium today with all respect to
Madam Speaker, hon Baleka Mbete, who has been accused by the DA of
misconduct at Pollsmoor Prison when acting out her support for Mr Tony
Yengeni.

As a member of this House, she certainly has the responsibility to uphold
the dignity and honour of Parliament. The MF affirms that each of us has
been honoured with a right, enshrined in our national Constitution, and the
freedom to be, which are vital to embracing true democracy.

Interpretation can be dangerous at times, and the accusation that Madam
Speaker is supporting a fraudster is an insinuation that she supports
fraud. The MF strongly believes that such an insinuation is unacceptable
and is directly aimed at discrediting the current government.

We believe that Madam Speaker should not fall victim to this abusive attack
by the DA, which, possibly, is a publicity ploy. Instead, she should be
given an opportunity to explain herself.

Further, we should not violate the freedom of members of this House outside
of it. We certainly put across to the nation the message that, even though
our Bill of Rights advocates freedom for all, our actions are a closed
book, as was the case during the apartheid regime. Thank you, Chair. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, with the dawn of our new democracy in 1994, we
did not merely leave behind a history of injustices of discrimination based
on the colour of our skin or inequalities based on race, gender and sexual
orientation. The advent of democracy also started a process of healing, of
addressing the injustices of the past and by building the kind of society
that we as South Africans want.

In doing so we realised that it will not be a simple process. We will not
wake up one morning and find that all South Africans are of equal minds on
what happened in the past, developing a desire to assist in building a
better South Africa for all who live in it. We expected that this will be a
process, and that it will take time and a change in mindset and attitude.

Nonetheless, we embarked on this journey with enthusiasm and commitment,
knowing that there is no alternative, and believing that the majority of
South Africans are proud and loyal South Africans who share the desire to
make this nation the great nation it deserves to be within the family of
nations.

In the preamble of the Constitution, it is stated that:


   We adopt this Constitution as a supreme law of the Republic so as to heal
   the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
   values, social justice and fundamental human rights.

The point of reference for the development of the kind of society that we
desire and that all South Africans deserve is the Bill of Rights as
contained in the Constitution. The Bill of Rights is the cornerstone of our
democracy. It enshrines the rights of all people in our country and affirms
the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom.

The right to human dignity determines that everybody has inherent dignity
and the right to have that dignity respected and protected. Freedom of
association is another right that is protected in the Constitution under
the Bill of Rights.
Even before the adoption of our Constitution, there were certain values
that determined our society and our interaction with one another in
society. And, whether for one it is the principle of ubuntu, or for another
it’s Christian values and for yet another it is the basics of humanism, all
of these feed into our Constitution and into the Bill of Rights.

Under ubuntu we understand the caring for one another by each other. It is
the principle and value of looking after each other, not limited along
family lines only, but within and amongst communities. It is not turning a
blind eye when another human being is in need. It is sharing what you have,
limited as it might be, with another who might have even less. It is me
taking care of your child in your absence as if it were my child. It is to
be there when a mistake is made and to assist the one who made the mistake
to stand up and correct that mistake. It is the value of a person being a
person because of other persons.

Christianity encourages the very same principle. The wording might be
different; the examples might not be the same, but in the end the desire to
act in the same caring manner remains. The Bible is full of examples of
teachings about the need to act in a humane manner and support each other,
and specific examples where it’s the fallen that they supported through
acts of Christianity.

However, the question that now needs to be asked and that we need to answer
is: what is the commitment of the DA and its Chief Whip in achieving these
values and promoting the rights as identified in our Constitution? Do they
share this desire and commitment? Do they have the responsibility in
promoting these values in order to bring about a society that is caring in
its approach? Or is their role and responsibility limited to that of a
scarecrow, negatively shouting and screaming, crying wolf, without ever
having to share the responsibility?

In the past few months we have seen an increase of unsubstantiated attacks
on individuals and organisations within government, in what can only be
seen as an attack on the very democracy of our country. We have seen an
attack on chapter 9 institutions, when the DA found it in order to attack
the Public Protector.

Also, last week a member of the DA stood up in this House and referred to
yet another holiday that the Minister of Safety and Security is on. This,
while the Minister, as part of his duties and in the execution of our
commitment to peace and stability on our continent, is in Burundi
facilitating the peace process.

Last week we had a debate in this House regarding the disregard for the
right to privacy of our country’s President. It was a debate in which the
hon Gibson tried to justify his action by stating that he acted on
information that was published in a speculative news article.

Where is his responsibility in all of this? He is not the media, but he is
a person who, through his position that he holds within this House, is
tasked by none other than the Constitution to protect the Bill of Rights.
That is the least that the electorate expect of us. Yet, today, a week
later, here we are again, debating in what in the end and in its logical
conclusion can be nothing more than yet another example of disregard for
the basic right to human dignity and freedom of association.

It is time that we ask what the motivation behind all of this negative and
prejudice actions is? Why is it not possible for the DA to be in opposition
while still putting the wellbeing of our country, its people and its
democratic institutions at the fore? Surely they cannot be proudly South
African if, when you hear them and see them, they act as vultures swooping
onto anything that remotely might give them their few seconds in the
headlines, ignoring fact, creating false impressions and not having the
decency or humanity to apologise even after they were told in no uncertain
terms by their peers in this House that they acted in a shameful manner.

The ANC wants a strong opposition. We want an opposition that indicates to
us where we make mistakes. We want an opposition that comes with
alternatives if they feel that something is not working. [Interjections.]
Listen, you might learn! [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Order!

Ms A VAN WYK: It is what our country needs; it is what our democracy
deserves. We desire and deserve an opposition that promotes and defends the
Constitution with the same vigour and enthusiasm as we do, that cares about
the wellbeing of the nation and who does not rejoice in anything and
everything that it perceives to be wrong.

For what is it that happened on 24 August 2006 this year that gives the DA
the right to use a word such as “spectacle”? The Speaker, as a human being,
went to support a person and his family who are going through a very
difficult period. This is a person with whom she shares a history to free
our society from the injustices of the past, a person who was a close
colleague and a friend.

Mr Yengeni is also a human being in all senses of the word. He is a father,
a son, a husband, a friend to many and a colleague. In a time of difficulty
the DA then wants to take away the Speaker’s right to freedom of
association and Mr Yengeni’s right to human dignity.

The Speaker went there as her own person, exercising her right to freedom
of association and the important values of ubuntu, Christianity and
humanity. It is a right that many people laid down their lives for and that
we, including the hon Gibson, are interested to protect.

What is equally important in this whole issue and is conveniently ignored
is that the hon Speaker, and others who were there, not only went there to
support Mr Yengeni, but also to support and show solidarity with his
parents, his wife, children and family. Or, must we expect that they and
their needs in these times are of no consequence just because Mr Yengeni is
a person with a high political profile?

Does the DA also want us to change the Constitution so that we ignore the
rights of those who are convicted in our country? Do they want us to change
the philosophy behind Correctional Services? Why include rehabilitation in
the principles of Correctional Services if what they really want is that we
ban those who have made mistakes in their lives to the fringes of society,
never to be allowed to play a productive role in society ever again?

We in the ANC will never allow that to happen. Our freedom, our respect for
human dignity and human rights, our belief in values of ubuntu,
Christianity and humanity will not allow us; instead it will be our driving
force, our beacon to achieve a caring society, a society that treats all
equally and with compassion. “Let the one amongst you who is without sin,
be the first to throw a stone at her.” Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu. [A person
is a person through other people.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, thank you to you and to all
the hon members who participated in this debate. I think it was
constructive, it was calm and it was dignified, in contrast to the circus
that Parliament experienced just a week ago. [Interjections.]

The hon Mr Nel prepared a speech which was in reply to the speech he
thought I would deliver and not the one I actually delivered. He finished
by proposing a motion of confidence when I didn’t propose a motion of no
confidence. He was honest enough to admit that when the ANC heard that the
Speaker was going to Pollsmoor, they had misgivings about it. I want to
tell him that we had the same misgivings when we heard that she had gone
there.

The hon Ms Mahlawe, with due respect, made a similarly misconceived speech.
It was certainly not a response to anything that I said. It did contain
some interesting aspects, which show that she has a warm heart and a firm
commitment to her understanding of our South African constitutional values.
She was on less sure ground when she lectured us on liberalism. She seems
not to understand that our Constitution is a liberal democratic document,
which gives expression to classic, liberal values.

The hon Annelizé van Wyk focused on reconciliation and nation-building and
our constitutional Bill of Rights. I think she did so very well, except
that she too responded to a speech which I did not deliver. She wants to
define how the opposition should act. I want to tell her that when
governments try to tell the opposition how to act, they are on less firm
ground. Governments everywhere in the world try to dictate to the
opposition, and it doesn’t work. You must let the opposition be what it has
to be.

I’d like to compliment the hon Dudley, Dr Mulder and Mr Ellis who were much
more constructive. [Interjections.] Mr Ellis made a point that I think ...
[Interjections.] I’m surprised that these hon members don’t know quality
when they hear it. Mr Ellis made a very valuable point. He said that we
hadn’t yet designed the speakership for our country. We’re only 12 years
into democracy. There are various styles and patterns of speakership in
many countries in the world. I think we need something that is African and
something that is truly South African, and I think it is dead right to
suggest that we should have a dialogue as to how the incumbent of that
office should act.

The DA believes that the hon Speaker, for whom we have great respect, did
not strengthen Parliament or strengthen the respect of the public for this
institution, or strengthen the rule of law, by going there in public. We
think that she should know that, and we think that many people within this
House and outside feel the same way as we do. I therefore move the motion.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I put the amendment moved by Mr
Nel. Are there any objections to the amendment as moved by the hon A C Nel?
[
Interjections.] As there are objections, I now put the question. Those in
favour will say “Aye” and those against “No”. I think the Ayes have it.


Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, under the circumstances, the DA has no option
but to call for a division.

Division demanded.


The House divided:


  AYES - 187: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Arendse, J D; Asiya, S E; Bapela, K O;
  Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B;
  Bici, J; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Booi, M S;
  Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P;
  Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Dambuza, B N; Didiza, A
  T; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G Q M; Fihla, N B;
  Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; George, M E;
  Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Godi, N T; Gololo, C L; Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M
  T; Gumede, D M; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C; Huang, S; Jeffery, J H;
  Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D;
  Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M; Komphela, B M;
  Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S;
  Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
  Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madikiza, G T; Maduma, L D; Mahlaba, T L;
  Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Maloney, L;
  Maloyi, P D N; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N S; Maserumule, F T; Masutha, T
  M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ;
  Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Meruti,
  M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S;
  Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J;
  Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D; Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Monareng, O E;
  Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I;
  Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndou, R S; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ;
  Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B
  T; Ngculu, L V J; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A
  A; Nogumla, R Z; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli,
  S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M
  G; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramphele, T D H; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E;
  Schneemann, G D; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibande, M P; Sibanyoni,
  J B; Siboza, S ; Sigcau , S N; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M;
  Smith, V G; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thomson, B; Tobias, T V;
  Tolo, L J; Tshabalala-Msimang, M E; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I;
  Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xolo, E T;
  Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.


  NOES - 37: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R;
  Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D
  H M; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J;
  Kohler-Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J;
  Morgan, G R; Nel, A H; Opperman, S E; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C;
  Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
  Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M;
  Waters, M.


  ABSTAIN - 20: Batyi, F; Bekker, H J; Cupido, H B ; De Lille, P; Dudley, C;
  Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J; Harding, A; Lucas, E J; Mars, I; Mfundisi,
  I S; Mpontshane, A M; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Rabinowitz, R; Sibuyana,
  M W; Smith, P F; Spies, W D; Vos, S C; Zikalala, C N Z.

Amendment agreed to.

Motion, as amended, accordingly agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, members please! Order please!
I will now grant the Speaker an opportunity to make a statement as agreed
to by the House.

                     DRAFT RESOLUTION BY MR D H M GIBSON

                                 (Statement)

The SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much for this opportunity. I
thought it would be important for me to say something very briefly. First
of all, I asked the Whips that we should have this debate. It would have
been very easy for us not to have it and to tuck this issue away and forget
about it. However, I thought, indeed, I should put it on the table and let
us debate it.

Why did I do that? I thought, first of all, to make the point that there
are no holy cows. If the Speaker has done something wrong, let’s talk about
it. I believe from what I heard today that it was valuable, because it was
important for us to express our differences on the issues, to express our
understanding of the role of the Speaker and even to express the view that
we still need to debate the speakership and our own South African approach
to the role played by the Office of the Speaker. I think it is very, very
important for us to still do that.
However, indeed, we are not Canada. [Laughter.] [Applause.] So, it is
interesting for me to listen to my counterpart in Canada sharing with us
how they approach things, for us also to reflect on whether there aren’t
some of the things they are doing that we would like to pick up and borrow.


So, there is nothing wrong with that, but it is wrong to assume that our
system is the same as that of Canada or the House of Commons or wherever,
because this is South Africa. In fact, here we have decided that we remain
political. I remain a member of the ANC caucus and I go to it, unlike for
instance in Lesotho where the Speaker is not even a member of Parliament.
She is appointed from amongst the citizens. That is a different system, and
to make an assumption that the Speaker’s Office in one country is the same
and functions the same way as in another country is wrong. That is part of
us growing to actually talk about those kinds of things.

Having said that, I want to emphasise something that was said by somebody
about ubuntu and the value of human solidarity, and say that, regardless of
what the circumstances were, one has to give support to another human being
because the intention is not to destroy, but to build.

Having said that, I think we can’t allow this opportunity to go by without
making an important point. That is that this Parliament was never defrauded
by the former hon member Tony Yengeni. That is just for the record.

So, I thought that it is important for me to come and stand here and make
that categorical statement, because the records are there and we do our
homework on these matters. I have also been in touch with the former
Speaker on this matter and she herself was as anxious as I was that that
point should be made categorically clear.

Having said that, I also want to add onto my last point and say that on the
day the former hon member was locked up - because he is a law-abiding
citizen – he actually was locked up because there are no holy cows.
Therefore, when you are told that you must be locked up, you go and get
locked up, just like Madiba went when he was hauled before a court; he went
there.

Some of us were wondering as to why is this old man doing this? I mean, in
his position he shouldn’t have done that, but he went because he also was
teaching the lesson: There are no holy cows! That is what we fought for.
That is the democracy we fought for.

We went and we showed solidarity with the family of Tony Yengeni. His wife
the hon member Lumka Yengeni, her children and his parents were there. For
me, I am satisfied as I stand here that I did that. Just as an ordinary
citizen, I went and I did that. [Applause.] [Time expired.] Thank you very
much, hon Chairperson.


 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - FILLING
    OF VACANCIES ON INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA
                                   COUNCIL


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I put the question. The question
before the House is that the following list of candidates be submitted to
the Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment as
councillors to Icasa: Dr A J Barendse, Ms M Matlala, Ms M Mohlala, Mr R
Nkuna, Ms B Ntombela, Ms K A Serero-Chiloane, Dr M Sociqwa and Prof J C W
Van Rooyen. Are there any objections?

Since there are objections, I now put the question. Those in favour will
say “Aye.”

HON MEMBERS: Aye

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): And those against will say “No.”

HON MEMBERS: No.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I think the Ayes have it.


Declarations of vote:


Ms M SMUTS: Madam Chair, the DA supports four of the persons nominated.
However, we wish to vote against this list, and wish to record our utmost
dismay at the fact that the ANC has selected two Department of
Communications officials for appointment to the Independent Communications
Authority of South Africa.

The Communications Regulator is a chapter 9 constitutional body which must
be independent from government in general and from the Department of
Communications in particular, and not only for constitutional, but also for
commercial reasons.

The Minister in the department has tried throughout the past and this year
not only to remove the regulators’ independence, first in the law, then
constitutionally, but he has also tried to circumvent the declared
intentions of the National Assembly, as the intentions then were, to retain
and respect that independence.

The very same departmental official who at each stage of the legislative
process defied the Assembly and who sat with the NCOP when it swept the
Assembly’s version of the law off the table, has now been nominated by the
very same ANC MPs to the Regulator, notwithstanding the fact that our
President sent the Icasa Amendment Bill back to the Assembly for
unconstitutionality after she had worked with the NCOP.

Icasa councillors have to take an oath that they will uphold the
Constitution and the law, including the Icsa Act. The Icasa Act itself
determines that the Regulator is independent and subject only to the
Constitution and the law. The same official who tried to circumvent the
Constitution and the law appeared before the Joint Committee on the
Constitutional Review when the proposal was made to strengthen the
independence of the Regulator. She was dismissed by that committee for her
plain inability to argue the issue serving before it and the inability to
argue even the department’s case for weakening the Regulator.

The second official chosen serves directly under the Director-General of
Communications who drove the process to take the “I” out of Icasa in so
many words. She also appeared before the Constitutional Review Committee
after Ms Matlala had been dismissed.

The Minister must now select five of the eight names you vote on today.
Based on the Minister’s performance over the past year and half, she will
choose her own officials, creating ``Ivy’s Communications Authority of
South Africa.’’ [Laughter.]

On present performance - when her choices come back to Parliament to reject
or approve – I must tell you that I see no hope of my ANC colleagues, once
so independent-minded and so proud of it last year, reversing themselves on
this disastrous list of nominees. I cannot express my dismay sufficiently
strongly. And I don’t know to what end one spends all these months
legislating good law when this happens at the end of the process.
[Applause.]

Ms S C VOS: Chairperson, the IFP, as a matter of principle and in defence
of the Constitution of the Republic, cannot support the report containing
names of persons currently in the employ of the Department of
Communications.

Overall, the complete list of names falls short of the expertise required
by Icasa. Excellent candidates were unfortunately rejected.

However, first and foremost, the deployment by the ANC and the ANC alone in
the portfolio committee, of department officials is viewed by the IFP and
many others as a cynical and seemingly naked attempt by the Ministry to
control Icasa, a chapter 9 body, from within.

The Minister lost out, as you’ve heard, in her attempt to hire, evaluate
and fire Icasa councillors as she saw fit when the Icasa Bill, now Act, was
passed through the National Assembly.

We are grateful for the intervention of the President of the Republic in
returning the Bill to Parliament for redrafting after the Minister’s
official, in a last-ditch stand, got the NCOP to ignore this Parliament and
to draft amendments according to the Minister’s wishes – an entirely
shameful episode.

So, now we have department officials on this shortlist - one of whom is the
very same official who, as you’ve heard, tried but failed to negotiate the
Minister’s wishes to exert direct Ministerial control over Icasa in the
National Assembly but was more successful in the NCOP, resulting, as I said
once before, in the President refusing to sign the Bill as amended.

It is simply incredulous that the very same person now appears on the list!
It remains to be seen, of course, which five names out of the eight on the
list the Minister will return to this House for ratification. Meanwhile,
Icasa is wracked by a lack of capacity and internal divisions and does not
enjoy the confidence of the industry.

The ongoing direct political interference by the department into Icasa’s
decision-making should stop. If these persons are chosen, we would be told
loud and clear that the Minister, and by implication the executive, intends
to make a sham of the so-called independence of this body, and that
political interest would be put first before the interest of the country.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, hon members! It’s very tricky
when we have several debates on the floor at the same time. Please, try and
keep your comments a bit lower in key.

Dr P W A MULDER: Mevrou die Voorsitter, ons leef in ’n opwindende tyd
waarin die ontwikkelings op telekommunikasiegebied regtig ‘n mens se asem
wegslaan. Elke maand is daar nuwe tegnologiese ontwikkelings en
veranderings. Wat dit meer ingewikkeld maak, is dat hierdie ’n hoogs
tegniese, hoogs gespesialiseerde terrein is.

Okosa se taak is om regulasies te maak om te verseker dat Suid-Afrika nie
by die res van die wêreld agter raak nie. Daarvoor het ons die beste
persone met tegniese kennis nodig. Wat my betref, gaan dit nie hier oor
politieke aanstellings nie, maar oor wie die beste mense om is seker te
maak ons raak nie agter nie.

Met daardie gesindheid het die VF Plus, en ek persoonlik, aan die
onderhoude in die portefeuljekomitee deelgeneem. My benadering was
eenvoudig om die beste persone in belang van Suid-Afrika te kies sodat ons
op die voorpunt kan bly. Op baie terreine is ons tans voor, en ek is
bekommerd ons gaan begin agter raak.

Die VF Plus stem saam met sommige van die name wat aanbeveel is. Ons dink
dis die beste keuses, maar ons is ook bekommerd oor die onafhanklikheid van
sommige ander keuses onder die agt wat in die naamlys verskyn. Wat my
betref, gaan dit hier oor die rol van die uitvoerende gesag teenoor die
wetgewende gesag. In sommige lande word sulke rade regstreeks deur die
Minister aangewys. Die uitvoerende gesag besluit alleen daaroor. Die VF
Plus glo dat die Suid-Afrikaanse metode om mense aan te wys beter is omdat
dit ’n onderskeid maak tussen die uitvoerende gesag – die Minister - en die
Parlement. Veral terwyl dit hier om ’n onafhanklike liggaam gaan dink ek
dit gee geloofwaardigheid.

Die Minister moet vyf van die agt mense aanstel. Die name wat sy aanwys,
sal help aantoon in watter mate hierdie Parlement se rol werklik erken word
en of ons geslaag het om daardie balans te behou, en of ons ongelukkig
gevorder het van 1994 tot nou toe tot op die punt wat hierdie Parlement net
gebruik word as ‘n rubberstempel om geloofwaardigheid te gee aan name wat
die Minister graag wil hê.

Ons sal kyk na watter kant toe dit gaan. Ek hoop nie dit gaan na daardie
kant toe wat ons ‘n rubberstempel word wat net die stempel op name moet sit
nie. Dis die dood in die pot vir onafhanklike liggame en gespesialiseerde
liggame soos OKOSA. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER: Madam Chair, we live in exciting times, when developments
in the field of telecommunications take one’s breath away. Every month
there are new technological developments and changes. What makes this even
more complicated is the fact that this is a very technical, highly
specialised field.

Icasa’s function is to make regulations to ensure that South Africa does
not fall behind the rest of the world. For that we need the best persons
with the technical know-how. To my mind this is not a matter of political
appointments; it is rather a matter of choosing the best people to ensure
that we do not fall behind.

With that attitude in mind the FF Plus, and I personally, participated in
the interviews of the portfolio committee. My approach was simply to choose
the best people in the interest of South Africa, so that we can remain at
the forefront. At the moment we are leading in many areas, but I am afraid
that we may start to lag behind.

The FF Plus agrees with some of the names that have been put forward. We
believe these to be the best choices, but we are concerned about the
independence of some of the other choices among the eight names appearing
on the list. As far as I am concerned, the issue at stake here is the
relation of the executive vis-à-vis the legislative authority. In some
countries such councils are appointed directly by the Minister. The
executive alone decides. The FF Plus believes that the South African method
of appointing people is better, because it differentiates between the
executive - the Minister - on the one hand, and Parliament on the other.
Especially where an independent body is concerned, I believe our method
carries greater credibility.

The Minister must appoint five of the eight persons recommended. The names
she chooses will serve to indicate whether the role of this Parliament is
truly recognised, whether we have succeeded in maintaining that balance, or
whether unfortunate developments since 1994 have brought us to the point
where this Parliament is now simply being used as a rubber stamp to lend
credibility to the names the Minister prefers.

We will observe which way the decision goes. I hope it does not go the way
that will make us a mere rubber stamp to be added to names already chosen.
That will be fatal for independent and specialised bodies such as Icasa.
Thank you.]

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Madam Chair, we are happy to report that the Portfolio
Committee on Communications concluded the process of selecting prospective
councillors for Icasa on Thursday, 7 September 2006. We further wish to
thank all members from all political parties for their consistency,
dedication and attention to details when dealing with such important
matters.

We are today presenting a list of eight prospective councillors for the
Minister of Communications to choose five councillors to be appointed and
wish all of them good luck. The committee went through the CVs of 58
candidates and interviewed 19, following a rigorous process of
shortlisting. The committee had absolute consensus on four of the members
here, reasonable consensus on some and no consensus on others.

We are today subjected to opposition parties on the following matters: lack
of respect for the ANC, lack of respect for democratic processes and lack
of respect for the chapter 9 institutions. This onslaught is not only on
Icasa today, but was also on the Presidency, the Speaker, the Public
Protector etc. I call upon the ANC to assert its authority and continue to
use this majority that we have - unashamedly so - to benefit the country as
a whole, and not just to appease the opposition.

The attack on these three black females was launched even before they could
be interviewed. Their credentials, their skills and their expertise during
the interviews were not in question. The only alleged sin is that they work
for government. So what? Who says those who work for this government are
not better than those who work for the Public Service? The law does not
allow them to be appointed as councillors. In fact, the law says when they
are appointed as councillors, they must resign from those positions.
Interestingly, members were reading selectively on what the law says. When
we brought it to the attention of members such as those in the DA, saying
but the law says they can’t hold two jobs and that they can be nominated
and that if appointed they must resign the positions, they said that was an
ANC clause. Shame!

This matter will henceforth be handled by the Minister of Communications
who, is incidentally, is the Acting President of the Republic of South
Africa today. We must allow that process to take its course.

Actually, in other jurisdictions the appointment of regulators is a line
function, and not a parliamentary process. I am just saying it so that it
is for the record that it is not unique in South Africa, but even if we
take that responsibility here, let’s not abuse it.
The ANC will support all the names. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Are you rising on a point of
order, hon member?

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Chair, is it parliamentary for the hon Gibson to be so
quiet in the House today? [Laughter.]

Mr D H M GIBSON: Madam Chair, if he is asking for a speaking term for me in
this matter, I’ll be happy to oblige.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


  AYES - 176: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Asiya, S E; Baloyi, M R; Bapela, K O;
  Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B;
  Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Bonhomme, T J; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I
  M; Carrim, Y I; Chalmers, J; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F
  I; Combrinck, J J; Dambuza, B N; Didiza, A T; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L;
  Dlali, D M; Doidge, G Q M; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L;
  Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gerber, P A; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L;
  Gomomo, P J; Goniwe, M T; Gumede, D M; Hangana, N E; Hendrickse, P A C;
  Hogan, B A; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C B; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R;
  Kekana, C D; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M;
  Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S;
  Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C;
  Madella, A F; Madlala-Routledge, N C ; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M;
  Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X
  C; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleke, D K; Manana, M N
  S; Maserumule, F T; Mashangoane, P R; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M;
  Mathibela, N F; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J ; Maunye, M M; Mayatula,
  S M; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
  Mkhize, Z S; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T R;
  Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
  Molefe, C T; Moloto, K A; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
  Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu,
  B; Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C;
  Nene, M J ; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D;
  Ngcobo, B T; Ngwenya, M L; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A;
  Nogumla, R Z; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S
  B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ; Nyambi, A J;
  Olifant, D A A; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M
  G; Pieterse, R D; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M;
  Ramgobin, M; Ramphele, T D H; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E;
  Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Sibanyoni,
  J B; Siboza, S ; Sikakane, M R; Sithole, D J; Skhosana, W M; Smith, V G;
  Solo, B M; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Thomson, B; Tolo, L J;
  Tshivhase, T J; Vadi, I; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Xolo, E T;
  Yengeni, L E; Zita, L; Zulu, B Z.
  NOES - 55: Batyi, F; Bekker, H J; Bici, J; Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G;
  Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B ; De Lille, P; Delport, J T; Doman,
  W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
  Greyling, L W; Harding, A; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-
  Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Lucas, E J; Madikiza, G T; Mars,
  I; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Mncwango, M A; Morgan, G R; Mpontshane, A M;
  Mulder, C P; Mulder, P W A; Nel, A H; Rabinowitz, R; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
  Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau
  , S N; Smith, P F; Smuts, M; Spies, W D; Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M
  M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Vos, S C; Waters, M;
  Zikalala, C N Z.


  ABSTAIN - 3: Ditshetelo, P H K; Godi, N T; Mfundisi, I S.


Question agreed to.


The following list of candidates will accordingly be submitted to the
Minister of Communications for consideration for appointment as councillors
to ICASA: Dr A J Barendse, Ms M Matlala, Ms M Mohlala, Mr R Nkuna, Ms B
Ntombela, Ms K A Serero-Chiloane, Dr M Socikwa and Prof J C W van Rooyen.

                 IMPLEMENTATION OF PROVISION IN RULE 246(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution as printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That the House –


      1) approves, for a trial period  until  the  end  of  the  year,  the
         implementation of the provision in Rule 246(1) for a First Reading
         debate on Bills introduced in the Assembly, except money Bills, in
         accordance with the following guidelines and  notwithstanding  any
         Rules to the contrary:


         (a)     A First Reading debate may be conducted on Bills
              introduced in the Assembly.


         (b)     There shall be no speakers’ list for a First Reading
              debate.


         (c)     The member in charge of a Bill, be it a Minister, a member
              or a representative of a portfolio committee, must be
              allocated fifteen minutes to make an introductory speech on
              the background to, reasons for and objects of the Bill, and
              to reply to the debate.


         (d)     In the case of a Bill introduced by the Executive, a
              Deputy Minister may participate in the First Reading debate
              on behalf of a Minister.


         (e)     Members may speak on the Bill for no longer than three
              minutes each.


         (f)     With the exception of the member in charge of the Bill, or
              a Deputy Minister participating on behalf of the Minister, a
              member granted an opportunity to speak will not be given a
              second opportunity in the same debate.


         (g)     Members intending to participate in the debate must press
              the “to speak” button on their desks.


         (h)     Decisions regarding the scheduling of First Reading
              debates are taken by the Programme Committee.
         (i)     If a Bill is introduced in the Assembly during a non-
              plenary period, it may be scheduled for a First Reading
              debate as soon as possible upon the resumption of plenaries.


         (j)     Once the speeches have been made, a Bill  is  regarded  as
              having been read a first time.


         (k)     No amendment to a Bill is allowed on its First Reading and
              no decisions will be taken by the House after a First Reading
              debate; and


   (2)      agrees to an assessment and review of these measures by the
         Programme Committee after the expiry of the trial period and, if
         required, the recommendation of specific Rule adjustments to the
         Rules Committee.


 Agreed to.


                  FOURTEENTH SUMMIT OF NONALIGNED MOVEMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): Chairperson, the Fourteenth Summit of the Nonaligned
Movement started yesterday in Havana. The summit convenes under the theme:
“Towards a More Dynamic and Cohesive Nonaligned Movement – Challenges of
the 21st Century”.

Our country, led by President Thabo Mbeki, will take part in the summit
within the context of South Africa’s commitment to promoting South-South co-
operation. Our government should also raise the issue of the need to
democratise and strengthen the multilateral systems of the UN.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Order! Order, please. Please be
courteous enough to make the member heard. Please don’t speak so loudly.
Thank you.

Mr D J SITHOLE (ANC): The great majority of humanity is faced with the
scourge of poverty and underdevelopment. The situation in the Middle East
highlights the continuing fragility of global peace and security.

The ANC wishes the Fourteenth Summit of the Nonaligned Movement well in its
deliberations, and hopes that this occasion will assist the members of the
movement as we prepare for the 61st session of the United Nations General
Assembly. Thank you. [Applause.]


                     ANC CONNECTIONS TO LOTTERY OPERATOR


                            (Member’s Statement)
Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Thank you, Chairperson. The South African
public are sick and tired of watching already rich and already empowered
members of the ANC elite getting richer and re-empowered while the party
itself seems to have no idea of how to free the millions of South Africans
that are trapped in poverty and unemployment.

Weekend papers reported that Gidani, a consortium of well-connected members
of the ANC elite, has emerged as the preferred bidder to operate the Lotto
when the current contract with Uthingo expires. The consortium is expected
to make an annual profit of more than R40 million from this lottery. Should
they be awarded this contract?

Reports indicate that the Gidani consortium consists of, among others, ANC
NEC members Chris Nissen, who has already confirmed his involvement, Cyril
Ramaphosa, Max Sisulu and various other government officials. The National
Lottery Board should realise that should Uthingo be passed up in favour of
Gidani, then they would have to have a very good explanation handy.

The ANC, on the other hand, would be well advised to hasten its efforts to
put a stop to the greed of its elite and actually to produce the much-
vaunted guidelines for the involvement of ANC members in business. Thank
you.


                SMALL PERCENTAGE OF DRUNK DRIVERS PROSECUTED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H J BEKKER (IFP): Madam Chair, the IFP would like to register its shock
at statistics that suggest that only four out of every hundred drivers
caught driving under the influence of alcohol are being prosecuted. Those
that do end up in court are likely to be discharged on a technicality or
get off with a light fine.

According to the Department of Transport’s own figures, about 60% of all
road deaths can be linked to drunk driving. That means that more than 7 000
people died on our roads last year as a result of drunk driving or drunk
drivers. A recent study in the Western Cape indicated that 47% of motor
vehicle drivers who died in road accidents had blood alcohol levels higher
than the limit.

South Africa has very strict punishment in place for drunk driving, with
fines of up to R120 000 or six months in jail, but what is the use of
having such high fines or jail terms if the perpetrators do not even get as
far as breathalyser tests or are not prosecuted? Blood testing facilities
are either not available or not functioning.

The country cannot claim to be serious about dramatically decreasing the
number of road deaths as long as drunk drivers remain on the roads with
almost total impunity. I thank you.


               LACK OF EQUITY AMONG SENIOR AND TOP MANAGEMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S A MSHUDULU (ANC): Chairperson, yesterday the Minister of Labour,
Comrade Membathisi Mdladlana, released the sixth report of the Commission
for Employment Equity in Pretoria, and he is quoted as saying that there
has been little progress and that whites still dominate top and senior
management positions within the economy.

Furthermore, the Minister added that the department would also look into 1
296 large companies which had not submitted employment equity reports to
the commission in 2005. Figures from submitted reports show that while the
percentage of whites in top management decreased by 2,3% between 2001 and
2005, whites still dominate the top posts, with 72,6% representation
compared with 27,2% black - African, coloured and Indian.

The chairperson of the commission, Jimmy Manye, said what raised further
concern was that recruitment for top senior and professionally qualified
levels still showed whites being targeted. The ANC is concerned by these
findings, as they illustrate that, if we continue at this pace, we would
most probably only reach equitable workplaces 40 to 50 years from now. We
call on the Minister of Labour to engage companies with unacceptable equity
representation. I thank you. [Time expired.]


             COMMEMORATION OF TRAGIC EVENTS OF 11 SEPTEMBER 2001


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S N SIGCAU (UDM): Chairperson, the UDM joins the people of the world in
remembering the tragic events that transpired on 11 September five years
ago. We commiserate with the loved ones of the more than 3 000 people who
perished. It is worth remembering that on that day men and women from many
nationalities were the victims of a horrific act of violent murder.

It is sad that the remarkable demographic representation of the victims has
not united the world against a common enemy, but has rather ushered in a
new conflict of civilisation. In this the terrorists have succeeded in
their stated objective of causing global conflict.

South Africa emerged as a political miracle after the collapse of the Cold
War, as a model of diverse people seeking a common political solution in
pursuit of their shared destiny. Perhaps we have not done enough as a
nation to spread the word of reconciliation and to set an example of what
politics in a post-Cold War world should look like.

In the process, far greater tragedies, such as the daily suffering and
death of many thousands due to poverty and disease, have slipped off the
world agenda. I thank you, Chairperson.


                       POLITICAL INTERFERENCE IN SPORT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr P W A MULDER (VF Plus): Agb Voorsitter, die regering se inmenging in
sport is op die oomblik tot nadeel, en nie tot voordeel, van sport in Suid-
Afrika nie.

Dit is belangrik dat die ontwikkeling van sportgeriewe en sportpersone op
alle vlakke plaasvind. Die VF Plus steun dit entoesiasties. Die regering
kan en behoort ’n rol in hierdie ontwikkeling te speel, maar die regering
behoort nie ’n rol te speel en in te meng met die kies van sportspanne en
die daaglikse bestuur van sport in Suid-Afrika nie. Griekeland is ’n tyd
gelede uit internasionale sokker geskors omdat die Griekse regering so met
sport ingemeng het.

Naas Botha, bekende rugbyspeler, mag waarneem as bestuurder van die
Springbokspan, maar hy mag nie in die pos aangestel word nie, omdat hy wit
is. Die nuwe bestuurder moet etnies swart wees. Gister het die president
van sport darem ’n toegewing gemaak en laat blyk dat bruin kandidate ook
nou vir die pos oorweeg sal word.

Die beste netbalspeler in Nieu-Seeland is Irene van Dyk, ’n Suid-Afrikaner
wat verkies om in Nieu-Seeland netbal te speel. Die beste krieketspeler in
Brittanje is Kevin Petersen wat in ’n boek uitvaar oor hoe kwotas in Suid-
Afrika gemaak het dat hy nooit hier internasionaal sou kon speel nie. In
die boek verduidelik hy hoe kwotas in Suid-Afrika hom geraak het.

Dit is tyd dat gewone sportliefhebbers en –toeskouers hul stemme dik maak
oor die regering se inmenging in sport. Ek dank u. (Translation of
Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr P W A MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Chairperson, the government’s interference
in sport is to the detriment and not to the advantage of sport in South
Africa at present.

It is important that the development of sporting facilities and
sportspersons takes place at all levels. The FF Plus supports this
enthusiastically. Government can and should play a role in this
development, but Government should not play a role or interfere in the
selection of sport teams and in the daily management of sport in South
Africa. Some time ago Greece was suspended from international soccer
because the Greek government interfered in sport.
Naas Botha, a well-known rugby player, may act as manager for the Springbok
team, but he may not be appointed in the job because he is white. The new
manager must be ethnically black. Yesterday the president of sport made
some concessions and indicated that brown candidates will also be
considered for the job.

The best netball player in New Zeeland is Irene van Dyk, a South African
who prefers to play netball in New Zeeland. The best cricket player in
England is Kevin Pietersen, who mentions in a book how quotas in South
Africa precluded him from ever playing international cricket here. In the
book he explains how quotas in South Africa affected him.

It is time that regular sport lovers and spectators let their voices be
heard regarding the government’s interference in sport. I thank you.]


            CAPE TOWN CITY COUNCIL’S SCRAPPING OF BEE REQUIREMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C B JOHNSON (ANC): Agb Voorsitter, die DA-beheerde Kaapstadse Stadsraad
het besluit om die vereiste van 30% swart ekonomiese bemagtiging vir die
toekenning van stadsraadskontrakte te laat vaar. Hulle baseer hul besluit
op die veronderstelling dat dit kwansuis minder betoë of appèlle teen die
toegekende kontrakte tot gevolg sal hê.

Die vraag wat gevra moet word, is: Hoeveel van hierdie betoë was suksesvol,
en hoeveel van die betoë het gekom van maatskappye wat, soos die DA,
terughunker na die verlede en nie self die nodige toewyding aan die dag kon
lê om swart ekonomiese bemagtiging na te streef nie?

Hierdie besluit is ’n terugwaartse stap vir transformasie in Kaapstad, en
dit demonstreer weer eens dat die DA eenvoudig nie belangstel in swart
ekonomiese bemagtiging nie. Met hierdie besluit het die DA dieper in sy
laer getrek en dra die DA geensins by tot die ontwikkeling van ons voorheen
benadeelde gemeenskappe in Kaapstad nie. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s
statement follows.)

[Ms C B JOHNSON (ANC): Hon Chairperson, the DA-controlled Cape Town City
Council has decided to scrap the requirement of 30% black economic
empowerment for the awarding of city council contracts. They premise their
decision on the supposition that it will apparently lead to fewer
objections or appeals against the awarded contracts.

The question that must be asked is: How many of these appeals involved were
successful, and how many of the appeals came from companies who, like the
DA, yearn for the past and who could not themselves show the necessary
dedication to strive for black economic empowerment?

This decision is a step backward for transformation in Cape Town and it
demonstrates once again that the DA is simply not interested in black
economic empowerment. With this decision the DA has withdrawn deeper into
its enclave and in no way does the DA contribute to the development of our
previously disadvantaged communities in Cape Town.]


         PREVALENCE AND COMBATING OF SERIAL KILLING IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S RAJBALLY (MF): Chairperson, South Africa is said to be among the three
most notorious countries in respect of serial killings. However, it is
encouraging to note that from 1 936, 71 killers were identified, of which
only 11 are still at large.

Johannesburg and Durban are the worst affected cities, and Gauteng and
KwaZulu-Natal are the worst affected provinces. Five new serial killers are
found each year, and thanks to the competent SAPS Investigative Psychology
Unit, many of these killers have been captured.

Serial killers are said to have a psychological motive, and the devastating
attributes of South African society give birth to serial killers. Are there
any efforts that can stop such initiation? If anything, the fact that the
SAPS Investigative Psychology Unit is successfully hunting down killers
should serve as a form of deterrent. Thank you.

                         ACCESS TO CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Chairperson, on Wednesday last week the Deputy
Minister of Safety and Security, Susan Shabangu, told Parliament that there
was no moratorium on crime statistics and that members of the public were
free to access them at their local police stations.

Well, the DA immediately conducted a snap survey of 41 police stations in
six major centres to determine if the Deputy Minister’s statement bore any
resemblance to reality. We found that 95% of those stations approached
refused to release the statistics, citing the ongoing moratorium on their
release. This came as no surprise, as we’ve repeatedly had our requests for
crime statistics turned down in the past.

The DA survey shows up the Deputy Minister’s comments for what they were:
ill-informed nonsense that were out of touch with reality. In light of the
seeming inability of the police to protect South Africans against violent
criminals it is essential that people have access to up-to-date information
on crimes in their local areas. We have to be able to protect ourselves.

It is unacceptable that the Deputy Shabangu has seemingly misled the public
in an attempt to excuse her department’s failure to keep the public
informed. She now needs to explain herself to South Africa.

        PROTECTION OF LOCAL CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY FOR 2010 WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms O R KASIENYANE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the commitment by
government to protect the local construction companies from the stiff
international competition for 2010 construction work. This approach by
government was further elaborated upon by the Deputy President during a
meeting with India’s business leaders.

In a meeting with the Confederation of Indian Industry the issue of 2010
and the construction work needed ahead of the Soccer World Cup was raised.
Mr K Kapila of the Confederation of Indian Industry said they had an
interest in the building of stadiums and that their construction skills
could help reduce input costs. The commitment by government that this will
not be at the expense of the local industry should be commended.

The two governments have set a staggering R12 billion target in bilateral
trade by 2010. This commitment will further strengthen South-South co-
operation and advance development as we work towards the defeat of global
poverty. I thank you.

                   DEALING WITH EXTREME DRUG-RESISTANT TB

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chairperson, the IFP views with dismay the cavalier
manner, bordering on negligence, in which the national Department of Health
has responded to the latest TB crisis.
The emergence of a highly resistant and deadly strain of TB deserves urgent
responses at the highest level to be implemented with immediate effect.
This drug-resistant form of TB is transmitted horizontally and does not
necessarily arise in persons previously on TB treatment.

It is highly contagious and no drugs in South Africa are currently
registered or available for its treatment. It cannot be identified by means
of the current two-TB-slide examinations and requires special sputum
culture to be identified. It will run a swathe through people who are HIV
positive and even those on antiretroviral treatment. It will also affect
health workers, families and fellow workers of persons infected by this
deadly form of TB.

To contain it requires strict isolation, barrier nursing, quarantining and
treatment. Fortunately, the medicines to which it is sensitive are
available overseas. They are not available in South Africa and are
massively expensive, running to hundreds and thousands of rands per
patient. They could become available through the generosity of
international TB organisations.

We appeal to the national department to act decisively and effectively to
cope with this resistant TB and to the health fraternity, including
doctors, nurses and scientists, to lobby government vigorously to do so.
[Time expired.]

                    ACHIEVEMENTS IN SA ECONOMY COMMENDED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B A MNGUNI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government inherited an
economy shaped by colonial dispossession and apartheid, which resulted in
huge inequalities and increasing poverty, rising unemployment and
unsustainable government debt. Despite this legacy, the ANC-led government
has made great achievements.

This has also been confirmed by the International Monetary Fund’s executive
board, whose recent Article IV consultation report observes that our
country is supported by well-designed macroeconomic policies and structural
reform, inflation has remained within the target band and employment has
increased. Our public finances are sound and international reserves have
been rebuilt. The IMF further supports government’s goal of rising growth
and reducing unemployment. The IMF also supports the initiative aimed at
the reduction of wealth disparities, including land reform and black
economic empowerment.

We commend government on these achievements and call on all sectors,
particularly the private sector, to ensure that all South Africans share in
the country’s wealth. Thank you.

           TRADE RESTRICTIONS ON CLOTHING AND TEXTILES FROM CHINA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE (DA): Chairperson, the Deputy President’s hostile
warning to clothing retailers not to circumvent the trade restrictions on
clothing and textiles from China is a tacit acknowledgement of how flawed
these measures are. If the restrictions really helped the workers, the DA
would support them, but they do not.

The restrictions will be completely ineffectual without an accompanying
industry development plan and will not be able to create jobs sustainable
after the two-year restriction period has lapsed. If South African clothing
retailers do not seek out substitute products from competitive clothing and
textile manufacturing markets, the trade restrictions will merely have the
effect of a false economy in which hard-pressed local consumers will be
forced to pay inflated prices for clothing.

The average South African does not have the luxury to travel to
international shopping destinations such as Dubai to buy their clothing. To
suggest that such action by retailers should be viewed as treason is
profoundly hypocritical and boils down to nothing other than a cheap
intimidation tactic to score in a succession race by the vulnerable ANC
ruling faction.

This statement has resulted in negative international publicity and will do
South Africa no good.

                        THE FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnu N B FIHLA (ANC): URhulumente oxhuzula imikhala nokhokelwa ngumbutho
wesizwe i-ANC kwezinye zezibhambathiso esazenza nabantu kukulwa
urhwaphilizo, siluncothule neengcambu. Iqumrhu elikhethekileyo labaphandi
okanye ispecial investigation unit elasekwa ngowe-1996 ukulwa norhwaphilizo
kubasebenzi bakarhulumente likwaziwa njengesikhotsholo okanye i-cobras
ngabula makhumsha, liye lathi thaca ingxelo yalo yonyaka phambi kwale Ndlu
yoWisomthetho yeSizwe,ingxelo leyo ebonakalisa ukuba kulo nyaka-mali ka-
2005/2006, izikhotsholo ezi ziye zasindisa imali kuRhulumente ekuma-300
ezigidi zeerandi.

Le mpumelelo idandalazisa ukubaluleka kwentsebenziswano phakathi
kukaRhulumente nabantu ngokubanzi. Thina singumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, siya
kuthi gqolo sibambisana nabantu ngokulwa ubuqhophololo. Ndiyabulela.
(Translation of isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mr N B FIHLA: Among the undertakings that the ANC-led government made with
the people, there is one to fight and uproot corruption. A special
investigation unit, also known as the Cobras, was established in 1996 to
fight corruption amongst government employees, and before this House, the
National Assembly, it presented its annual report which indicates that
during the 2005-2006 financial year the special investigation unit managed
to save about R300 million of government funds.

This success clearly portrays the importance of a good working relationship
between the government and the public. We, the ANC, commit ourselves to
continuously working with the public in the fight against corruption. I
thank you.]
              AFFIRMING BONDS OF FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN CUBA AND SA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Chairperson, earlier this month the Sikhumbuto Wall of
Names was officially launched at Freedom Park in the city of Tshwane. One
of the participants was Esther Armenteros, the ambassador of Cuba.

Her presence was further affirmation of the historical bonds of friendship
between Cuba and South Africa. The inclusion on the wall of 2 107 gallant
Cuban soldiers who fell in the Southern African region is a profound
reminder of the need for us to fulfil our international solidarity
obligations.

This event serves to awaken us to the fact that internationalism requires
the highest level of political consciousness. We commend the ANC-led
government for its outstanding leadership in creating symbols for
recognition of the heroes and heroines and internationalists who
contributed selflessly to our liberation.

The practice of providing support towards liberation of the oppressed and
the exploited societies with expectation of material dividends after the
liberation has always been questionable. Cuba rose above such dubious
conduct and supported our struggle without any ulterior motive, except to
advance global peace and human solidarity. [Time expired.]

                     EMPLOYMENT EQUITY COMMISSION REPORT
   IMPACT OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN SOUTH AFRICA AND CHINA ON TEXTILE INDUSTRY
                                STAKEHOLDERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson and hon members, I must say
that the comment on the release of the report of the Employment Equity
Commission helps us to monitor how far we have gone in terms of the
transformation of our society. Indeed, it is correct that, time and again,
we must assess what progress we are making and the challenges we are
facing. I hope that, collectively, we will be able to reflect on what more
we may need to do to ensure that our employment environment does take into
consideration our demography as a country.

As a member of Nedlac, it may be important for me to reflect on the
statement that was made about what the Deputy President said at that
conference. I understand that maybe the choice of words might have created
some challenges to the public, as mentioned by other hon members when they
referred to treason.

I think we all remember that the issues around textiles and the
interventions that have been made did not just come out when the agreement
was finally signed by China and South Africa but involved labour, in
connection with finding what solutions could be made to ensure that we
retain jobs and also to ensure that we keep this important industry in our
economy.

That has not been made at the expense of the challenge faced by retailers.
Even during Saturday’s Nedlac summit, when the Deputy President reacted on
this issue, she did indicate, as all other members in the summit did, that
we need to look at what the unintended consequences could be that might
arise as a result of this agreement, engage the retailers, and acknowledge
some of the negative impacts that they might feel.

My own view is that the Department of Trade and Industry has committed
itself to engaging the retailers in this regard. I think it is important
for us not to doubt whether the agreement can work, but rather to find a
way in which we can make it work such that it gives us relief - not just
from the employment challenge, but also from the industry perspective; and
on how we can ensure that, as a country, we do not lose our edge on this
important industry, the textile industry. Thank you very much.

              MEASURES FOR CONTAINING EXTREME DRUG-RESISTANT TB

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chair, I want to say thank you to the hon
member Rabinowitz for raising the issue of the emergence of extreme drug-
resistant TB in our country. As you know, this is a worldwide problem. All
over the world we have cases of this strain of tuberculosis.

I want to assure the member, and I am certain that the Minister of Health
will be making an announcement very soon, that we are taking all necessary
measures as the department to contain this disease. I think I should let
the member know that the Minister is working around the clock on this
issue.

Just yesterday, top managers in the Department of Health were sitting and
looking at the problem. On Friday a meeting will be convened by the
director-general which will be attended by HoDs from all provinces. Also at
that meeting will be specialists who have the know-how regarding the
treatment of this extreme drug-resistant strain of TB.

I want to assure you that the drugs are available in the country. The
Registrar of Medicines is doing a search to see which drugs are not
available in the country, and to see how we can get them and register them.
Indeed, we are all very concerned about this.

The extreme measures that you mentioned, of quarantining the patients, are
something that we are also looking at. You must remember that, in terms of
the Constitution, there are certain rights that patients have which we
can’t take away. We are looking at this as an emergency matter. Thank you
for your concern.

                   OWNERSHIP OF LARGE NUMBER OF BUSINESSES
                          OPPORTUNITIES FOR TENDERS
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I note with some interest that the
statements that have been made by hon members seem to be derived from
information contained in newspaper reports. I think that makes the
opportunity of making statements rather a peculiar process because it means
we don’t do research for ourselves, we don’t check and we are not really
focusing on what we had been told was a focus on government’s execution of
its programmes and that this will be a commentary by members to address
this particular aspect.

Nevertheless, given that we are drawing our information from newspapers,
allow me to say that, indeed, nobody in the country would welcome the
formation of new monopolies. Therefore, regarding the hon members who
object to persons having a large number of businesses, we would say, if,
indeed, they hold this as a principle, let us have that principle applying
across the entire business sector.

I recall that, in our country, many businesses have a role in gold,
platinum, diamonds, property, financial services, etc. If our principled
view is “one business, one person,” let us hold it throughout. Let us not
be selective in identifying individuals who hold positions in the ruling
party. Let us not be selective by identifying only them, if indeed it is a
principle. If it is political posturing, then we will be selective in our
approach. However, if it is a principle, then everybody with large numbers
and diverse numbers of interests would be called upon to unbundle them and
share them out. On that, yes, we might agree, but if it is selective,
certainly, we will not accept that selectivity.

All of us in government spheres are enjoined by our Constitution to ensure
that all our people enjoy an opportunity to participate in opportunities
for tendering with respect to government business. Therefore I don’t think
we would have any agreement that any sphere or council should prevent
access to opportunities for tenders concerning persons who previously had
been denied such opportunities. So, we would reject any such exclusion with
the contempt it deserves. I thank you.


                         THE QUESTION OF UNBUNDLING


        THE ROLE OF COMMUNITIES IN RESOLVING CASES OF SERIAL KILLING


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, as a
first point, I would want to reiterate what the Minister of Education has
stated with confidence, regarding those Members of Parliament who have
suggested the unbundling. I am sure, Minister, you will agree that they
probably meant unbundling across the economic sector as a whole. I think we
would love to see that in operation.

As they have articulated that here, today, we would like them to start this
campaign that will unbundle across the economic sector. It would be an
interesting campaign to watch. It would also be interesting to watch how
their influence may rise or fall around the unbundling question.

Having said that, I would also want to welcome the input that was made by
hon Rajbally. She quite correctly pointed out that, in relation to the
issue of serial killing and much as it is reflected as quite high in South
Africa, the fast response was seen as very positive. What we must endorse
is the fact that we need to look at interventions in dealing this
particular phenomenon.

I think we need to ensure that communities play their role to facilitate
the interventions that will contribute towards prevention, because this is
also linked to the social realities that are there. We need to ensure that
as we deal with combating it, we don’t only look at services that intervene
from this side of government, but we also look at the very strong community
role and interventions that will help strengthen and rebuild communities in
dealing with this. I thank you very much.

 SPECIAL INITIATIVES REQUIRED TO ALLEVIATE POVERTY, WITH REFERENCE TO YOUTH
                            AND RURAL COMMUNITIES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs I MARS: Deputy Chair, hon Deputy Minister and colleagues, the fact that
poverty is pervasive in our rural community and among our youth, cannot be
a subject of dispute. Members know the figures that paint a deeply
depressing and disturbing picture of the effects of poverty. It affects
millions of our citizens, and members of this House see these figures
translated into a daily reality in their constituencies, the provinces and
elsewhere.

We must note here that this is not only a South African problem, but it is
a global trend. We all know what it means to a mother not being able to
feed her children. We therefore know the problems and it’s not necessary to
list them today. What is very important, though, for this debate is to
acknowledge that poverty transcends party politics. It is a matter that
cannot be the exclusive preserve of either the majority or opposition
parties.

Poverty must not just be a subject of criticism from opposition parties,
nor must it be the majority party defending the progress made over the past
12 years. We acknowledge all this. If those are our respective approaches,
very little progress can be made today. It is therefore vital, that today’s
debate should take a nonpartisan approach where we, as the representatives
of the people of South Africa, can take a collective responsibility to
create a positive strategy for the alleviation of poverty. May we say it
categorically here, that alleviation of poverty is merely a first important
step towards the eradication of poverty.

Therefore, initiatives like those of the Minister of Social Development to
review the means test for social grants and the reported approach to
Treasury to improve these grants are an example of alleviating poverty.
This is a very necessary step that needs to be taken. However, we know that
it will not eradicate poverty. That is where we should focus our attention
on today. The eradication of poverty in our country is the only answer in
ensuring long-term political stability and the survival of our democracy
that we all treasure dearly.

Hon members are well aware of numerous programmes and projects that have
been and continue to be successful in addressing poverty in a meaningful
and sustainable way. It is my call to hon members to share these positive
experiences with the House today, so that they can become the collective
property of this Parliament. My colleague the hon Peter Smith will relate
some of his experiences in India.

I want to close the opening of this debate with a warning. We should not
rely entirely on the government and the state bureaucracy to eradicate
poverty, rather, the youth and the rural communities should decide for
themselves as to what projects and programmes suit their needs best. In
this respect, community leaders have an important role to play. They should
not just provide leadership, but should at all times follow a practical
hands-on approach to the problems of the people whom they lead. It is at
this level that a direct partnership with business and local organisation
needs to be firmly established.

Let us explore as to how we, as their representatives, fit into the process
of finding a long-lasting solution. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A RADEBE: Chairperson, the ANC welcomes this debate. It is an honour
for me to participate in this debate, because it gives one an opportunity
to reflect on the causal factors that underpin youth underdevelopment and
the poverty of the rural communities. According to the World Bank Report of
1995, the contemporary South Africa evolved at the turn of the 20th century
from an agrarian setting through the rapid growth of commodity markets that
sprung up around major industrial mining centres, urban population centres
and commercial agricultural centres. Initially, African farmers and
entrepreneurs successfully participated in the growing commodity markets
under conditions of relative land abundance, low population size, low
production processing and distribution technologies, weak government
interventions and relatively undistorted markets. Poverty amongst the
majority of the African population group who, at the time was largely
constituted of independent producers, was almost nonexistent.

The successive white governments, impelled by social and economic
imperatives, transformed the 19th century agrarian society through a two-
pronged strategy that set into motion a process that would simultaneously
cripple and debar African farming and entrepreneurial development. One part
of the strategy was aimed at the white minority population. It enabled and
entitled industrialists as leaders and beneficiaries of industrial
development. The other part of the strategy was aimed at the African
majority and, to a lesser extent, at coloured and Indian people. The
strategy was characterised by a list of government policies that created
artificial land shortages. Proscribed black participation in land sales and
rental markets confined their access to land only in reserves, excluded
them from credit markets and denied them access to marketing co-operatives
and farmer unions. This strategy further denied blacks extension services,
access to public sector investment and subjected them to a rigid and
authoritarian state and communal land tenure system. This strategy forced
blacks to participate in the labour market via extraordinary taxes and
levies, and it forcefully resettled millions to densely populated reserves.

The decline of African farming led to a gradual loss of agricultural and
rural capital, wealth, farming and entrepreneurial skills and experience.
The process of modern industrial development in South Africa thus became
the driving force that created the contemporary poverty and
underdevelopment among the blacks in South Africa. They had limited access
to education, health and social services. They were as good as being
foreigners with limited or no rights to participate in business or trade.

The emergence of the ANC-led democratic order in 1994 was an epoch-making
event for millions of the downtrodden rural masses. First, the ANC-led
government passed a Constitution that was anchored on a Bill of Rights. The
Constitution ensured that every citizen has a right to equality, a right
not to work under conditions of slavery, servitude and forced labour. The
Constitution further enshrined the right to property, which meant that the
state was obliged to foster conditions that will enable citizens to gain
access to land on an equitable basis. It further provided that people who
had lost land due to past racially discriminating laws or practices, were
entitled to restitution of that property or to an equitable redress.
The ANC-led government implemented programmes and passed laws that ensure
the realisation of these rights. This august House passed the Extension of
Security of Tenure Act, the Labour Tenures Act, the Restitution Act and the
Communal Land Rights Act, which served as a basis for land reform in South
Africa. Through land reform, more than four million hectares of land has
been transferred back to the historically disadvantaged rural communities.
By December 2005, 68 719 of the total of 79 996 claims lodged, were
settled. The outstanding claims which number 10 977, will be settled by
2008. The target is that all urban claims totalling 2 922, will be settled
before the end of the financial year. The government has so far invested
R5,5 billion, which was unheard of because blacks were excluded from public
investment.

In the 2004 state of the nation address, President Thabo Mbeki committed
the government to redistribute 30% of the prime agricultural land to black
farmers by 2014. During the land summit held in 2005, problems that
constituted a threat to the target of 30% redistribution were identified,
for example, landowners who were unwilling to sell the land, who inflated
land prices, protracted land claim cases and long project cycles of land
reform projects. All these factors slow down land redistribution process
and access to secure land tenure for the poor. The land summit recommended
that the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle be reviewed and the
constitutionally enshrined expropriation be used as a tool to fast-track
land reform. It is appreciated that the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
Affairs has ditched this principle. This immediately led to farmers
belonging to AgriSA releasing about five million hectares of land to the
market. This creates conditions in which the state can fulfil its mandate.

The biggest challenge in land reform remains in the area of tenure reform.
According to the report of the Nkunzi Development Association, more than a
million farm workers were evicted from the farms. Some of these evictions
were violent and included the collusion of some police in the area of
Utrecht in KwaZulu-Natal. It is promising to see that some of these farmers
and colluding police were charged. Many of these evictions are illegal,
because the processes stipulated in the Extension of Security of Tenure
Act, or Esta, were not followed. Insecure tenure exacerbates poverty,
because people cannot plan their lives properly. There is no provision of
education and health services. To deal with this scourge, government must
commit more funds to the Legal Aid Board and ensure that the board is
accessible to the rural masses. The Esta implementers must be well funded
to do proactive inspections and organise education campaigns to ensure that
farm dwellers are aware of their rights.

This Parliament passed the Communal Land Rights Act, or Clara, in 2004.
This Act provides for the election of land administration committees in the
communal areas. These committees are obliged to have a one-third
representation of women, youth representation and people with disabilities
who are the vulnerable groups in these areas. This Act further regularises
the right of tenure of individual households, which enables them to have
title deeds for the land that they use for housing, grazing and food
production. This will enable these communities to participate in the
property market, using their title deeds as security. This will further
enable government to survey all the land in the communal areas, which will
make it easier for local government to plan and provide bulk infrastructure
services like water, electricity and roads. It is estimated that R8,5
billion will be invested in the implementation of Clara. This will be a
huge economic investment for these historically disadvantaged areas.

This motion also deals with the underdevelopment of the youth. First, it
will be wrong to assume that all youths in South Africa are underdeveloped.
According to Stats SA, the youth who is likely to be unemployed and
underskilled is the black youth. It is not a co-incidence, because Bantu
Education ensured that the black youth knew their station in life, that is,
that they are not equal to their white masters. This was ensured by the
apartheid regime that ensured that black students were not taught maths,
science and commercial subjects at school. That is why today we have
thousands of unemployed graduates.

The system of land dispossession and inferior education provided to the
African majority ensured that there was a dual economy in this country.
According to President Mbeki, the first economy is modern, produces the
bulk of South Africa’s wealth and is integrated within the global economy
through appropriate infrastructure like telecommunications, ICT,
electricity and proper models of transport. The second economy is
characterised by underdevelopment. It contributes little to the gross
domestic product, contains a big percentage of our population, and
incorporates the poorest of the rural and urban poor. It is structurally
disconnected from the first and the global economy and it is incapable of
self-generated growth and wealth.

To address these gross disparities, the ANC-led government came up with
numerous initiatives to fight poverty in accelerated youth and rural
community development. As I said initially, the black farmers were denied
access to credit. This prevented them from acquiring new equipment and
access to markets. In 2004, the President announced the creation of the
agricultural credit scheme which was capitalised to the tune of R1 billion.
The Ministry of Agriculture launched the Micro-Agricultural Financial
Institution of South Africa, or Mafisa, in 2005. The Mafisa pilot project
was started in Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape where there are
high levels of poverty. The scheme provided the emerging farmers with the
opportunity to take micro-loans between R25 000 and R100 000 for production
and market access purposes. The retail centres like the Land Bank, Post
Bank, Khula and Ithala were used as points to disburse the loans. Within a
period of a year, R90 million worth of loans were disbursed to about 674
applicants.

In the implementation of Mafisa, the Department of Agriculture is
retraining all the extension service officers so that they can be able to
help the farmers. This will bring about an improved extension service to
the historically disadvantaged farmers. I thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, at the outset, can I thank the hon Mars for
introducing the debate. The DA welcomes it. We are witnessing a phenomenal
growth in children orphaned by HIV/Aids which, according to the report on
the costing of the Children’s Act, is currently at 1,5 million maternal
orphans and is set to increase to 2,1 million by 2010. Of these children, a
staggering 873 000 will be double orphans. In other words, they would have
lost both parents to HIV/Aids, resulting in many young girls leaving school
to support their siblings. This reinforces the vicious circle of poverty.

The majority of our youth live below the poverty line and face many
obstacles in uplifting themselves. The DA believes that South Africa should
be a country of hope and of making dreams come true for all who live in it;
that it should be a country that is truly alive with possibility. To this
end, we have made a number of proposals that, we believe, could have a
significant positive impact on the lives of young South Africans.

First and foremost, we believe that as an interim measure, the introduction
of a basic income grant would go far in alleviating many of the pressures
which poverty brings to bear on our youth and rural communities. At the
moment the social welfare system excludes a vast majority of South
Africans. If you are an abled person over the age of 14 and up to
pensionable age, you are not entitled to a social grant. However, social
grants can only alleviate poverty, not eradicate poverty. Only job creation
can eradicate poverty.

The basic income grant of R110 per month would not keep young able-bodied
workers out of the labour market or overly burden the fiscus. What it will
do is give the youth, particularly our young women, access to a little
resource to assist them while they are at school and without having them
endangering themselves or running the risk of increasing long-term poverty
by engaging in unprotected sex and having babies in order to obtain the
child support grant, which our committee has heard about.

What we need, is to focus on poverty eradication for all South Africans.
However, the suggestions I am going to give today will focus on the youth.

The DA is worried about the fact that most young South Africans do not get
a fair chance at success. Our youth are sold short by an educational system
that fails to deliver all the way from Grade 1 to adulthood. Providing
access to an adequate education forms the cornerstone of the DA’s drive for
greatest social justice and equality of opportunity. Our schooling system
should level the playing fields. Our schooling system should enhance and
protect every individual’s life chances. Instead, it perpetuates inequality
by condemning poor children to a poor education and an impoverished future.


A shortage of qualified mathematics and science teachers at secondary
school level has been identified as a major factor inhibiting development.
Without better maths and science education, we will not be able to produce
engineers, the software developers, researchers and accountants that we
need for faster economic growth. Failure to deal decisively with this
shortcoming threatens to leave South Africa behind in a highly skilled
globally competitive environment.

To address this threat, the DA proposes that a maths and science
educational development fund be set up, with a mandate of improving the
level of secondary school maths and science education and with securing
adequately qualified teachers. The fund would, firstly, identify students
going into the third year of study and provide full bursaries to those
willing to major in science or maths, complete a post-graduate educational
qualification and commit to four years of teaching. Secondly, it would
headhunt for maths and science teachers, and thirdly, provide once-off
incentives to qualifying persons to enter the teaching profession.

Our programme of opportunity does not end at Grade 12. Those who do not
choose to enter tertiary education, or who cannot afford to do so, enter
the labour market with few marketable skills. Most employers look for some
form of work experience, but because young South Africans cannot break into
the labour market in the first place, they have no way of acquiring that
experience.

The DA believes that every young South African should have the opportunity
to make an economic success of his or her life. To this end, we propose a
series of reforms on educational system, as well as the introduction of the
opportunity voucher which can be used by school-leavers to subsidise
tertiary studies, apprenticeships or even entry-level employment.

By giving school-leavers a fighting chance at success, we hope to break the
circle of unemployability that starts with inadequate secondary schooling
and sets in with the first few years of unemployment, being after school.

Opportunity vouchers are all about choice. The DA will provide matriculants
with vouchers to the value of R4 500 per annum for three years after
leaving school. These vouchers can be utilized in a variety of ways: to pay
towards university or any recognised tertiary education; to subsidise an
apprenticeship or learnership; to subsidise a newly formed small business,
or to be handed to employers to subsidise initial employment.

If young learners know they can look forward to better prospects after
matric, we believe more of them will decide to finish their secondary
schooling. Our plan for more opportunity is not confined to the classrooms
and lecture halls, but also expands to the shop floor. We believe that
workplace training is an important means of increasing productivity and
improving the individual worker’s life prospects. Unlike the government, we
do, however, believe that private sector rather than the state should drive
workplace skills development.

An investment in our youth is an investment in the fibre of society and in
the power of our economy to grow. The initiatives suggested here, are
investments in our youth that are completely affordable for us, as a
country, and are sure to have a huge impact on theirs and therefore our
lives. There are no reasons why these incentives cannot be implemented to
good effect. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Thank you, Chair. Colleagues, I want to use a few minutes I
have at my disposal to make reference to a recent study tour I made to
Kerala in India, as a member of the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
Local Government. I do this because I think there are lessons applicable
from Kerala that we may wish to consider for South Africa.

Firstly, you do not have to be rich to address poverty, though presumably
it helps to have resources. Kerala’s experience demonstrates, quite
clearly, that success in addressing poverty is not dependent upon strong
economic growth, and that even modest performance can underpin high levels
of social redress. South Africa’s problem, we know, is less one of finance
than it is of capacity to spend. Put differently, imaginative programmes
need to be substituted for processes based on throwing money at a problem.

Secondly, local is lekker. What Kerala demonstrates amply is that a lot
happens at the local level. Despite national and state programmes and state
support, the local level plays a key role in alleviating poverty. This is
evident in the extensive competencies of municipalities including housing,
public works, education, agriculture and social services. It is evident in
the strongly participatory community culture, as well as in the executive
powers, not merely advisory of the village councils, which are active role-
players, particularly in the identification of beneficiaries of welfare.
The message here is that there is scope to improve our municipal framework
and our participatory framework.

Thirdly, there is an active partnership required between the different
spheres of government and between government and other institutions as
well. In Kerala, the state poverty alleviation programme, which is focused
entirely on the family rather than on individuals, draws in national rural
financing agencies, commercial banks, international agencies and, of
course, local government.

The community organisations in the rural areas in Kerala alone total 105
000. These community organisations play a key role in alleviating poverty.
Initially, too, very interestingly, they focused entirely upon the
provision of consumption activities, daily necessities. At present their
focus is, in fact, on income-generating activities, which is the fishing
rod rather than the fish. I think, here again, there is something that we
should look at, see what they are doing and how they are achieving what
they are.

Fourthly, special steps are taken in Kerala to address the destitute who
may not be benefiting from other antipoverty programmes. In Kerala there
are very imaginative ways of defining the destitute -equivalent types
presumed to our indigent - and, interestingly, income is not a criterion.
Furthermore, once a destitute family has been identified and approved by
the village assembly, that family is visited by trained volunteers to
assist them until they are no longer destitute and a tracking system is put
in place to monitor progress.

Fifthly, and of great importance, is the focus on the role of women. It is
obvious that women’s participation in Kerala, particularly in local
government, is mainstreamed. But far more significant than that, is that
there are many thousands of women’s community-based self-help groups,
structured on one member representing between 15 to 40 families. In Kerala,
the fight against poverty is almost entirely women-centred. The argument
raised there, and it seems valid, is that women’s participation and women’s
upliftment are the key to uplifting the community as a whole; and it works
for women, children and youth, and it is particularly prevalent to the
rural areas. These are some of the points I picked up in Kerala and I think
we should be able to consider them here. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, I have only a minute to put forward the ID’s
suggestions on combating youth and rural poverty.
Firstly, the government needs to prioritise the rural areas and develop a
comprehensive rural development strategy. Such a strategy must put emphasis
on rural people’s livelihoods and how their natural asset base can used to
deal with the worst effects of poverty.

I have seen places of despair and malnutrition turn into thriving and
healthy areas through the simple provision of training in organic
agriculture. It is not the grandiose development schemes dreamt up in some
far-flung government offices that will provide the best form of development
for rural communities, but the placing of rural communities at the very
centre of any development effort. These communities need to be listened to
and given tangible support by government to bring forward their own local
vision for development.

Rural communities also need to stop being treated as second-class citizens
and government must ensure that they get the services they are
constitutionally entitled to. This will prevent the needless deaths of many
children and pregnant mothers through diseases of poverty.

It should also be a source of shame to this government that 4 000 schools
in South Africa do not have electricity and 2 500 do not have water, let
alone libraries, computers and Internet connections.

The inequality of education in rural areas is dooming another generation to
poverty and we have to address this if we are going to alleviate poverty in
the long run. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, employment is an obvious key to alleviating poverty
which is a primary concern when it comes to youth. Why is this proving so
elusive? Unemployment has become so firmly entrenched that it will take
more than a wish and a prayer to dislodge it. Great numbers of South
Africans are simple excluded from productive participation in economic
activity, with tragic consequences, including crime and disease.

A recent interesting comment by Temba Nolutshungu, a director of the Free
Market Foundation, suggests that the bold and creative ideas needed to
address this situation adequately are likely to be unpopular politically.
Nolutshungu referred to a booklet, “Jobs for the Jobless” by Eustace Davie,
in which it proposed that a special certificate of exemption be instituted
in terms of which exemption from the provisions of labour legislation
should be granted to people who have been unemployed for a period of over
six months. This could facilitate entry into the labour market for both
skilled and unskilled people, creating more opportunities for youth to gain
much-needed experience.

The ACDP is of the opinion that in both rural and urban communities,
initiatives centred on working with markets that draw on existing
activities among the poor, have proven beneficial and should be encouraged.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, there is no negation in the
statement that education is a weapon of development and therefore all the
vulnerable, the youth, the disabled, women and all those who live in the
forsaken rural communities, need education. They need to be educated to be
thrifty. It has been proven that education, however elementary, is indeed
helpful to people and enables them to perform their duties better.

To this end, it will be in the interests of all South Africans to assist in
setting up rural microfinance structures for poverty alleviation. It is
such programmes that will assist those who are so vulnerable to be trained
in saving and lending activities to empower them economically. The
strengthening of literacy and mathematics skills will surely enhance the
chances of leading a better life.

The UCDP is on record as saying that labour-intensive programmes should be
introduced to ensure that all live by the sweat of their brows. We do not
really accept the doling out of social grants ad infinitum, as they tend to
turn such people into perpetual hangers-on. I thank you.

Ms N D NGCENGWANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon members, the fact that we
are here today, debating initiatives required to alleviate poverty, shows
that the ANC did not fight for democracy in vain, but taught every
individual in this country, yes, every individual, even in this House, that
poverty is everyone’s business.

Indeed, it is everyone’s business to restore the dignity of our people who
suffered enough during the apartheid era. After stripping and dispossessing
the Africans of their land, poverty became the order of the day. We never
heard anything about poverty before the colonisers invaded our country and
robbed people of their land and livestock.

South Africa ended up having two economies, the first and the second
economy. Indeed, we ended up having two nations in one country, one nation
filthy rich and the other desperately poor.

It was only after the democratically elected ANC-led government came to
power that poverty alleviation policies and programmes were made the number
one priority on the agenda. The President’s pronouncements on interventions
were reiterated from top management right down to the most junior official
in the departments.

Hon members, in his state of the nation address President Mbeki had this to
say, and I quote:


  At the core of our response to all the challenges of government is the
  struggle against poverty and underdevelopment, which rests on three
  pillars, namely encouraging the growth and development of the first
  economy and increasing its possibility of creating jobs; implementing our
  programme to address the challenge of the second economy; and building a
  social security net to meet the object of poverty alleviation.

Hon members, it is in this context that Public Works came up with the
following interventions. The Expanded Public Works Programme is an
initiative that seeks to implement short- to medium-term programmes aimed
at the provision of additional work opportunities together with training.
All spheres of government and state-owned enterprises are required to make
systematic efforts to target the unskilled, the unemployed, the poor, the
youth and women in particular.

The EPWP, as part of the strategy to alleviate poverty effectively has been
divided into various forms in an integrated programme, which cuts across
various departments to promote interdepartmental relations. The first is
the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme – Casp - which includes
the building of dams for livestock, the building of infrastructure for
dipping services, irrigation infrastructure, and the fencing off of
livestock from our roads, thus eliminating accidents.

Regarding transport infrastructure, the construction of rural roads that
connect provincial roads should be more labour intensive and should target
the unskilled and the unemployed, especially the youth and poor
communities. We should build on existing initiatives, such as the Zibambele
Road Maintenance Programme in KwaZulu-Natal, the famous Gundo Lashu Road
Construction programme in Limpopo and the Zivuseni building and maintenance
programme in Gauteng.

The Working for Water programme includes the removal of alien vegetation
that could create problems for livestock, and the labour-intensive
construction of water pipelines for the community water supply and
sanitation programme under the Department of Water Affairs.

With regard to the land care programme, degraded soils and dongas should be
taken care of by Public Works in the environmental sector.

Hon members, you must understand that all these programmes are labour
intensive, the main objective being job creation.

Coming to Integrated Development Planning or IDP, the municipal
infrastructure grant, the MIG, and the provincial infrastructure grant, the
PIG, as you can see all government departments are working together to
eliminate poverty, not simply to alleviate it. We are doing our best to
rectify the wrongs of the past. As you all know, apartheid planning left us
with cities and towns that have racially divided business and residential
areas; are badly planned to meet the needs of the poor, with long
travelling distances to work and poor access to business and other
services; that have great differences in levels of service delivery between
the rich and the poor and have sprawling informal settlements and spread-
out residential areas that make cheap service delivery very difficult.

The Integrated Development Plan is an approach to planning that involves
the entire municipality and its citizens in finding the best solutions to
achieve good long-term developments. Through the effective use of scarce
resources, it helps to speed up delivery and to attract additional funds,
it strengthens democracy, helps to overcome the legacy of apartheid and
promotes co-ordination between local, provincial and national government.

It is through the National Public Works Programme that the government
advances and transforms the delivery of infrastructure to meet the physical
and social needs of the poorest of the poor, found in the rural areas in
particular. Training is achieved through human resource development, in
terms of which jobs opportunities are created for the country’s poorest
communities. Construction industry development boards, or CIDBs, aim to
achieve maximum impact in terms of the economic and social objectives in
the construction industry.

Hon members, a lot has been done by the ANC-led government. The SA Women in
Construction Association, which aims to empower women participating in
construction projects, is excited about the conference it will host later
this year. We have more than 1 000 registered members, but the challenge
remains tapping into the rural areas to determine how many more women are
operating in those areas.

Construction as a career path is still regarded as a male domain and this
is still a challenge for most women. Recently Gauteng women members won a
contract to build 10 schools. Amabamba Fencing, a women’s group based in
the Western Cape, won a R4,8 million contract to install a high-security
fence for a power utility at Eskom’s Koeberg nuclear power station.

In conclusion, hon members, South Africa belongs to all who live in it. It
is not only our country, but also our home. Even though we have had our ups
and downs in the past, we need to reach out to each other, roll up our
sleeves and commit ourselves to the future of this country, regardless of
colour, race, gender, class, disability or age. Pulling together, we can do
wonders for the future of this country.

As can be seen, our government has programmes and processes in place which
are meant to ensure that jobs are created for our people to engage in while
employment skills are transferred to them. The core function and
responsibility of the Department of Public Works is job creation, poverty
alleviation and skills transfer.

Hon members, if we are really serious about restoring the dignity of our
people, together we need to put our shoulders to the wheel and improve the
quality of life of all the citizens of South Africa. Democracy goes with
responsibility. South Africa will only work if Public Works works. I thank
you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, we commonly share a vision for South Africa and
all our people, and that is a life of poverty alleviation, freedom, success
and a comfortable lifestyle. However, the reality is that the volume of
victims of poverty and other social challenges is vast and it will take a
lot of hard work to turn this vision into a reality.

These initiatives extend between rural and urban projects, and the MF
recognises the youth of this country to be a primary tool to transform
South Africa into a true democracy, and South Africa as a land of
opportunity for all its residents.

However, it is of the opinion that initiatives are not adequately being
infiltrated in rural communities, and that the youth in rural communities
are not effectively being recruited to develop this new South Africa.

We think it is crucial that members of the House, as representatives of
this nation, comb their constituencies and venture even beyond that to
endorse efforts of poverty alleviation. Rural initiatives should consider
adopting programmes and assume greater responsibility to incorporate youth
development among rural communities.

The MF calls on the adoption of rural youth into our provinces to engage
them in possible future ambitions and to pave the road to poverty
alleviation by reaching out to these communities.
Close co-operation with municipalities should also be initiated and
facilities created to develop ... [Time expired.] Thank you.

Mr B MTHEMBU: Chairperson, hon members, there is abundant evidence that
poverty is disproportionately located in the rural areas, and that the
level of youth unemployment or lack of sustainable livelihood is
unacceptable.

It is for this reason that we welcome the IFP motion to deal with this
matter, because underpinning government programmes is dealing with the
question of poverty and underdevelopment.

However, the question of the alleviation of poverty with regard to our
youth and rural communities needs to be addressed without losing sight of
the broader socioeconomic reconstruction and development agenda of post-
apartheid and post-colonial South Africa.

In this context, our government has developed a comprehensive and
multidimensional strategy that seeks to address poverty and
underdevelopment. This approach seeks to alleviate the pain of poverty in
the short term. It seeks to reduce poverty in the medium term, and most
importantly, to eradicate or eliminate it in the long term.
The approach of our government is to respond to the challenges of poverty
and underdevelopment within the context of a growing economy. To that end,
various programmes are in place which are simultaneously implemented to
grow the economy, to alleviate poverty in the short term, to reduce it in
the medium term and to eradicate it in the long term.

In April 2004, the ANC was given a mandate to fight poverty and
unemployment when the overwhelming majority of the electorate voted in
favour of its manifesto.

On 21 May 2004, the President unveiled the government’s comprehensive
programme of action to address the challenges of poverty. This
comprehensive programme rests on three pillars, as my colleague has already
pointed out.

Alleviation of poverty is a short-term approach in addressing the burden of
poverty, not to deal with the fundamental causes of poverty. To this end,
the government has built a social security net. This programme, among other
things, includes free basic services such as water, electricity and
sanitation to all our people. It also includes scholar transport and school
nutrition.

The challenge is the fact that the programmes are there. The problem is
with implementation. It is in that instance that we as public
representatives will need to make sure that these programmes are in fact
translated into reality.

Our government believes that we cannot build a society in which large
sections depend on social welfare, because this is not sustainable. In the
medium to long term, the government has a programme to intervene in the
first and second economy, improving sustainable livelihoods and creating
work to ensure that over time a small proportion of society, in particular
the most vulnerable, subsists solely on social grants. This is in the
medium term to long term. We need to reduce the number of people who depend
on social grants by getting them to participate in the economy.

Our government believes this approach will increase the resources available
for human capital, and is thus moving away a large number of people who are
still within the paradigm of poverty alleviation.

The reduction of poverty involves addressing the structural deficiencies of
our economy, namely the question of ownership. As long as only a few in our
country own the land, while the majority are landless; as long as only a
few own capital, while the majority have no access to capital, we will have
problems. As long as only a few have the most human capital, education -
unfortunately those who are rich have the best education - skills and
knowledge, it will not be possible for us to address this question. Hence,
the approach of the government is to deal with these fundamental structural
deficiencies through land reform, transformation of education and by making
finance accessible to those who definitely need it.

It is only in this context that we will be able to bring the majority of
the people to participate meaningfully in the economic activities and thus
enhance their dignity and self-esteem and respect, rather than being
dependent on the state.

I need to emphasise that the eradication of poverty also involves our
active participation in the global progressive movement that seeks to
create a new world order that is more equitable and responsive to the needs
of the poor of the world who constitute the overwhelming majority of
humanity.

We cannot succeed alone in this global village in which interdependence is
very important. I wish to quote the words of James Speth, in his foreword
in the 1997 Human Development Report:


  Poverty is no longer inevitable. The world has the material and
  natural resources, the know-how and the people to make a
  poverty-free world a reality in less than a generation. This is not
  wholly idealism, but a practical and operationally achievable goal.

As long as the current world order persists, where a few nations,
especially in the West, dominate trade, the majority - billions of people –
will be living in abject poverty. In this context of interdependence, we
will need to make sure that we bring about a world order which is
equitable; a world order which is concerned with humanity; a world order
where we remove greed that feeds few, only in that context will we move
forward to ensure that the vision and the ideal of eradicating poverty will
prevail, and there will be peace, prosperity and promoting humanity. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon members, hon
Mars, thank you. The ANC welcomes this debate. We agree entirely with your
view of the need to find sustainable solutions to poverty eradication. In
closing the debate, I wish to reiterate what previous speakers have stated
with regard to poverty alleviation initiatives for youth and rural
communities, and combine this with what the Department of Social
Development and the government overall is inclined to do.

The gap between the rich and the poor, and the fact that the majority of
the poor is black and rural, necessitates that we acknowledge the
culpability of our past government with regard to separate and unequal
development. We look with hope to the future where the ANC’s manifesto of a
better life for all is, indeed, slowly but surely becoming a reality.
Having said that, we also acknowledge that poverty is a global phenomenon
which needs solidarity amongst nations for a just and equitable world
order.

Poverty remains one of the salient and most onerous challenges facing South
Africa. Rural areas account for a large proportion of the population and
are really represented in the first economy. It is estimated that 28% of
all households and about half of the total population lived below the
poverty line in 1995, according to Statistics SA. This would invariably
have impacted on the lives of youth with regard to their access to basic
services, including schooling and skills training and opportunities for
jobs and earning an income.

Youth development is part of a government-wide programme that includes
skills development and employment creation. As was stated by previous
speakers, various departments have made great strides into poverty
alleviation for youth and rural communities. While the challenge of
creating full employment and decent jobs are addressed in the longer term
through accelerated growth, the short-term strategy includes improved
social economic equity, gender equality, enhanced buying power, integration
into civil society, social protection, social dialogue, employment creation
and appropriate remuneration.

The ANC-led government’s approach to youth development, rural development
and human development in general, is encapsulated in the mandated
Reconstruction and Development Programme, the RDP of 1994, as well as the
2004 Employment and Poverty Manifesto. More recently, given the need for a
more robust approach to service delivery and resource distribution,
government has embarked on an Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
South Africa, Asgisa. Indeed, significant achievements have been made over
the past 12 years. This is seen by the strides we have made in the area of
growing the economy that will be shared by all, and the accelerated
delivery of basic social services like access to electricity, water and
social grants to millions of people who have no other income.

Indeed, this has opened huge opportunities for us to enhance social
integration, social justice and social cohesion with regard to the youth.
Asgisa emphasises the government’s intended vision of an integrated and
sustainable approach to people-centred development. This is absorbed in
initiatives pertaining to sustainable livelihoods where people become self-
reliant and capacitated with skills, employment and the necessary
resources.

In the context of Asgisa, the focus is on priority and scarce skills, which
include artisans. A new institution, established in the month of March, is
the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa. The structure
is led by the Deputy President and a committee of relevant Ministers,
business leaders, trade unionists and education and training providers or
experts. Its job is to confirm the urgently needed skills and find quick
and effective solutions.

The National Youth Service is co-ordinated by the Deputy President, which
shows the importance that government has attached to youth development. The
ANC-led government has put several institutions and programmes in place for
youth development, as epitomised by the National Youth Commission and the
Umsobomvu Youth Fund. The Department of Social Development’s intervention
to alleviate poverty has since 1994 been through the provision of income
poverty programmes, namely the means-tested income grants.

More recently, through its own programmes in the Expanded Public Works
Programme, which include the training of home and community-based care
workers, probation officers supporting various income-earning initiatives
like coffin-making, arts and crafts, vegetable gardens and a variety of
other activities support is offered. These interventions have their own
limitations, yet they go some way in alleviating poverty. Other programmes
that the government has initiated include learnerships, skills development,
broad-based black economic empowerment programmes and the national youth
service programmes in partnership with the Umsobomvu Youth Fund.

The Department of Social Development is currently finalising the youth
development plan which will ensure that we build capacity at national,
provincial and local levels. That will improve planning, mainstreaming and
integration of youth into programmes and scale up youth programmes in the
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, to reach as many young people as
possible, both in rural and urban areas.

Hon member Smith may know that the Department of Social Development has its
own sustainable livelihood directorate, which is anchored on the conviction
that development encompasses people’s real lives, drawing localised
development strategies from their daily struggles of survival. The goal is
to find a proper fit with what the community needs and it creats
development parts that are adaptable to those needs and aspirations which
are determined by the communities themselves.

The directorate submitted the belief that grants are an important facet in
the noble cause of alleviating poverty. However, grants alone are not
enough and may end up creating even more problems such as dependency and
the underutilisation of the productive work force, hence the drive to link
grants to sustainable livelihoods. In an attempt to mitigate poverty in a
sustainable fashion, the directorate is currently on a massive drive and
campaign to link social grants to sustainable livelihoods.

Silindithemba Rural Development Project in Dutyini is an agricultural
project located in the OR Tambo District Municipality, which is one of the
nodal areas. It started on 1 September 2005 during the Child Support Grant.
A questionnaire was developed where members of the community of Dutyini
defined, in their own version, what poverty is, what obstacles retard them
from extricating themselves from poverty.

The community also identified ways in which they can alleviate the squalid
conditions in which they find themselves. This process led to the formation
of Silindithemba Rural Development Project. It has about seven subprojects
which include poultry farming, sewing and crafts. This idea of linking
grants to sustainable development is progressive in that it makes people
self-reliant while they synergetically participate in the economy. It is
intended to be replicated in Mpumalanga, the Free State and in the Northern
Cape province, which are also nodal areas.

In conclusion, notwithstanding the fact that the lives of many young people
have changed, there is still many youths in our country who are faced with
many complex challenges like poverty, HIV/Aids, the need for economic
empowerment, skills development, meaningful integration into all
development programmes and last but not least, better access to government
social services.

In order to address these critical socioeconomic challenges in an
integrated and sustainable way, it is imperative that the youth become an
integral part of these programmes and ensure that they, indeed, work for
the benefit of the youth and the country as a whole.

Linking grants to sustainable livelihood has a massive potential to promote
self-reliance and to act as a long-term solution to poverty alleviation in
rural as well as urban areas. Progressive thought and actions are in order
for rural areas to develop. We have to build and uplift our rural
communities by twinning agrarian land reform and creating capacity for
light manufacturing also, so that rural people are not solely reliant on
agriculture as a means of income. The challenge facing us now is for all
three tiers of government, business and communities to play an active and
integrated role in the development of youth and the rural communities.

Awards given to our people, who have successfully turned their lives and
those of others around, are there for all to see. Every year there are
hundreds of awards that are given. Just recently, as an example, the
Department of Land Affairs gave an award to a woman farmer who saved R3 000
of her grant money and after that she began farming. She then cancelled her
own grant, because she didn’t need it any more. Today, she is assisting
others and showing them how to become self-sustainable. It is stories like
these that show us, indeed, that today is better than yesterday and
tomorrow will be better than today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs I MARS: Chairperson, first of all I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to all members who have made a positive contribution to this
debate. It is clear that many members agree that the needs of the poor
should be paramount in our daily work as parliamentarians. Perhaps now is
also the correct time to do a comprehensive audit of outstanding needs on
youth and rural communities, so that the findings could inform our future
action and intervention.

Yes, we have excellent policies and we support them fully and we also know
the difficulties in the implementation of many of our policies. However, we
still have an enormous deficit and it is this deficit that we wanted to
address in this discussion. We therefore thank Mr Mthembu for his input and
I also want to express my appreciation to the Deputy Minister for her very
constructive remarks. Thank you very much. However, I would need to stress
again that we should not rely solely on intervention by the government to
eradicate poverty.

The youth and rural communities need to have a major say in how their
plight is addressed while we, the parliamentarians, can use the resources
that are at our disposal in a co-ordinated and a co-operative manner in
order to make a positive contribution to the lives of millions of our
citizens. I think, particularly, the Deputy Minister has made it quite
clear and we agree with her. There are many very good interventions in
place and she has also acknowledged that there is a deficit. All we are
trying to do with this debate today was to see how we can assist and how,
generally speaking, we can all be part of eradicating poverty in South
Africa. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF SIXTY-SEVENTH, SIXTY-EIGHTH, SIXTY-NINTH, SEVENTIETH,
     SEVENTY-FIRST, SEVENTY-FOURTH AND SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORTS OF STANDING
                        COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, it is both a pleasure
and an honour to present the following reports on behalf of the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts. These reports are the products of the hard
work and commitment by Scopa to the full implementation of the Public
Finance Management Act and the political imperative of service delivery to
the people.

The 67th report is on Scopa’s concern about the lack of uniform norms and
standards on salary levels, especially bonus payments in public entities.
We are recommending that the Auditor-General should investigate and report
to Parliament on this matters, but also that National Treasury, together
with the Department of Public Enterprises, should review the adequacy of
existing guidelines on these issues, as well as compliance with the Keehn
Report on Corporate Governance Codes.

The 68th report is on Scopa’s concerns about the non-filling of funded
posts and government departments. We recommend that the Auditor-General
should investigate and report on these issues, but also that the National
Treasury, together with the Department of Public Service and Administration
should review the relevant policies and guidelines on salaries and the
filling of funded posts.

The 69th report concerns the unauthorised expenditure of the Government
Communication and Information System. It is an unauthorised expenditure for
the year that ended on March 1997 and relates to an amount of R1,698
million. R400 000 was incurred when the GCIS’s then accounting officer
disregarded tender procedures. Scopa recommends that the amount be written
off. This includes writing off the debt from the GCIS books. The state did
take legal action against the then accounting officer and got a default
judgement. So far the said gentleman does not have any realisable assets to
recover the losses incurred by the state. Scopa, however, recommends that
the High Court judgement should continue to apply until such time that the
30 years period lapses, which means if he is able to own property, the
state can recover its losses within the 30-year period. That could be done.

The 70th report is about the unauthorised expenditure in the Department of
Agriculture. It relates to an amount of R663 000 incurred in the financial
years 1998-99 and 1999-2000. Scopa recommends that Parliament should
approve the amounts since there was no loss to the state and those
responsible were reprimanded.

The 71st report is on the Department of Communications. Scopa is happy with
the unqualified audit report, except for concerns pertaining to the
internal audit and asset register. Scopa would like the department to send
Parliament a report within 60 days, stating which measures are being taken
to address the above issues.
The 72nd and the 73rd reports are unqualified and clean reports of the
Engelburg House Art Collection and the Education and Labour Relations
Council. Scopa hopes that their future audit opinions will be equally
unqualified.

The 74th report is on the Department of Transport. The report arises out
the hearing that Scopa had with the department on issues contained in the
report amongst which are the following: The contract for the production of
the credit card drivers’ licences format. After Cabinet’s approval of the
above, the Department of Transport, in conjunction with the service
provider in question, opened two operating accounts in the name of the
service provider. There was no proper recording of transactions and no
proper internal controls to ensure that invoices of the service provider
were properly checked and authorised.

On the basis of the above and others contained in the full report in your
possession, Scopa recommends that the Department of Transport should
consider the conversion of the two bank accounts into a departmental
trading account or alternatively a trading account under the Road Traffic
Management Corporation and also that Parliament be supplied with the cost
benefit analysis in terms of value for money of this contract within 60
days.

Scopa condemns the fact that the initial contract was renewed for a further
five years without proper authorisation in the department, though aware
that the National Treasury has post facto approved it. Scopa also noted
incurred fruitless and wasteful expenditure of R958,683, a regular
expenditure of R951 000 and internal control weaknesses, amongst others.
Scopa expresses its profound disappointment at the failure to follow proper
procurement procedures and poor contract management. Scopa recommends that
a strategy and plan of action be put in place to address the weaknesses
highlighted during the hearing and that this be communicated to Parliament
within 60 days.

The 75th report is on the South African Rail Commuter Corporation Limited
Financial Arrangements Act. Scopa noted problems around fixed assets and
calls on the South African Rail Commuter Corporation to develop relevant
policy guidelines and report to Parliament within 60 days on these
corrective measures. There are various aspects of non-compliance with the
National Treasury regulations and the South African Rail Commuter
Corporation Limited Financial Arrangements Act of 2000. On all of these
instances, Scopa has made clear recommendations to ensure that there is
compliance.

We commend these reports to the House, Chairperson. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party move:

   That the Reports be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERALS AND ENERGY –
      PUBLIC HEARINGS ON VIABILITY OF ESTABLISHING NATIONAL RED/7th RED

Mnu E N MTHETHWA: Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu, maqabane kanye
nozakwethu, sekwevile eminyakeni eyishumi sisemshikashikeni wokwaba kabusha
imboni eyaba ugesi. Isizathu esikhulu salokhu ukuthi kufanele sihambisane
noguqukongqangi lwezwe lakithi nokuthi nalaba abadla imbuya ngothi
bawuthole ugesi. Ilesi isizathu esenza ukuthi mhla zi-2 kuNhlaba ngonyaka
wezi-2001 isigungu esiphezulu kuhulumeni wesizwe siphasise umqulu ovumelana
nokuhlelwa kwemboni kagesi. Lo mqulu weseka ukwakhiwa kwezifunda
eziyisithupha ezweni lonke ezizoxhasa omasipala abakhulu.

Ngonyaka wezi-2002, enqgunqgutheleni kazwelonke eStellenbosch, umbutho
wesizwe wanquma kanje ngalolu daba, ngiyacaphuna:


  Aluqhubeke uhlelo lokwakha kabusha; imboni yokwabiwa kukagesi iqinisekise
  ukuphakwa kukagesi ngenani elingambi eqolo; ukutholakala kukagesi obiza
  kancane kumuntu wonke; nokutholakala kwesabelo esithile sikagesi,
  ikakhulukazi kulabo abantulayo.


Ngonyaka wezi-2003 kwakhiwa isikhungo esibhekene noguquko ekuphakweni
kukagesi nokuyisenzo esihambisanayo nombutho wesizwe, uKhongolose. Ethula
inkulumo yakhe ayeyibhekise esizweni ngonyaka ka-2004, uMongameli wezwe,
uMnu Thabo Mbeki, wakhipha isiqondiso sokwakhiwa kwalezi zifunda
eziyisithupha ezizoxhaswa omasipala abakhulu. Wakukalela unyaka ukwakhiwa
kwesifunda sokuqala. Nebala esokuqala isifunda sakhiwa sagcotshwa
kumasipala omkhulu waseKapa ngenyanga kaNtulikazi ngonyaka wezi-2005.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr E N MTHETHWA: Chairperson, hon Members of this House, comrades and
colleagues, it is more than 10 years since we started campaigning for the
restructuring of the electricity industry. The main reason for this is that
we have to be in line with the transformation process of our country and
make it possible for the poor communities to get electricity. It was for
this very reason that Cabinet on 2 April 2001 adopted a policy which
sanctioned the restructuring of the electricity industry. This policy
supports the construction of six regions for the whole of South Africa to
assist metropolitan municipalities.

In 2002, at the National Conference in Stellenbosch, the ANC resolved as
follows on this issue, and I quote:


  That the restructuring process of the electricity distribution industry
  be continued to ensure that the distribution of electricity is affordable
  and accessible to all people, and to ensure that a certain share of free
  units are provided, especially to those who are poor.

In 2003 a distribution company was established to focus on the
transformation of electricity distribution which is in line with the ANC
policy. In his state of the nation address of 2004, the President of the
Republic of South Africa, Mr Thabo Mbeki gave a directive on the
construction of these six regions which will be supported by the
metropolitan municipalities. He gave a timeframe of one year for the
construction of the first region. Consequently, the first region was
completed and officially launched by the metropolitan municipality of Cape
Town in July 2005.]

The Cabinet Memorandum of 14 September 2005 was set to change the path
canvassed over a period of time amongst role players. We felt unhappy as a
committee for being ignored on this. We also felt that it is incumbent on
us to ensure that those affected by this are afforded an opportunity to
have a say before the executive decides on the matter.

Subsequently, on 21 and 23 June 2006 we held public hearings. Based on the
public hearings, we concluded that the initial position of six REDs or
``wall-to-wall REDs’’ is a viable model to pursue. The committee does not
favour the 7th RED or the national electricity distributor option. This
position is taken based on two factors: firstly, the lack of a convincing
argument for establishing the national electricity distributor emanating
from the hearings, in particular the fact that none of the positions put
forward could sustain the argument around the financial viability of the
NED and,
secondly, to eliminate any further delays in the restructuring process by
introducing new models, spending time and financial resources on such, but
to rather commit ourselves fully that the Six REDs model is operational.

In advancing this process, the committee recommends that collaboration
between the Department for Provincial and Local Government, the National
Treasury, the Department of Mineral and Energy and the Department of Public
Enterprises takes place to ensure that the long unresolved challenges
hampering the successful implementation of the six REDs model is addressed
with urgency. The committee noted with concern the number of inputs which
called for legislative and policy direction to drive the restructuring of
electricity distribution industry.

The committee further recommends that the Department of Minerals and Energy
should speed up the legislation in order to accelerate with change in the
industry. The National Treasury has to finalise the process of providing
clear policy guidelines with regard to the transfer of assets form existing
distributors, that is, Eskom and municipalities to the REDs. The Department
of Minerals and Energy has to provide clarity with regard to the definitive
problems with reticulation, as well as with competitive and contestable
customers. The committee remains steadfast in its commitment to ensure an
accelerated REDs creation process and that all transformation processes
remain informed by the needs of our country and its people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chair, the undertaking by the Portfolio Committee on
Minerals and Energy as to the viability of the so-called national or 7th
RED, indicates the diversity of opinion as to whether government should in
fact continue with the proposed policy to implement a system of six REDS
with adjoining boundaries.

As could be expected, Salga has serious reservations as to the
appropriateness of the 7th RED as reflected in their resolutions following
a meeting by the AMEU Standing Committee held in KwaZulu-Natal on 29 June
2006 and subsequently adopted by Salga.

One of these resolutions calls for the various modelling results to be
presented to consider the viability and sustainability of all the possible
scenarios to be implemented. This matter, together with all the other
resolutions, as well as the diverse views held at the public hearings of
the committee indicate the confusion which currently reigns within
government as to the appropriate route to follow.

It is of great concern that an earlier decision by Cabinet to consider a
7th RED clearly flows from opposition of local government, as well as a
failure to appreciate the fact that the initial proposed model of six so-
called ``wall to wall’’ REDs requires constitutional amendments which were
apparently not considered by Cabinet. As has been stated at the portfolio
hearings, a certain amount of confusion seems to exist as to the desired
model to follow. In this regard, it is the Department of Minerals and
Energy’s task, after due consultation, to develop a policy and proposals
which are financially viable and sustainable and to the benefit of the
electricity industry as a whole.

In this regard, the Department of Minerals and Energy has not been
constructive and has not played the role of leading the process in a
constructive and informed manner, hence, the confusion and direct opposing
views amongst role players, such as Cosatu which supports the six REDs.
Local government is also supporting the six REDs but sub-regional REDs, as
favoured by certain secondary municipalities and business who are happy
with any model on the basis that bulk customers are exempt from buying from
REDs instead from Eskom directly.

It would be unwise to support a particular model before the costs,
viability and sustainability of the various models have been determined.

The question of cross-subsidisation of tariffs is of utmost importance in
determining the appropriate model, the reduction of costs to the public, as
well as the most practical implementation of the various programmes. Only
once this exercise has been conducted and results are available should
Cabinet take a decision as to the most advantageous model to follow. At
this point, most of the submissions to the committee were based on the
issue of cross-subsidisation of tariffs and the potential loss of revenue
to local government.

Although both these issue are important, it should not form the basis of an
informed decision in this regard. It is time that the department gets its
house in order on this important issue in order to prevent further
deterioration of the infrastructure in electricity distribution due to the
insecurities which currently exist with local government responsible for
electricity distribution. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, the interruptions in the supply of electricity
that we experienced in the Western Cape and parts of Gauteng have served to
highlight the need for a stable and reliable source of electricity. It is
also of paramount importance that this electricity is affordable to the
masses. The restructuring of the electricity distribution industry has been
in the pipeline for some time now, with Cabinet approving a blueprint on
EDI restructuring in May 2001.
The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy held public hearings on 21
and 23 June 2006 on the viability of establishing a 7th RED. During the
deliberations many views were expressed by different stakeholders,
including representatives from labour, business and local government. These
were all very informative and were taken into consideration by the
committee.

A very important aspect of the report is the committee’s view that it finds
it problematic that the municipalities could be given the choice of joining
the national RED or metro REDs. We in the committee are not in favour of
the 7th RED option. We are also disappointed that the 1st RED, which was
established around the city of Cape Town, has not reported on its
performance as yet, as its experiences could prove invaluable and be of
great assistance.

We agree with this report. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, firstly I must congratulate the Chairperson of this
committee, hon Mthethwa, for holding public hearings on the viability of
establishing a national RED. These public hearings revealed a number of
different viewpoints on the issue of electricity distribution. Many of
these views, are however, based on the particular interest of each
stakeholder, but it did offer interesting insights into this debate, which,
I am sure, will continue.

The ID would agree with the committee’s report that there is a lack of a
convincing argument for establishing a 7th RED at this time. This report is
also one of the rare moments where Parliament has differed with Cabinet on
an issue. We hope that this trend continues.

The ID will support the recommendations of the committee.

Mr H B CUPIDO: The ACDP is assured that the present six-Regional
Electricity Distributor model is effectively rendering the required service
for the people of South Africa. The need for secure, reliable and cost-
effective electrification is of paramount importance for the stabilisation
and growth of our economy, as a significant percentage of activities that
support our economy are based in and around the metro areas.

In light of the frequent or the recent disruptions in power supply that
have taken place throughout South Africa, it is imperative that all role-
players, as mentioned in the committee report, should as a matter of
urgency hasten to address those challenges that may be hampering the
successful implementation of the six-RED model. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, in his state of the nation address, our hon President
expressed a vision of every household having electricity, running water and
sanitary facilities. This will equip South African households with the
basic necessities to sustain a healthy lifestyle. Certainly, all government
initiatives are being extensively exhausted to ensure delivery.

The Department of Minerals and Energy has been part of the formidable team
to deliver and to make electricity accessible and cost-effective to all
South Africans. We agree with the committee’s evaluation of the existing
six Regional Electricity Distributors’ benefits, and suggest that the
recommendation to make it more effective be seriously considered.

We further acknowledge Eskom’s favour of the national RED, but agree with
the committee on the potential risk and note the success of the current RED
Six.

The MF calls on the public at large to acknowledge all government
initiatives and efforts to provide every South African with basic
necessities for survival, but also to note the volume of this need and
problems inherited by the apartheid regime that certainly hinder delivery.
Thank you very much.

Mr C D KEKANA: Hon Chair, hon members, we are very glad as a portfolio
committee that we are reaching the end of the debate on this matter. I am
glad that we have just got to announce that, for the first time in the
development of South Africa, the division between the urban and rural area
is kind of closing because, for the first time, rural small towns are
absorbing many people from the rural area who used to cause the influx to
the urban area and, as a result, overburden the urban area and its
infrastructural facilities.

The reason is that there is decentralisation of infrastructure in the rural
areas and the rural towns. For the first time, there is housing with tap
water, electricity and sanitation facilities. That is absorbing many people
who come from the rural area. So, our rural towns are for the first time
growing and absorbing the population from the rural area. Green pastures no
longer only exist in the main metros or in the urban areas, but also in the
rural towns.

The six regional electricity distributors, as approved by our portfolio
committee, indeed address this issue because, as regards cross-
subsidisation, each of the six REDs is based in one metro. There is one
metro for each of the Six REDs, and that main metro is going to help with
the cross-subsidisation of small local governments that are within its
demarcation.

In our hearing, labour had approved this because they realise that the
transfer of the assets, which involves staff, will not change the status of
the staff in each local government.

In fact, the agreement is that the transfer put the staff that are there on
equal par. If there are going to be changes, the changes will be based on
the promotion of the staff or an increase in salary of the staff. It won’t
be based on any decrease of salary or demotion of any staff. So, labour was
very happy with the presentation of the six REDs.

It is also very important to realise that the six REDs have also been
approved, in a sense, by business. Business had a few reservations, but in
the main they approved the six REDs. So, with the support of business,
labour and as a department, we think the six REDs should unreservedly be
approved by the Parliament. Thanks very much.

Debate concluded.

The Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party move:

    That the Report be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS - STUDY
                          TOUR TO MANILA AND LONDON



Ms C M P RAMOTSAMAI: Deputy Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, the
Portfolio Committee on Public Works has been concerned by the spate of
disasters caused by the floods in the country. We as a caring arm of
government, have been perturbed by the analysis of distances our people
have to travel generally, but in particular the children who are going to
school and the aged visiting our social and economic centres in order to
access services and benefits made available for them by this very
government.

The committee embarked on a study tour of the Philippines and London,
amongst other things, to learn about the concept of the Mabey bridges and
the bridging programmes of the Philippines, as the core functions and
responsibilities of Public Works, particularly of the Expanded Public Works
Programme, are job creation, poverty alleviation and skills transfer.

In meeting the challenges caused by natural disasters, the committee
decided to go to the aforesaid countries to see whether these bridges and
programmes could possibly be integrated into our programmes and provide a
service-delivery vehicle for cost-effective infrastructure development in
our country in and during the aftermath of disasters caused by floods in
areas like Taung in the North West, and many other areas in KwaZulu-Natal
and recently in the Eastern Cape and the southern Cape.

It was interesting to note in the Philippines that after the tsunami
disaster, these bridges were used to rehabilitate the damaged
infrastructure and bridges. The Philippines presidential bridging programme
is utilised as a means of direct access between the islands in order to
join together communities divided by the sea.

These bridges are utilised as a means of direct access between the islands.
As alluded to in the report, it was interesting to note that in the
Philippines these bridges provide the following economic and social
benefits: they lower the environmental impact of the construction being
undertaken; there are poverty alleviation programmes; rural communities
have access to economic centres; there is access to health and education
facilities, especially in the rural areas; there are short and long-term-
based job opportunities; and there is skills transfer.

Of further interest was the fact that the presidential bridging programme
in the Philippines has been in progress for the past eight years, but has
never been changed even when governments changed, owing to its
effectiveness.

During our visit to a manufacturing plant, it was interesting to note that
these bridges had the following unique features: The bridges are easy to
construct or to install, and this can be done within a week. The bridges
can be used permanently and are versatile in most remote areas for the
immediate provision of emergency bridges. Owing to their galvanisation, the
bridges are sustainable and need very low maintenance. The size of the
bridge varies from one way to multiple ways and includes footbridges. The
substructure of the bridge can be built quickly with reduced expense and no
consultation fee. The construction of the bridges is labour-intensive. The
special grade steel used for building the bridges is fully galvanised and
designed to carry in excess of a normal highway load.  This resulted in the
hon member Blanché making the admission that they are far advanced in what
they are doing, and Mr Blanché himself is an engineer.

In line with our strategy of skills transfer and development, job creation
and poverty alleviation, it was interesting to note that there the Mabey
Group of Companies only provides the superstructure in their operations,
that is the bridge site survey, bridge design drawings, bridge
superstructures and the overseeing of the building of the bridge.

The substructure of approximately 50% of the project costs will be the
responsibility of a South African black empowerment company and contractor,
which therefore will see to the provision of job creation for local people
in the areas where the bridges are constructed.

What was of the most interest to us on this oversight visit was the
willingness and readiness of the Mabey Group, given the opportunity, to not
only build bridges, but to also transfer skills to South Africans and to
offer young South Africans an opportunity to get training at their premises
in England. This would be in line with what we saw yesterday and the day
before yesterday in terms of the Tata initiative in India, lead by the
Deputy President, Pumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka. We as a committee, see this
initiative as being in line with our Asgisa objectives, hence we would like
Parliament to send the report to the Office of the Deputy President.

Disasters take place nationally and in different forms, and the most
frequent ones in South Africa are caused by floods. Therefore a project of
this magnitude has to be handled nationally, as it would involve a number
of departments: the Departments of Defence, Provincial and Local
Government, Public Works, Transport, and Environmental Affairs and Tourism,
as well as the Treasury. In this way we will also avoid the problem of
different provinces doing different things and spending a lot of resources
on consultation fees rather than on the infrastructure itself.

Tomorrow Parliament will be going to the southern Cape in the programme of
“Taking Parliament to the People”. We know very well that municipalities in
the southern Cape and the surrounding communities will definitely raise the
issue of the recent floods and the damage they have caused.

Surely they will ask Parliament to help, because we know that
municipalities, especially the smaller ones, do not have the resources to
deal with these disasters. Some people lost their lives, and these floods
have impacted negatively on tourism, which is one of the key economic
drivers in that part of the country. The committee moves that this report
be adopted with recommendations. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Chairperson, during our portfolio oversight visit to the
North West province, our delegation was shown the council chambers of the
Ratlou Municipality where we saw how vast sums of money were spent on
swivel chairs and other expensive equipment in the council chambers.
Outside the chambers, the poorest section of the nation was stuck with the
bucket toilet system in a flood-prone zone.

Our last qualified engineer in that region is on the verge of receiving his
pension, and he is overseeing the maintenance and building of bridges in
that province. The question is: How will the know-how of how to maintain
the inlets and outlets where road bridges cross rivers and streams be
passed on to those who take over that function?

If maintenance is not done, floods can cause damage to bridges and
disasters can strike. Rivers and streams can become destroyers of our
region’s transport and economic arteries. These are the lifelines of the
children and the poor people who live in those areas, and who become the
masters or slaves of our nation if we do not build or maintain
infrastructure in all provinces.

Failure to skill our people in maintenance is what is causing the collapse
of infrastructure throughout our country, be it at Koeberg, at Kaaimans
Pass or City Power, or where roads and bridges are erected.

The solution to floods and regional economic disasters is not to train
people to assemble imported panel bridges. The solution is to build our own
bridges. We have been doing it for a hundred years in this country. We have
to train our communities on how to maintain bridges. Our regional
municipalities must be staffed with more engineering personnel and fewer
managers with academic qualifications.

Regretfully, the report tabled in this House this afternoon still contains
a number of mistakes, and seems not to be the one that was corrected and
virtually rewritten by the committee. The first mistake is that it was not
published in the ATCs of 21 August, as was announced in today’s programme.
It was in fact tabled in the ATCs of 21 June. Secondly, the tour group
consisted of more Members of Parliament than shown in the report. For some
strange reason, the members whose names do not appear in the report were
told that they must advise the Ethics Committee as to who funded their part
in the trip, despite the fact that they were part of the group. Why must
their names and their funders’ names be kept secret?

The trip took us to top hotels and on air trips to London, Hong Kong and
Manila, back to Hong Kong, London, Wales, London, and back to all cities in
South Africa. That is quite a cost per individual. If we can just build
bridges in South Africa.

Under clause 3.1.3.1, the impression is created that one of the Manila
bridges was 45 720 metres long. It might have been 46 metres long, but most
definitely not 45km, as the report reflects.

We also were never shown manual labour constructing even one bridge. We did
however see the 10 people who operated the cranes with which they drove the
pylons into the ground to support the delta multispan bridge at Queson
Aliaga. What we saw was not a labour-intensive bridge-building programme.

We learned much from the Philippines as far as their presidential bridge-
building funding programme is concerned. The IMF supports ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Blanché, your time has expired.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: It is a pity, Madam Chair. There is so much to be said
about this report.
Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, the alleviation of poverty and social
development remains a priority in every effort and activity of government.
Ultimately, we are striving to overcome our challenges through every
avenue, and while delivery is evident, any form of assistance that can
boost delivery and can bring to all South Africans a better life is
invited.

The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa plays a vital
role in this transformation process, and the combined efforts of
departments as well as the public and private sectors are turning this
wheel to success.

From this report, we understand that a bridging programme has been
established to operate as a sub-programme to Asgisa in the President’s
Office to assist us in providing basic services, improving service
delivery, economic development, job creation, skills development and
infrastructure development. If this could possibly assist us in delivering,
the MF requests that the committee’s recommendation receive earnest
attention and consideration. We have to exhaust every avenue to deliver our
people from the clutches of poverty, crime and social erosion.

The MF supports the report.

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We move that the report be
adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That concludes the business for the
day. I wish you all well for your trip to Oudtshoorn.

The House adjourned at 17:47.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Education


      On request of the Minister the following Bill was introduced by the
        Select Committee on Education and Recreation in the National
        Council of Provinces:


          a) Further Education and Training Colleges Bill [B 23 – 2006]
             (National Council of Provinces – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 29189 of 4 September 2006.]


        Introduction and referral to the Select Committee on Education and
        Recreation of the National Council of Provinces, as well as
        referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
        terms of Joint Rule 160.


        In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
        the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
        working days.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Defence

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of Defence
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2005-2006 [RP 163-2006].


    2. The Minister of Communications


     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Broadcasting
        Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
        Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority (FoodBev-
        Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 75-2006].
4.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 134-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
        Institute for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.
     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
        Corporation of South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

                          MONDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2006


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
        2006.
     (b)    Government Notice No 811 published in Government Gazette No
        29101 dated 7 August 2006: Dimension of, design for, and
        compilation of the year 2006 R2 silver crown and R2 gold coins, in
        terms of South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


     (c)    Proclamation No R.31 published in Government Gazette No 29072
        dated 28 July 2006: Commencement of section 44(1), in terms of the
        Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005).


     (d)    Government Notice No 1010 published in Government Gazette No
        29050 dated 28 July 2006: Listing and Classification of Public
        Entities 1. Listing 1.1 Agriseta: Schedule 3A National Public
        Entity 2. Delisting 2.1 Primary Agricultural Education and Training
        Authority (PAETA) as a Schedule 3A National Public Entity 2.2
        Secondary Agricultural Sector Education and Training Authority
        (SETSA) as a Schedule 3A National Public Entity, in terms of the
        Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     (e)    Government Notice No 1011 published in Government Gazette No
        29050 dated 28 July 2006: Listing and Classification of Public
        Entities 1. Listing 1.1 Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors:
        Schedule 3A National Public Entity, in terms of the Public Finance
        Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     (f)    Government Notice No 768 published in Government Gazette No
        29078 dated 4 August 2006: Amendment of Regulation 3 of the
        Development Bank of Southern Africa in terms of section 17(h) of
        the Development Bank of Southern Africa Act, 1997 (Act No 13 of
        1997).


2.    The Minister in The Presidency
     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the International Marketing
        Council (IMC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 127-2006].

3.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Request from the Minister of Foreign Affairs for Parliament, in
        terms of section 16(7) of the Public Service Act, No 103 of 1994 as
        amended, to consider the extension of service by five years of Mr A
        S Minty, Deputy Director-General in the Department of Foreign
        Affairs.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration for consideration and report, the committee to
        report by 16 October 2006.

                         TUESDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


         (a)     Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
              Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 29182 of 1 September 2006.]


         (b)     South African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of
              Certain Emblems Bill [B 25 – 2006] (National Assembly –
              proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
              notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
              28106 of 14 October 2005.]


        Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
        the   National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
        Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


        In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
        the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
        working days.

     (2)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Civil Union Bill [B 26 – 2006] (National Assembly – proposed
             sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 29169 of 31
             August 2006.]


             Introduction and referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
             for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


National Assembly


The Speaker

 1. Membership of Committees

      (1)   The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
        Portfolio Committees:

        Environmental Affairs and Tourism
        Appointed:     Maluleke, Mr D K, Rasmeni, Mr S M (Alt)
        Discharged: Bonhomme, Mr T J, Khoarai, Mr L P
        Combrink, Mr J J, Olifant, Mr D A A, Sekgobela, Ms P S


        Labour
        Appointed: Lekgetho, Mr G (Alt), Mogale, Mr O M (Alt), Siboza, Mr S
        (Alt)
        Discharged: Ngcengwane, Ms N D


        Minerals and Energy
        Appointed:     Vundisa, Mr S S, Combrink, Mr J J (Alt), Mohamed,
                  Prof, I J (Alt)
        Discharged:    Ngaleka, Ms E, Ngcobo, Mr E N N, Mofokeng, Mr T R,
                  Komphela, Mr B M


        Science and Technology
        Appointed:     Maloyi, Mr P D N, Mtshali, Mr E (Alt), Matsemela, Ms
                  M L (Alt)
        Discharged: Nkem-Abonta, Dr E, Mlangeni, Mr A, Van der Heever, Mr R
                  P Z


        Sport and Recreation
        Appointed:     Makgate, Ms W, Ntuli, Ms M M, Mlangeni, Mr A (Alt),
                  Ramakaba-Lesia, Ms M M (Alt), Solo, Mr B (Alt)
        Discharged: Mathebe, Mr P M, Morobi, Ms D M


      (2)   The following changes  have  been  made  to  the  membership  of
        Standing Committees:


        Public Accounts
        Appointed:     Fubbs, Ms J L, Asiya, Mr S E, Koornhof, Dr G W
                  (Alt), Mabe, Ms L L (Alt), Hogan, Ms B A (Alt)
        Discharged:    Maluleke, Mr D K

TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Resolutions of the 114th International Parliamentary Union
        Assembly.

        THE NEED FOR URGENT FOOD RELIEF IN ORDER TO COMBAT DROUGHT-INDUCED
        FAMINE AND POVERTY IN AFRICA, FOR THE WORLD'S MOST INDUSTRIALIZED
        NATIONS TO SPEED UP AID TO THE CONTINENT AND FOR PARTICULAR EFFORTS
        TO BE MADE TO REACH DESPERATE AND POOR POPULATIONS


        Resolution adopted unanimously by the 114th Assembly
        (Nairobi, 12 May 2006)


        The 114th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,


        Deeply concerned that intensive  natural  and  human  activity  has
        continued to upset the environmental balance  and  thus  erode  the
        global environmental capital,


        Noting that  the  negative  effects  of  globalization,  population
        growth and the exponential increase in demand for natural resources
        driven by consumerism pose far-reaching dangers to the ecosystem,


        Further noting that Africa in particular is  faced  with  the  real
        challenge of high levels of poverty and environmental  degradation,
        which  compound  the  effects   of   floods,   soil   erosion   and
        desertification, and  that  the  consequent  destruction  of  water
        catchment areas results in unreliable water supplies for  domestic,
        industrial and agricultural purposes,


        Aware that urgent food relief is needed  in  order  to  combat  the
        drought-induced famine and poverty now  pervading  large  areas  of
        Africa,


        Further aware that Africa needs sustainable development  strategies
        to combat famine and poverty rather than  relying  on  food  relief
        every time natural disasters and calamities occur, and recalling in
        this regard the Millennium Development Goals, which aim inter  alia
        to achieve a massive reduction in poverty,


        Conscious of the need for a multisectoral approach  to  sustainable
        development that encompasses not only sustainable  food  production
        but also good governance, respect for human rights, eradication  of
        corruption, development of infrastructure and provision  of  access
        to communities, and security for the population,


        Recalling that the right to food is  a  basic  human  right  and  a
        binding obligation that is well established under international law
        and recognized in the Universal Declaration on  Human  Rights,  the
        International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights  and
        a plethora of other instruments,


        Recognizing that women in Africa play a key role, especially in the
        agricultural sector,  and  that  their  empowerment  can  therefore
        contribute significantly to improving food security,
        Aware that the heavy external debts owed  by  most  African  States
        constitute a major hindrance to development and that  debt  relief,
        where provided, has released substantial  additional  resources  to
        support food security and other programmes, such as  education  and
        health, in many countries in Africa,


        Noting that the world's most industrialized countries  are  capable
        of speeding up aid to the continent for the  immediate  purpose  of
        famine relief, and recalling the numerous commitments made by these
        countries in, inter alia, the Monterrey Consensus,  the  Millennium
        Development Goals and the New York Declaration  on  Action  against
        Hunger and Poverty,


        Recalling the numerous previous resolutions adopted by  the  Inter-
        Parliamentary Union on the  many  issues  relevant  to  famine  and
        poverty, in particular the resolution on the right to food  adopted
        at the 96th IPU Conference in Beijing in 1996,


        1. Makes a pressing appeal for increased supplies of emergency  food
           assistance to be made available to  drought-affected  nations  in
           Africa, and calls on governments collectively to meet the targets
           contained in the repeated appeals from international agencies, in
           particular the World Food Programme, for such assistance;


        2. Urges the governments concerned to take every appropriate measure
           to facilitate  access  to  the  affected  areas  for  the  speedy
           delivery of food supplies and to provide security;

        3. Calls on all parties to ensure that food  relief  programmes  are
           not used for political ends and that food is distributed to those
           in need without political interference;


        4. Recommends that parliaments in the affected countries monitor the
           delivery of food relief programmes, and invites them to report on
           their findings to the Inter-Parliamentary Union;

        5. Calls on the governments of the countries concerned to make every
           effort  to  implement  the  Millennium  Development   Goals,   in
           particular those relating to the reduction of  poverty,  and,  to
           this end, to pursue sustainable development strategies;

        6. Affirms that  such  medium-  and  long-term  strategies  must  be
           comprehensive and aim to promote good governance and respect  for
           human  rights,  eradication  of  corruption,   sustainable   food
           production, development of infrastructure and provision of access
           to  communities,  and,  most  importantly,   security   for   the
           population;

        7.  Calls  on  all  African  countries  to  develop  policies   that
           facilitate the full and equal participation of women in political
           and economic life, so that they can  contribute  to  and  benefit
           from the development of their countries;

        8. Further calls on African countries to take  measures  to  promote
           and protect the security of land tenure, especially with  respect
           to women  and  poor  and  underprivileged  segments  of  society,
           through legislation and programmes  that  protect  the  full  and
           equal right to own land and other property, including  the  right
           to inherit,  in  accordance  with  the  Voluntary  Guidelines  to
           support the progressive realization of the right to adequate food
           adopted by the United Nations Food and  Agriculture  Organization
           in November 2004;

        9. Further calls on  the  international  community  to  support  all
           efforts to improve access to education  and  vocational  training
           for people in poverty-stricken regions, this  being  one  of  the
           most effective measures of reducing poverty in the long term;

       10.  Further  calls  on  all  governments  to   facilitate   conflict
           resolution in affected areas in order to ensure human security;

       11. Urges governments to encourage people in the  affected  areas  to
           end certain practices that promote hostilities, including  cattle
           rustling;

       12. Appeals to the developed countries  to  respect  the  commitments
           they have made to provide assistance to developing countries  and
           calls on them to  accelerate  implementation  of  the  Millennium
           Development Goals and the New York Declaration on Action  against
           Hunger and Poverty in this regard;

       13. Strongly urges the developed countries substantially to  increase
           their financial assistance, notably through innovative sources of
           financing for development, for the specific purpose of  improving
           agricultural industry  in  affected  countries  with  a  view  to
           boosting food production and thus ensuring food security;

       14. Calls on the developed countries to  extend  and  implement  debt
           cancellation programmes  in  respect  of  all  African  countries
           affected by drought-induced famine;
       15. Invites relevant international and multilateral  institutions  to
           review their policies and programmes to ensure that these do  not
           in  any  way  detract  from  or  undermine  policies  pursued  by
           countries to ensure food security;
       16. Calls on the developed  countries  to  phase  out  all  forms  of
           agricultural  export  subsidies,   to   reduce   trade-distorting
           domestic support to agriculture, and to open their markets to the
           world's poorest countries;

       17. Calls on the United Nations agencies, in  particular  the  United
           Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),  to  increase  funding  and
           other measures to combat worsening environmental  degradation  in
           Africa, in particular in areas affected by drought and famine;

       18. Encourages African  parliaments  to  promote  the  socio-economic
           development of areas affected by drought and  famine,  which  are
           also often marginalized,  through  a  range  of  legislative  and
           budgetary measures, including income-generating measures;

       19. Invites the United  Nations  to  give  rapid  effect  to  General
           Assembly resolution 57/265 on  the  Establishment  of  the  World
           Solidarity Fund (and the eradication of  poverty),  in  order  to
           expedite the provision  of  financial  resources,  and  calls  on
           parliaments to adopt the requisite implementing  legislation  and
           to encourage their respective governments to contribute to  those
           resources so as to  enable  African  countries  to  become  self-
           sufficient and ensure their food security.


        Note: you  can  download  a  complete  electronic  version  of  the
        brochure "Results of the 114th Assembly and related meetings of the
        Inter-Parliamentary Union" in PDF format (file  size  approximately
        503K).


        Referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Foreign  Affairs   for
        consideration and report, and to the Portfolio  Committee  on  Land
        and Agricultural Affairs and  Portfolio  Committee  on  Health  for
        consideration.


        THE ROLE OF PARLIAMENTS IN STRENGTHENING CONTROL OF TRAFFICKING  IN
        SMALL ARMS AND LIGHT WEAPONS AND THEIR AMMUNITION


        Resolution adopted by consensus* by the 114th Assembly
        (Nairobi, 12 May 2006)


        The 114th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,


        Deeply concerned by the tremendous human suffering, especially  for
        women and children, who are the most vulnerable in armed conflicts,
        associated with the proliferation and  misuse  of  small  arms  and
        light weapons (SALW),


        Stressing that, by definition, SALW include all arms  that  can  be
        used by one person alone and all associated  ammunition,  including
        grenades, rockets, missiles, mortar  shells  and  man-portable  air
        defence systems (MANPADS), and that landmines can be considered  as
        having similar effects,


        Recalling that items such as daggers, machetes, clubs, spears,  and
        bows and arrows are also frequently used  in  armed  conflicts  and
        criminal acts, and that, although they do not fall under  the  SALW
        category, their use may need to be regulated,
        Recalling also that the  definition  of  SALW  should  not  include
        daggers and other items which are not firearms and are not used  to
        cause bodily harm, but as part of the national dress,

        Deeply concerned also by the high political, social  and  financial
        costs incurred when SALW fuel armed conflict, armed criminality and
        terrorism, exacerbate violence, contribute to the  displacement  of
        civilians, undermine respect for  international  humanitarian  law,
        impede the provision of humanitarian assistance to victims of armed
        conflict, and hinder a return to peace and sustainable development,




        Recognizing the threat posed to  civilian  aviation,  peacekeeping,
        crisis  management  and  security  by  the  illicit  transfer   and
        unauthorized access to and use of MANPADS,


        Affirming that combating  the  proliferation  and  misuse  of  SALW
        requires coherent and comprehensive  efforts  by  governmental  and
        other players at the international, regional and national levels,


        Welcoming in this regard the adoption in 2001 of the United Nations
        Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and  Eradicate  the  Illicit
        Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons  in  All  Its  Aspects  (SALW
        Programme of Action),


        Recalling the relevant United Nations General Assembly  resolutions
        concerning international arms transfers,


        Welcoming the adoption in  December  2005  by  the  United  Nations
        General Assembly of the International Instrument to  Enable  States
        to Identify and Trace, in a Timely  and  Reliable  Manner,  Illicit
        Small Arms and Light Weapons,


        Also welcoming the entry into force in July 2005  of  the  Protocol
        against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking  in  Firearms,
        their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United
        Nations  Convention  against  Transnational  Organized  Crime  (the
        Firearms Protocol),


        Recalling that the Second Biennial Meeting of  States  to  Consider
        the Implementation of the Programme of Action  to  Prevent,  Combat
        and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons  in
        All Its Aspects was held in New York from 11 to 15 July 2005,


        Pointing to the  existence  of  several  other  SALW  and  firearms
        control instruments at the level of the United Nations, and in  the
        Americas, Europe, sub Saharan Africa and Pacific regions,


        Emphasizing that  these  multilateral  initiatives  must  be  fully
        implemented by their member States and  be  supplemented  with  the
        development of high national standards,


        Underscoring that the active involvement of the  relevant  national
        authorities and of parliaments is essential for  the  effectiveness
        of any measures to combat SALW proliferation,


        1. Urges parliaments to engage actively in efforts to  combat  SALW
            proliferation  and  misuse  as  a  key  component  of  national
            strategies on conflict prevention, peace-building,  sustainable
            development, the protection of human rights, and public  health
            and safety;


        2.  Calls  upon  parliaments  to  encourage  their  governments  to
            reaffirm their commitment to implement the  SALW  Programme  of
            Action and to build on their current commitment to combat  SALW
            proliferation and misuse at the 2006 SALW Programme  of  Action
            Review Conference, while focusing on areas where  obstacles  to
            full implementation of the SALW Programme  of  Action  persist,
            namely: brokering, transfer controls, marking and tracing, end-
            user  certification,  stockpile  management  and   destruction,
            ammunition and capacity-building;


        3. Encourages parliaments to agree to a set  of  global  principles
            for international arms transfers based on  States'  obligations
            under international  law  and  internationally  accepted  human
            rights standards, as a  fundamental  requirement  for  national
            arms transfer controls and to be included as a  key  output  of
            the 2006 Review Conference;


        4. Urges parliaments to encourage  their  governments  to  redouble
            their  efforts  in  this  area  following   the   2006   Review
            Conference, notably by organizing additional biennial  meetings
            in order to develop ideas and recommendations for consideration
            at future international and United  Nations-sponsored  meetings
            and conferences;


        5. Urges parliaments to promote and  ensure  the  adoption  at  the
            national level of the legislation and regulations  required  to
            control SALW effectively  throughout  their  "life  cycle"  and
            actively to combat SALW proliferation and misuse;


        6.  Encourages  parliaments  to  promote  the  development  of   an
            international arms  trade  treaty  to  strictly  regulate  arms
            transfers  on   the   basis   of    State   obligations   under
            international law and internationally accepted norms and  human
            rights standards;


        7. Encourages parliaments to  promote  greater  international  and,
            where appropriate, regional efforts to develop common standards
            to strictly  control  the  activities  of  those  brokering  or
            otherwise facilitating arms transfers between third countries;


        8. Calls upon parliaments to ensure that those who provide SALW  to
            children, or who recruit and use children in conflicts or armed
            operations, are subject to strong legal sanctions;


        9. Urges parliaments to enact legal sanctions at the national level
            for those who commit crimes and atrocities  against  vulnerable
            sections of society such as the elderly,  women  and  children,
            and to adopt measures to prevent such crimes and atrocities;


        10.       Encourages  parliaments  to  ensure  also  that  national
            legislation is matched by the allocation of adequate means  for
            the national authorities, including training and equipment,  to
            ensure the strict enforcement of national controls;


        11.       Urges  parliaments  to   adopt   and   enforce   national
            legislation incorporating the two instruments that provide  the
            most specific guidance regarding States' obligations to prevent
            misuse: the United Nations Code of Conduct for Law  Enforcement
            Officials and the United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of
            Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials;


        12.      Recommends that parliaments work towards the harmonization
            of national  SALW  controls  on  the  basis  of  strict  common
            standards, while ensuring that  national  controls  provide  an
            appropriate response to the national and regional realities  of
            each State;


        13.      Recommends that parliaments exchange with each  other  and
            the IPU information on national legislation on SALW control, in
            order to enhance understanding  of  controls  and  to  identify
            existing   best   practices,   and   establish    international
            parliamentary forums to consider SALW issues;


        14.      Urges parliaments to consider ratifying, if they have  not
            already done so, the multilateral SALW control  treaties  their
            governments have signed, to incorporate their  provisions  into
            domestic legislation in a timely manner and in accordance  with
            the aims of these treaties, and to see to it that they are duly
            implemented;


         15. Calls upon parliaments to ensure that  the  provisions  of  the
             recently adopted International Instrument to Enable  States  to
             Identify and Trace, in a Timely and  Reliable  Manner,  Illicit
             Small Arms  and  Light  Weapons  are  fully  implemented  under
             national legislation, and that ammunition for SALW  is  covered
             by national legislation to trace illicit SALW;
        16.      Urges parliaments to make violations of arms  embargoes  a
            criminal offence under national law; to sanction logistical  or
            financial support for such violations; and,  in  the  event  of
            breaches of arms embargoes,  to  trigger  the  specific  action
            prescribed for each particular embargo;


        17.      Recommends that parliaments develop  and  help  implement,
            where  appropriate  and  together  with  governments,  national
            action plans  on  preventing,  combating  and  eradicating  the
            illicit SALW trade in all its aspects;


        18.      Encourages parliaments, where  necessary,  to  set  up  or
            strengthen procedures enabling them  to  scrutinize  government
            practice and policy on SALW controls,  to  ensure  respect  for
            their countries' international commitments, and to work towards
            the high degree of transparency allowing for such scrutiny;


        19.       Calls  upon  parliaments  to  designate  a  parliamentary
            committee, or to create one at the national level  if  no  such
            body exists, to engage with the government in a regular  debate
            on national SALW policy and control practice;


        20.      Encourages parliaments in this context to promote  regular
            reporting  by  governments  to  national  parliaments  on  SALW
            transfers, in order to allow for  informed  debate  on  whether
            government practices are in conformity with stated  policy  and
            legislation;


        21.      Recommends that parliaments closely monitor the efficiency
            and effectiveness of their governments' fiscal measures related
            to  SALW  policies  and,   where   necessary,   request   their
            governments to  provide  financial  and  technical  support  to
            international SALW research initiatives and funds;


        22.      Invites the  relevant  parliamentary  committees  to  seek
            regular exchanges of views and information with governments  in
            a debate on government policy and action at both  the  national
            and multilateral levels, and to request  their  governments  to
            include parliamentarians in national  delegations  to  regional
            and international meetings  between  States  on  combating  the
            illicit trade in SALW;


        23.      Encourages parliaments in a position to  do  so  to  offer
            assistance to other parliaments requesting such assistance,  so
            as to develop national capacities to engage in  a  dialogue  on
            SALW with governments and scrutinize their policy  and  action,
            and requests that the IPU compile a list of parliaments able to
            provide assistance in this field to interested parliaments;


        24.       Invites  the  IPU,  in  cooperation  with  its   relevant
            partners, to promote capacity-building programmes  that  enable
            parliaments to make effective contributions to  the  prevention
            and combating of SALW proliferation and misuse;


        25.       Recommends  that  parliaments  in  countries  engaged  in
            disarmament, demobilization, reintegration  and  rehabilitation
            (DDRR) programmes encourage their governments to prioritize  in
            such programmes "weapons in exchange for  development"  schemes
            to  provide  community-based  incentives  for   the   voluntary
            surrender of illicitly held SALW;


        26.      Recommends that  parliaments  in  post-conflict  countries
            encourage their governments to ensure that  the  reconstruction
            process  is  promoted  under  an  international  framework  for
            conflict prevention and peace-building;


        27.      Encourages parliaments to support  the  participation  and
            active role of  women  in  DDRR  processes  and  peace-building
            activities, and stresses the   need  to  incorporate  a  gender
            perspective  in  DDRR   and   peace-building   strategies   and
            activities;


        28.      Encourages parliaments to  urge  governments  involved  in
            DDRR programmes to  pay  particular  attention  to  the  unique
            circumstances of child  soldiers  and  the  rehabilitation  and
            reintegration of former child soldiers into civilian  life,  in
            order to prevent such children from resorting to armed crime;


        29.       Encourages  parliaments  to  urge  their  governments  to
            destroy, in public view and wherever possible, all illicit SALW
            that are recovered by the national authorities in  the  context
            of armed conflict and crime, including SALW  recovered  in  the
            context of DDRR programmes, and to dispose of such  SALW  in  a
            safe, environmentally responsible and cost-effective manner;


        30.       Calls  upon  parliaments   to   intensify   international
            cooperation to prevent the illicit international arms trade and
            its links with international organized crime, particularly drug
            trafficking;


        31.      Exhorts the parliaments of countries that produce SALW  to
            develop effective mechanisms  for  regulating  their  sale  and
            distribution,  both  nationally   and   internationally,   thus
            preventing their proliferation;


        32.       Recommends  that  parliaments  continue  and   strengthen
            efforts, and work together with civil society, including  NGOs,
            to prevent the outbreak of conflict in regions and States prone
            to  tensions  and  to  resolve  social  and  economic  problems
            underpinning  such  tensions  and  armed  conflict,   including
            efforts to fight  poverty,  social  exclusion,  trafficking  in
            human beings, drugs and  natural  resources,  organized  crime,
            terrorism and racism;


        33.      Urges parliaments in this context  to  adopt  and  support
            adequate national measures to limit demand in  their  societies
            for SALW and firearms,  and  in  particular  to  eradicate  the
            demand for illicit SALW and firearms;


        34.      Encourages parliaments  to  develop  strategies  aimed  at
            building public  awareness  of  the  negative  effects  of  the
            illicit acquisition of SALW, including  by  proposing  that  an
            international day  be  observed  annually  to  publicize  these
            effects, and to participate in  relevant  programmes  with  the
            media, in coordination with the government and civil society;


        35.      Calls upon parliaments to promote full  implementation  by
            their governments of their pledges  under  the  United  Nations
            Millennium  Declaration  to  ensure  the  achievement  of   the
            Millennium  Development  Goals,  a   measure   which   requires
            disarmament and the reduction of armed violence.
        *  The delegation of India expressed strong reservations to the
           text of the resolution as a whole.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security for
        consideration and report and to the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence for consideration.

        THE  ROLE  OF  PARLIAMENTS  IN  ENVIRONMENTAL  MANAGEMENT  AND   IN
        COMBATING GLOBAL DEGRADATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT


        Resolution adopted by consensus* by the 114th Assembly
        (Nairobi, 12 May 2006)


        The 114th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,


        Alarmed at the state of the world’s ecosystems  and  recalling  the
        following agreements and instruments:


         • The Declaration of the United Nations Conference  on  the  Human
           Environment (Stockholm, 1972);
         • The Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution (1979);


         • The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982);
         • The Rio Declaration on Environment and  Development  and  Agenda
           21, adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment  and
           Development (1992);
         • The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) and
           the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (2000);
         • The Convention to Combat Desertification (1994);
         • The  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change
           (UNFCCC, 1992) and its Kyoto Protocol (1997);
         • The Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development and  the
           Plan  of  Implementation  adopted  at  the   World   Summit   on
           Sustainable Development (WSSD) (2002);
         • The 2005 World Summit Outcome,


        Further recalling the following reports and events:


         • Reports to the Club of Rome, Limits  to  Growth  (1972)  and  No
           Limits to learning (1979);
         • The World Commission on Environment and Development  report  Our
           Common Future (1987);
         • The United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (2000);
         • The United Nations Global Compact (2000);
         • The Third Assessment Report of the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on
           Climate Change (2001);
         • The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2001);
         • The Monterrey Consensus adopted by the International  Conference
           on Financing for Development (2002);
         • The Report of the United Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)
           entitled  Natural  Selection:  Evolving  Choices  for  Renewable
           Energy Technology and Policy (2003);
         • The Parliamentary Declaration  entitled  Toward  Sustainability:
           Implementing  Agenda   21,   adopted   by   consensus   at   the
           Parliamentary Meeting held on the occasion of the 2002 WSSD;
         • The final report  of  the  United  Nations  Millennium  Project,
           Investing in Development (2005);
         • The support for the  Earth  Charter  expressed  at  the  General
           Conference of the United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and
           Cultural Organization (UNESCO) (2003);
         • The IUCN World Conservation Congress  resolution  endorsing  the
           Earth Charter (2004);
         • The Ministerial Conference on the 3R initiative (2005);
         • The eleventh session of the Conference of  the  Parties  to  the
           United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (COP  11)
           and the first meeting of  the  Parties  to  the  Kyoto  Protocol
           (COP/MOP 1) (2005);
         •  The  Mauritius  Strategy  and  Declaration  drawn  up  at   the
           International  Meeting  to  Review  the  Implementation  of  the
           Programme of Action for the  Sustainable  Development  of  Small
           Island Developing States (2005);
         • The Hyogo Declaration and the Hyogo Framework for  Action  2005-
           2015:
         • Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to  Disasters
           (2005);
         • The Parliamentary Declaration of the Fourth  World  Water  Forum
           (Mexico, 2005);
         • The Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean  Development  and  Climate
           (2005);
         • The Strategic Approach  to  International  Chemicals  Management
           (SAICM) adopted by the  International  Conference  on  Chemicals
           Management (ICCM) (2006),


        Deeply concerned that, while there has been some action relating to
        these commitments, many of them remain unfulfilled, and emphasizing
        the support expressed by the Inter-Parliamentary Union for measures
        aimed at curbing global environmental  degradation,  especially  in
        the following statements, declarations, and resolutions:


         • The statement adopted by the 87th Inter-Parliamentary Conference
           and  entitled  Environment  and  Development:   The   views   of
           parliamentarians on the main directions of  the  United  Nations
           Conference on Environment  and  Development  and  its  prospects
           (Yaoundé, 1992);
         •  The  Declaration  adopted  by  the   97th   Inter-Parliamentary
           Conference and entitled Measures required to change  consumption
           and production patterns with a view to  sustainable  development
           (Seoul, 1997);
         •  The  resolution  adopted  by  the   107th   Inter-Parliamentary
           Conference and entitled Ten years after Rio: Global  degradation
           of the environment  and  parliamentary  support  for  the  Kyoto
           Protocol (Marrakech, 2002);
         •  The  resolution  adopted  by  the   108th   Inter-Parliamentary
           Conference  and  entitled  International  cooperation  for   the
           prevention and management of transborder natural  disasters  and
           their impact on the regions concerned (Santiago de Chile, 2003);


         • The resolution adopted by  the  111th  Assembly  of  the  Inter-
           Parliamentary Union and entitled  The  role  of  parliaments  in
           preserving   biodiversity   (Geneva,   2004),   supporting   the
           commitment of the 2002 WSSD to achieve a  significant  reduction
           in the current rate of loss of biological diversity by 2010,


        Recognizing that global environmental problems pose a common threat
        to  all  humanity,  particularly  to  developing   countries,   and
        constitute a  common  but  differentiated  responsibility  for  all
        countries,


        Considering the high level  of  exhaust  substances  in  the  ozone
        layer, and concerned about  the  growing  environmental  impact  of
        climate change,


        Acknowledging the need  for  cooperation  among  all  stakeholders,
        including government, civil society and business,


        Recognizing that it has  become  urgent  to  reconcile  sustainable
        development with globalization, the latter being  the  cause  of  a
        vicious   cycle   of   environmental   degradation   triggered   by
        unsustainable production and consumption patterns in both developed
        and developing nations, among other factors,


        Also recognizing the  importance,  in  establishing  a  sustainable
        society, of the role of  education  and  learning,  which  have  an
        impact on the awareness, lifestyle and work ethic of individuals,


        Emphasizing that preservation of the environment  is  essential  to
        poverty eradication and the achievement of the MDGs,


        Noting the launch in 2005 of the United Nations Decade of Education
        for Sustainable Development (UNDESD), involving all actors and  all
        levels  of  national  education  systems,  UNESCO’s   International
        Implementation Scheme  for  the  UNDESD,  and  the  United  Nations
        Economic Commission for Europe’s Regional  Strategy  for  Education
        for Sustainable Development  and  the  Vilnius  framework  for  its
        implementation,


        Also noting that the  International  Conference  on  Financing  for
        Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, reaffirmed that the  target
        for the provision of official development assistance (ODA) was  0.7
        per cent of developed  countries'  gross  national  product  (GNP),
        recognizing  the  need  to  study  new  approaches  to   innovative
        financial mechanisms, and  calling  on  governments  of  developing
        countries  to  take  urgent   action   for   ensuring   sustainable
        development,


        Believing that effective administrative bodies and  enabling  legal
        and regulatory  frameworks  constitute  the  cornerstones  of  good
        governance and  thereby  enable  governments  to  address  critical
        environmental protection concerns,


        Emphasizing the importance of the gender perspective in efforts  to
        tackle national disasters, degradation of the natural  environment,
        environmental pollution, deforestation, global  warming  and  other
        environmental problems,


        Recognizing the need to establish a  sound  material-cycle  society
        with the 3R (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) initiative,


        Concerned about the contamination of global water resources and the
        deterioration  of  the  quality  of  drinking   water   for   human
        consumption, and about water consumption increases worldwide, which
        together result in water shortages in some regions  of  the  world,
        worsening desertification and deforestation,


        Emphasizing that environmentalism should become a way of life  that
        governs the behaviour and activities of all,
        Acknowledging  the  significance  of  the  precautionary   approach
        advocated in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
        Development, the objective  of  the  UNFCCC  climate  stabilization
        clauses, and the fact that scientific  uncertainty  concerning  the
        causes of global warming can no longer be an excuse for not  taking
        any action,


        Noting the UNEP publication Natural Selection: Evolving Choices for
        Renewable  Energy  Technology  and  Policy,  and  anticipating  the
        potential of a cleaner economy in the future,


        Recalling the essential role played by parliaments in strengthening
        efforts to encourage sustainable  development  through  legislative
        and budgetary policies that are consistent with the objectives  set
        forth  in  the  international  conventions,   through   appropriate
        initiatives to monitor  government  action,  and  through  advocacy
        aimed at public opinion and society at large,


        1. Calls upon governments to ensure prompt  implementation  of  all
           international environmental conventions to which they are party;




        2. Proposes that international environmental governance and  UNEP's
           role as a provider of policy  advice  and  guidance  be  further
           strengthened, that the participation  of  all  relevant  actors,
           including NGOs, in international environmental policy-making  be
           ensured,  and   that   multilevel   environmental   partnerships
           fostered;


        3. Calls upon all environmental management  decision-making  bodies
           to take into account the experiences, perspectives and knowledge
           of women,  and  to  ensure  their  equal  participation  in  the
           planning,  formulation,   implementation   and   evaluation   of
           environmental  policies  in  order  to  mainstream  the   gender
           component in all environmental programmes;


        4. Recalls that the European Union advocates the transformation  of
           UNEP  into   a   full-fledged   United   Nations   environmental
           organization;


        5. Calls upon parliaments, as front-line actors in  the  system  of
           global  environmental  governance,  to  participate  actively  -
           through their own delegations - in all international  events  at
           which the major options for protecting the environment  and  for
           using natural resources sustainably are debated and negotiated;


        6. Calls upon governments, when deciding  policies,  to  take  into
           account the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment and its main message
           that  human  well-being   and   progress   towards   sustainable
           development  hinge  on  improving  the  management  of   Earth’s
           ecosystems with  a  view  to  ensuring  their  conservation  and
           sustainable use;


        7. Proposes that UNEP prepare a list of global environmental  goals
           similar to the MDGs, supplement these goals  with  criteria  and
           indicators  for   their   implementation   and   promote   their
           implementation as  a  significant  contribution  to  sustainable
           development;


        8. Encourages parliamentarians to press their governments  to  give
           high priority to  their  international  sustainable  development
           commitments, including the MDGs;
        9. Stresses the need for ensuring the protection  of  biodiversity,
           including on the high seas outside the jurisdiction  of  coastal
           States;


       10. Calls  upon  countries  that  have  not  acceded  to  the  Kyoto
           Protocol, starting with those that pollute the most, to do so in
           order to give effect to measures for the  prevention  of  global
           warming;


       11. Calls for, in the framework of the second commitment  period  of
           the Kyoto Protocol, strengthened commitments from all  countries
           under Annex 1 as soon as possible;


       12. Calls upon all countries designing  a  post-Kyoto  framework  to
           shoulder    greenhouse    gas     emission     reduction/control
           responsibilities, in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  the
           UNFCCC, while also calling upon developed countries  to  provide
           further support to developing nations;


       13. Calls upon  parliaments  to  secure  national  backing  for  the
           objective recommended by the international scientific  community
           with regard to global warming, namely to limit to 2°C  the  rise
           in mean global temperatures compared with pre-industrial levels,
           and to take action towards attaining that objective, bearing  in
           mind that a decrease in greenhouse gas emissions by a factor  of
           two globally and by a factor  of  four  for  the  industrialized
           countries is generally considered necessary for  achieving  that
           goal;


       14. Strongly  urges  governments  and  parliaments  to  reverse  the
           negative  environmental  developments  in  the  Arctic   region,
           particularly regarding the effects of climate change, and  warns
           against the effects of the accumulation of persistent pollutants
           in regions which are particularly vulnerable to climate change;


       15. Calls upon governments  and  public  financial  institutions  to
           promote  research,  development  and  deployment  of  low-impact
           renewable energies, and to encourage the transfer to  developing
           countries  of  technologies  that  are   appropriate   for   the
           geographical and natural conditions of each region;


       16. Recalls such international efforts as the Renewable  Energy  and
           Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP) and the role played by the
           International Energy Agency (IEA),  as  positive  steps  in  the
           direction of improving energy efficiency and cooperation;


       17. Encourages governments and parliaments to advocate environmental
           awareness  and  educate  the  public  about  coordinated  action
           against environmental degradation;


       18. Supports and promotes the development of a ten-year framework of
           programmes in support of regional and  national  initiatives  to
           accelerate  the  shift  towards  sustainable   consumption   and
           production, and in this connection calls for  the  promotion  of
           sustainable public procurement;


       19. Calls  upon  parliaments  fully  to  commit  themselves  to  the
           challenges of climate change  and  its  effects  on  the  global
           environment and to take  the  necessary  legislative  action  to
           mitigate the effects of the problem;


       20. Calls upon governments and  parliaments,  with  due  regard  for
           national  circumstances,  clearly  to  define  corporate  social
           responsibility in their domestic legislation, and to uphold  the
           philosophy of the Ministerial Conference on the  3R  initiative,
           in order to promote the development of  a  sound  material-cycle
           society;
       21. Calls upon parliaments to promote, within  the  context  of  the
           ratification of  international  conventions  and  treaties,  the
           adoption of national plans on  major  environmental  issues  and
           sustainable development in which goals,  including  quantitative
           goals, are set;


       22. Calls upon parliaments to promote  legislation  that  stimulates
           the development of  environmentally-friendly  products,  and  to
           promote the use of green bonds and Clean Development Mechanisms;




       23. Encourages governments and parliaments to  ensure  accession  to
           and implementation of the United Nations  Convention  to  Combat
           Desertification (1994), and supports the International  Year  of
           Deserts and Desertification (2006);


       24. Calls for early ratification of the International Convention for
           the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and  Sediment
           (2004);


       25. Encourages parliamentarians in all  States  to  advance  efforts
           towards education for sustainable development and  to  serve  as
           role models for the global citizens who will be  the  foundation
           of a sustainable future, and calls for  programmes  specifically
           targeting women  in  order  to  strengthen  their  role  as  key
           managers of natural resources;


       26. Calls  upon  parliaments  to  recognize  that  preservation  and
           conservation of the hydrological cycle are  key  to  maintaining
           the climatic and environmental cycles that serve  to  regenerate
           the water supplies  needed  to  ensure  social  development  and
           quality of life for the world's peoples, particularly  in  terms
           of health and food production, and  to  prevent  desertification
           and deforestation;
       27. Calls upon governments, in cooperation with international bodies
           dealing with environmental issues, businesses and civil  society
           organizations, to put in  place  UNDESD  implementation  schemes
           that include systems for periodic monitoring and assessment;


       28. Encourages environmental  bodies  to  develop  sex-disaggregated
           indicators and data and to undertake  systematic  gender  impact
           analysis assessments and  research  in  order  to  evaluate  the
           impact of environmental policies on both sexes;


       29.  Calls  upon  parliaments  to  promote  greater  technical   and
           financial  cooperation  on  renewable  energies  by  encouraging
           transfers of technology and human, technical  and  institutional
           capacity-building between developed and less developed nations;


       30. Calls upon governments and parliaments, in view of  the  climate
           stabilization clauses of the UNFCCC, to take action  to  greatly
           reduce greenhouse gas emissions, share best practices, and carry
           out applied studies and  research,  including  using  the  back-
           casting approach;


       31. Calls upon parliaments and governments to ensure that women have
           access to land ownership  and  are  allowed  to  manage  natural
           resources,  as  balanced  ownership  patterns  are  a  principal
           requirement for avoiding environmental degradation;


       32. Urges all countries to formulate a  comprehensive  environmental
           policy that can genuinely enhance and  sustain  economic  growth
           without destructive consequences for our shared resources;
       33. Calls upon governments and parliaments, in the light of the last
           WSSD,  to  pursue  and  support  more  efficient  and   coherent
           implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its
           Cartagena  Protocol  on  Biosafety,  to  achieve  a  significant
           reduction in the current rate of loss of biological diversity by
           2010, which will require action at  all  levels,  including  the
           preparation  and   implementation   of   national   biodiversity
           strategies and action plans;


       34. Acknowledges the controversies which surround the nuclear option
           for energy production,  together  with  the  problems  posed  by
           decommissioning,  storage  of  nuclear  waste   and   accidental
           leakage, and, at the same time, recognizes the need to keep  the
           option  open  and  for  increased  research  to  overcome  these
           problems;


       35. Encourages parliaments to draw up the necessary legislation,  to
           review a  menu  of  policy  options,  including  ecological  tax
           reform, and to propose such policies to governments;


       36. Calls  upon  parliaments  and  governments  to  ensure  adequate
           funding for  UNEP  and  sufficient  financial  backing  for  the
           implementation  of  environmental  management  legislation,  and
           encourages the development of green budgeting based on the model
           of gender budgeting;


       37.   Urges   parliamentarians,   and   more   specifically    women
           parliamentarians,  to   establish   lobbying   networks   within
           parliaments to bring about changes in the management of  natural
           resources;


       38. Also encourages governments to include in  their  budgets  clear
           indications of the financial and non-financial costs related  to
           environmental  degradation,  and  the  benefits   of   ecosystem
           services;


       39. Encourages all transnational companies to  adopt  and  implement
           high environmental standards as part of their  corporate  social
           responsibility, in line with the cooperation provided for in the
           Global Compact;


       40. Encourages parliaments and governments to give  citizens  access
           to information on the local environmental situation;


       41. Invites parliaments  to  promote  the  development  of  new  and
           broader  tools  and  methods  for  measuring   GDP   and   other
           standardized economic concepts, said tools and methods  to  take
           account of the value of natural resources, in order  to  enhance
           sustainable development;


       42. Encourages parliaments to facilitate the participation  of  NGOs
           in strengthening popular  support  for  environmental  work,  in
           particular to mitigate the effects of climate change.


        *  The delegation of  India  expressed  reservations  on  operative
        paragraphs 4 and 16.  Two of the four members of the delegation  of
        Australia expressed reservations on operative paragraphs 10 and 11.
        The delegation of Venezuela  expressed  reservations  on  operative
        paragraph 10.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on  Environmental  Affairs  and
        Tourism  for  consideration  and  report,  and  to  the   Portfolio
        Committee on Minerals and Energy for consideration.


        HOW PARLIAMENTS CAN AND MUST PROMOTE EFFECTIVE  WAYS  OF  COMBATING
        VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN ALL FIELDS


        Resolution adopted by consensus* by the 114th Assembly
        (Nairobi, 12 May 2006)


        The 114th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,


        Reaffirming that violence against women constitutes a violation  of
        women’s human rights and fundamental freedoms,


        Stressing that the causes  and  consequences  of  violence  against
        women are intrinsically linked to longstanding gender  inequalities
        and discrimination that restrict the full  enjoyment  by  women  of
        their human rights,


        Recognizing that women belonging to minority and indigenous groups,
        refugee women, internally displaced  women,  migrant  women,  women
        living in rural or remote communities, destitute  women,  women  in
        institutions or detention, women with disabilities, elderly  women,
        women  in  situations  of  armed  conflict  and  in   post-conflict
        situations and girl children are especially vulnerable to violence,




        Alarmed by the perpetuation of violence  against  women  throughout
        the world, both  in  the  home  and  in  the  workplace,  including
        trafficking in women and  girls  and  forced  prostitution,  sexual
        violence within  and  outside  marriage,  and  certain  traditional
        practices that are harmful to women,


        Aware that violence against women increases their vulnerability  to
        HIV/AIDS and often impedes their access  to  prevention,  care  and
        treatment services, thus contributing to the conditions that foster
        the spread of HIV/AIDS,


        Stressing that it is the responsibility of States to act  with  due
        diligence to prevent human rights violations, investigate  acts  of
        violence,  punish  their  perpetrators  and  protect  and   provide
        reparation to victims of violence,


        Noting that rape, sexual  slavery,  enforced  prostitution,  forced
        pregnancy, enforced sterilization and all  other  forms  of  sexual
        violence of comparable gravity are crimes under  international  law
        and should be repressed and punished as such,


        Reaffirming that States are not justified in invoking  any  custom,
        tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations  to
        eliminate violence against women,


        Recalling the importance of the Convention on  the  Elimination  of
        All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979) and  its  Optional
        Protocol (1999), of the Declaration on the Elimination of  Violence
        against Women (1993), and of the Beijing Declaration  and  Platform
        for Action (1995)  as  effective  instruments  to  combat  violence
        against  women,  and  noting  the  existence  of   regional   legal
        instruments on violence against women,
        Noting all relevant resolutions adopted by United  Nations  bodies,
        including Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/45 of 4  March
        1994 appointing a Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
        causes and  consequences,  and  Security  Council  resolution  1325
        (2000) on women and peace and security,


        Recalling  the  Inter-American  Convention   on   the   Prevention,
        Punishment and Eradication of Violence against  Women,  adopted  in
        Belém Do Pará in 1994,


        Noting that violence against women hinders  human  development  and
        the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,


        Stressing that the eradication of violence against  women  requires
        preventive and responsive policies and actions and the  involvement
        of all members of society, including men,


        Stressing that the  newly  established  Human  Rights  Council  and
        Peacebuilding Commission will  be  crucial  to  the  promotion  and
        protection of the rights of women,


        Stressing the key  role  of  parliaments  and  parliamentarians  in
        preventing and eliminating violence against women, and the need for
        States to cooperate  with  and  support  organizations  working  to
        eliminate violence against women, especially women's organizations,




        Urges governments  and  parliaments  to  ratify  international  and
        regional instruments pertaining to violence against women, such  as
        the Convention on the Elimination of All  Forms  of  Discrimination
        against Women (CEDAW) and its Optional Protocol, and to ensure full
        compliance with those instruments and with pertinent United Nations
        resolutions;


        Calls  upon  parliaments  to  ensure  that  CEDAW  country  reports
        systematically include information on violence  against  women,  in
        particular statistical data disaggregated by sex,  on  legislation,
        on support services to victims and on  other  measures  adopted  to
        eliminate violence against women;


        Urges parliamentarians to refer to  and  make  use  of  the  IPU/UN
        Handbook for Parliamentarians: The Convention on the Elimination of
        All  Forms  of  Discrimination  against  Women  and  its   Optional
        Protocol;
        Calls upon governments and parliaments  to  give  priority  to  and
        raise awareness about violence against women as both a cause and  a
        consequence of rising HIV/AIDS and to include these  considerations
        in the relevant national strategy;


        Calls upon governments to implement United Nations General Assembly
        resolution 52/86 on Crime prevention and criminal justice  measures
        to eliminate violence against women, and, in particular, to  punish
        all acts of violence against women perpetrated  by  State  or  non-
        State actors in the public and the private  spheres,  to  establish
        courts specialized in  hearing  cases  of  such  violence,  and  to
        establish a governmental body promoting the prosecution of all acts
        of violence;


        Calls   upon   governments,   parliaments   and    non-governmental
        organizations to organize activities to promote public awareness of
        the  problem  of  violence  against   women,   including   on   the
        International Day for the Elimination of  Violence  Against  Women,
        which is observed on 25 November each year;


        Encourages  governments  to  provide  training  to   all   relevant
        government  agencies,  especially  the  police   forces   and   the
        judiciary, on ways to address gender-related violence;


        Encourages governments and parliaments to  establish  observatories
        on violence against women, and to develop  indicators  and  compile
        data,  disaggregated  by  sex,  to  monitor  the  effectiveness  of
        policies for the elimination of such violence;


        Encourages the establishment of parliamentary bodies to monitor and
        evaluate  all  international  and  national  measures  designed  to
        prevent and eradicate violence against women, and suggests  that  a
        rapporteur for these bodies submit an annual report to the Assembly
        for information, debate and public circulation;


        Encourages governments to collaborate with the  Special  Rapporteur
        on Violence Against  Women  on  developing  internationally  agreed
        indicators and mechanisms to measure violence against women;


        Calls  upon  governments  and  parliaments  to  enact  and  enforce
        legislation against the perpetrators of violent practices and  acts
        of violence against women and children, including tough  and  clear
        measures to combat recidivism;


        Calls upon parliaments to review legislation  to  detect  practices
        and traditions that impede the attainment of equality  between  the
        sexes and to eliminate inequality in all spheres, in particular  in
        education, health and access to property and land;


        Calls for the promotion of  nationwide  awareness  and  educational
        campaigns to encourage changes in  social  and  cultural  attitudes
        regarding gender roles and to eliminate patterns of behaviour  that
        engender violence; to that end,  encourages  cooperation  with  the
        media;


        Calls upon governments and parliaments to ensure that  information,
        education and training on gender-related violence are available  to
        all  public  agents,  including  the  judiciary,  involved  in  the
        prevention and prosecution of violence against  women  and  in  the
        provision of health care and support services for victims;


        Requests parliaments to allocate  sufficient  budget  resources  to
        facilitate universal access to reproductive health information  and
        services;


        Calls upon parliaments to  ensure  that  sufficient  resources  are
        allocated and clearly earmarked in the national  budget  for  plans
        and programmes to eradicate violence against women in all fields;


        Calls upon parliaments to denounce and combat the extreme forms  of
        gender violence against women that are derived from  the  violation
        of their human rights and shaped by  forms  of  misogynous  conduct
        that may go unpunished, and which have culminated in  homicide  and
        other forms of violent death of women;


        Urges all States to cooperate with  and  support  all  women’s  and
        other organizations working to eliminate violence against women;


        On domestic violence


        Calls upon governments and parliaments, if they have not  yet  done
        so, to develop and implement specific legislation and/or strengthen
        appropriate mechanisms to handle criminal matters relating  to  all
        forms of domestic violence, including marital rape and sexual abuse
        of women and girls, and to ensure that such cases  are  brought  to
        justice swiftly;


        Calls upon governments and parliaments, if they have not  yet  done
        so,  to  develop  and  implement  adequate  legislation  to  combat
        domestic violence;


        Calls upon governments and parliaments to develop national plans to
        combat domestic violence that include measures related to research,
        prevention,   education,   information   and   penalization,    the
        prosecution and punishment of all acts of  violence  against  women
        (including  violence  within  marriage),  social,   financial   and
        psychological support for  victims  (including  children  who  have
        witnessed domestic violence against their mothers), special support
        for the most vulnerable groups and effective legal tools to protect
        victims;


        Calls upon national legislators to make certain that legislation on
        violence  against  women  precludes  any  kind  of  culture-related
        violence; also calls upon legislators to deny  any  form  of  undue
        mitigation of sentence for crimes committed in the name of culture;




        Calls  upon  governments  and  parliaments  to  adopt  measures  to
        encourage adequate reporting of domestic  violence  and  to  combat
        recidivism;


        On female genital mutilation/cutting


        Calls upon parliaments to spare no effort  to  end  female  genital
        mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) within a generation;


        Recommends  that  strategies  for  the  abandonment  of  FGM/C   be
        developed within the wider context of the promotion  of  all  human
        rights, including the right to education,  health  and  development
        and the reduction of poverty;


        Calls upon parliaments to  work  with  civil  society,  traditional
        chiefs and religious  leaders,  women’s  and  youth  movements  and
        governments  to  ensure  complementarity  in  working  towards  the
        abandonment of  FGM/C;  and  together  with  governments,  to  take
        measures to raise awareness about  the  issue,  placing  particular
        emphasis on targeted training for health personnel;


        Calls upon States that have not yet done so  to  adopt  legislation
        outlawing FGM/C;


        Calls upon parliaments  to  take  note  of  the  Final  Declaration
        adopted  by  the  African  Parliamentary  Conference  on  "Violence
        against Women,


        Abandoning  female  genital  mutilation:  the  role   of   national
        parliaments", held in Dakar in  December  2005,  and  to  take  all
        necessary measures for its dissemination and implementation;


        At the workplace


        Calls upon parliaments to ensure  compliance  with  United  Nations
        General Assembly resolutions  on  violence  against  women  migrant
        workers and with General Recommendation No. 19 of the Committee  on
        the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,  as  well  as  the
        International Convention on the Protection of  the  Rights  of  All
        Migrant  Workers  and   Members   of   Their   Families,   relevant
        International  Labour  Organization  conventions  and   all   other
        international instruments that  contribute  to  the  protection  of
        migrant women, by increasing activities to prevent violence against
        migrant workers, by promoting and protecting their  rights  and  by
        strengthening relations among  countries  of  origin,  transit  and
        destination;


        Requests  parliaments  to   promote   close   cooperation   between
        governments,  employers  and  trade  unions  to   achieve   greater
        efficiency in preventing and  eradicating  all  forms  of  violence
        against women in the workplace, including through the enactment  of
        legislation that explicitly  prohibits  sexual  harassment  in  the
        workplace where such legislation does not exist;


        On sexual violence


        Calls upon parliaments and governments to review the effectiveness,
        at  the  national  and  local  levels,  of  legislation  on  sexual
        violence; further calls for the establishment of a policy  exchange
        network to facilitate exchanges of policy options  and  experiences
        at the international level;


        Calls  upon  parliaments  and  governments  to  make  rape,  sexual
        slavery,  enforced   prostitution,   forced   pregnancy,   enforced
        sterilization, and any other form of sexual violence of  comparable
        gravity, crimes under their domestic  legislation  and  to  repress
        them as such;


        Encourages parliaments to evaluate the adequacy  of  the  penalties
        imposed for the aforementioned crimes and to make every  effort  to
        ensure that such penalties are enforced;


        Emphasizes the value of effective legal and correctional programmes
        to prevent recidivism by perpetrators of  sexual  violence  against
        women;


        Calls  upon  parliaments,  when  debating  methods  for   gathering
        evidence and devising measures to punish  sex  offenders,  to  give
        special attention to the fact that children and  mentally  disabled
        and other disabled women - who are especially vulnerable to  sexual
        violence - find it difficult to testify in court;


        Calls upon  parliaments  and  governments  to  examine  systems  of
        investigation and prosecution and the way in which the media  cover
        sexual violence, and to  take  appropriate  measures  in  order  to
        minimize further trauma to victims of sexual violence;


        On human trafficking


        Urges those States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the
        United Nations Convention  against  Transnational  Organized  Crime
        along with its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
        in Persons, Especially Women and Children;


        Recognizes that globalization has aggravated and accelerated  human
        trafficking, and stresses  the  need  to  build  international  and
        regional  cooperation  among  countries  of  origin,  transit   and
        destination,   through   instruments   such   as    memoranda    of
        understanding, bilateral agreements and regional treaties  such  as
        the Council of Europe Convention on Action against  Trafficking  in
        Human Beings;


        Calls upon governments to address all factors and root causes which
        foster demand for prostitution and make women and girls  vulnerable
        to trafficking;


        Encourages governments to establish legal mechanisms to protect the
        victims of trafficking,  a  considerable  number  of  whom  may  be
        without legal status and who may not, as a result of  this  status,
        report to the authorities, and to ensure  that  they  are  not  re-
        victimized by providing for the possibility, in accordance with the
        basic principles of the national  legal  system,  of  not  imposing
        penalties on victims for their involvement in  unlawful  activities
        to the extent that they have participated under duress;


        Encourages governments to adopt measures  for  the  protection  and
        rehabilitation of victims of human trafficking;


        Calls upon States to  conduct  information  and  public  awareness-
        raising  campaigns  to   inform   women   about   migration-related
        opportunities, limitations and rights, thus enabling them  to  take
        informed decisions on migration and preventing them  from  becoming
        victims of trafficking;


        On violence in situations of armed conflict


        Invites States that have not yet done so to  become  party  to  the
        Geneva Conventions on the protection of victims of armed  conflicts
        (1949)  and  their  Additional  Protocols  (1977),  the  Convention
        relating to the Status of Refugees (1951) and its Protocol  (1967),
        the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
        on the involvement of children  in  armed  conflict  and  the  Rome
        Statute of  the  International  Criminal  Court,  to  withdraw  any
        existing reservations, and to ensure full compliance in law and  in
        practice with these instruments;


        Calls upon parliaments to intensify efforts,  in  cooperation  with
        relevant international organizations such  as  the  Office  of  the
        United Nations High Commissioner for  Human  Rights  (UNHCHR),  the
        Office  of  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
        (UNHCR), the United Nations Development Fund  for  Women  (UNIFEM),
        the  United  Nations  Fund   for   Children   (UNICEF),   and   the
        International Committee of the Red Cross  (ICRC),  to  enforce  the
        special procedures of the Human Rights Council, to improve  systems
        to monitor and report violence against women  and  girls  in  armed
        conflict, to take the necessary steps against the  perpetrators  of
        such acts, and to provide assistance to victims;


        Calls upon parliaments to promote full and effective implementation
        of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), and to ensure that  the
        elimination of violence against women in post-conflict societies is
        included  in  the  mandate  of  the  United  Nations  Peacebuilding
        Commission  as  part  of  the   disarmament,   demobilization   and
        reintegration (DDR) processes;


        Requests parliaments and governments to ensure a gender balance  in
        military and peacekeeping operations, including  the  participation
        of women at the decision-making level in all peacekeeping and peace
        processes, and to provide training in gender equality issues;


        Requests  parliaments  and   governments   to   ensure   that   all
        peacekeeping troops receive training in the United Nations Code  of
        Personal Conduct for Blue Helmets, international human  rights  law
        and international humanitarian law.


        *  Two of the four members of the delegation of Australia expressed
        reservations on the reference in operative paragraph 1 to the CEDAW
        Optional Protocol. The delegation of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran
        expressed reservations on  preambular  paragraph  8  and  operative
        paragraph 12
        Referred to  the  Joint  Monitoring  Committee  on  Improvement  of
        Quality of Life and Status of Women for  consideration  and  report
        and to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality  of
        Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons,  Portfolio
        Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development  and  Portfolio
        Committee on Safety and Security for consideration.


