---
title: 'National Assembly - 21 September 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-09-21
---

THURSDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

  REFERRAL OF GOVERNMENT IMMOVABLE ASSET MANAGEMENT BILL BACK TO COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is a very
long motion. In order to save time, I won’t read it. Members have it in
front of them.

I move without notice the motion in the name of the Chief Whip:

   That the House refers the Government Immovable Asset Management Bill back
   to the Portfolio Committee on Public Works for further consideration.

Agreed to.

    ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE REVIEW OF STATE INSTITUTIONS
    SUPPORTING CONSTITUTIONAL DEMOCRACY AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam, I now move the long one for
acceptance by the House:

   That the House establishes an Ad Hoc Committee on the Review of State
   Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy and the Public Service
   Commission –

   (1)      the Committee to consist of 10 members as follows: ANC 5; DA 2;
        IFP 1; and other parties 2;


   (2)      the Committee to review State Institutions Supporting
        Constitutional Democracy as listed in Chapter 9 of the Constitution
        as well as the Public Service Commission as established in Chapter
        10 of the Constitution, for the purpose of –


        (a)      assessing whether the current and intended constitutional
             and legal mandates of these institutions are suitable for the
             South African environment; whether the consumption of
             resources by them is justified in relation to their outputs
             and contribution to democracy; and whether a rationalisation
             of function, role or organisation is desirable or will
             diminish the focus on important areas;


        (b)      reviewing the appropriateness of the appointment and
             employment arrangements for commissions and their secretariats
             with a view to enhanced consistency, coherence, accountability
             and affordability;


        (c)      reviewing institutional governance arrangements in order
             to develop a model of internal accountability and efficiency;


        (d)      improving the co-ordination of work between the
             institutions covered in this review, as well as improving co-
             ordination and co-operation with government and civil society;
        (e)      recognising the need for a more structured oversight role
             by Parliament in the context of their independence; and


        (f)      reviewing the funding models of the institutions,
             including funding derived from transfers and licences and
             other fees, with a view to improving accountability,
             independence and efficiency;


   (3)      the Committee to conduct its review also with reference to other
        organs of state of a similar nature whose work is closely related
        to the work of institutions covered in this review;


   (4)      the Committee may exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may
        assist it in carrying out its task; and


   (5)      the Committee to report by not later than 30 June 2007.


Agreed to.

 CONSIDERATION OF SPECIAL REPORT OF JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
            (JSCI) - REPORTS OF INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF INTELLIGENCE

Dr S C CWELE: Madam Speaker, hon members, Ministers, let me also recognise
our Inspector-General, Mr Ngcakani. On 21 August, the Joint Standing
Committee on Intelligence tabled a special report on the Inspector-
General’s report emanating from his investigation of the alleged abuse of
power by National Intelligence Agency officials; the origins and
authenticity of allegedly intercepted e-mails introduced into Project
Avani, an authorised national stability assessment project conducted by the
National Intelligence Agency; and an evaluation and examination of
intelligence that informed this project. The report is available on
Parliament’s website, and we hope that hon members and the public are
familiar with the contents of that report.

The investigation was unprecedented in the recent history of our
intelligence services. We commend the Inspector-General for the diligent
work done in this complex investigation.

What we aim to achieve in this debate is firstly, to clarify the roles
played by different structures involved in the supervision, direction and
oversight of intelligence. Secondly, it aims to clarify or emphasise
certain aspects of the report. We also hope to dispel the mischievous
notions expressed by the media that this report was driven by divisions
either within the ruling party, or between Parliament and executive.

As the committee, and from this side of the House, we see this as a healthy
debate, because all these structures are approaching intelligence from
different angles. That is what is strengthening our democracy. That is what
will strengthen our oversight over intelligence services. We also aim to
reassure our nation that the dark cloud has passed, and our intelligence
community is functioning.

Since 1994, we as South Africans have defined our common set of values and
aspirations as a nation. We are united in striving for a democratic state
based on the will of the people; a united nation free of racial prejudice
and gender discrimination; a nation based on equality where each
individual’s talent is nurtured to the maximum, and a caring and
developmental state where citizens lead positive lives, free of fear and
free of want. We strive for a nation where we will be living under
conditions of peace, stability and economic progress, a prosperous Africa,
and a peaceful world of free, sovereign yet equal nations united in a
developmental agenda, and assisting the poor and the weak.

Indeed, we can sum it up as our common goal of searching for a better life
for all. This is what we regard in South Africa and broadly as our national
interest. Obviously, each country will have its own national interest and
sometimes these may compete with our own. The threats to our national
interest may come from rogue elements within our society or from these
competing international interests. The central role of intelligence is to
gather and analyse secret information about the threats to our national
interest and forewarn us to plan for, avoid or minimise such threats. They
are the guards of our common values and national aspirations.

Because intelligence operates in conditions of secrecy, we have put
measures in place to guard the guards in order to prevent the abuse of
power under the veil of secrecy. We have the Minister who is responsible
for supervision and direction of intelligence. We have the Auditor-General
who looks at the financial prudence of intelligence. We have the judge
responsible for authorisation of interceptions; the Inspector-General who
investigates complaints and reviews the activities of the services, and
lastly, we have the parliamentary committee, the Joint Standing Committee
on Intelligence, responsible for general oversight, and to which these
other structures account. All these structures are what we can sum up as
``the guardians of the guards’’.

From the onset let me clarify that the JSCI reviewed the report of the
Inspector-General. We did not conduct a new or parallel investigation. We
have come out of this with certain lessons and critical matters for the
future of our stability.

Firstly, the office of the Inspector-General is a relatively new
institution in our intelligence community. We are jealously guarding and
preserving its integrity. In terms of our legislation and international
best practice, this institution must be seen to be functioning
independently and without fear or prejudice. It must function in terms of
known rules, regulations and laws. In this respect, it will increasingly be
able to gain the confidence of both the services and the public. We accept
that the absence of regulations does not necessarily negate or compromise
the process followed by the Inspector-General in relation to the
investigation. The Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence calls for the
speedy implementation and strengthening of regulations for the functioning
of the Inspector-General. We will be awaiting progress in this respect in
the next quarter.

Secondly, the origin of the e-mails remains unresolved. The Inspector-
General did not establish the source or authors of these e-mails and chat
sessions, irrespective of them being authentic or not. They may either be
the work of rogue elements within our society, or more importantly, the
product of those who are opposed to our national or our international
agenda, particularly the foreign intelligence services. It is part of the
counter-intelligence mandate of the National Intelligence Agency to
investigate this and to ensure the integrity of our state.

Thirdly, the NIA has adequate regulations and internal controls to prevent
abuse. However, some of these regulations may need to be reviewed and
strengthened. The main challenge seems to be the implementation and
upholding of these controls. We call upon the management of the services,
particularly NIA, to make it part of their key performance indicators that
these controls are followed by all members of the intelligence services.

Fourthly, I would like to comment on the attempts to use the National
Communications Centre for intercepting the communications of South
Africans. While we have been assured as a committee that this facility is
configured and directed at bulk international communication traffic, the
JSCI would like to stress that any surveillance of our citizens must only
be done after permission from a judge responsible for issuing such
directions is granted. Any attempt to short-circuit the process is a
serious and punishable offence.

In conclusion, we call upon the services and the executive to take the
recommendations in our report seriously, and to report on the progress
thereof. We call on all stakeholders in the intelligence community to
utilise the internal processes to resolve disputes, and only to utilise
courts or public processes as a last resort, as these processes may have
the potential of compromising our national security.

The dark cloud has come and passed. We as a committee will criticise where
wrong is done, and we will give credit where it is due. Overall, we are
proud of and recognise the good work done by most of the intelligence
officers of utilising their craft as a critical instrument of democracy in
guarding our national values and aspirations.

The JSCI is a statutory committee with the necessary powers to do follow-
ups on our recommendations. In this respect, I move that the House notes
the special report of the JSCI. Thank you. [Applause.]

                   WELCOMING OF DELEGATION FROM INDONESIA

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon members, just before we proceed, join me
in welcoming a delegation of members of parliament from Indonesia, led by
the chairperson of the ethics committee. You are welcome to the House.
[Applause.]

 CONSIDERATION OF SPECIAL REPORT OF JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE
            (JSCI) – REPORTS OF INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF INTELLIGENCE

                           (Resumption of Debate)

Adv P S SWART: Madam Speaker, 2005 was a dark and unintelligent year for
our National Intelligence Agency, which plunged our democracy into its
greatest intelligence scandal ever.

It brought us the following: The compromised, unauthorised and unlawful
surveillance of businessman and ANC leader, Saki Macozoma; the unauthorised
surveillance of a well-known journalist found to be unprocedural by the
Inspector-General of Intelligence; the again unprocedural, shocking attempt
at surveillance of a very senior opposition politician; the outsourcing of
the interception of e-mails to a third party, effectively placing them
outside oversight controls; payment of that third party out of
discretionary funds; the contentious fabrication of a large number of e-
mails, indicating two separate groups of conspirators against government,
and this then used to illegally enter telephone numbers into the target
base of the National Communications Centre, targeting inter alia, the
parliamentary numbers of various senior politicians, both in the ANC and
the opposition for interception purposes.

All this was done under the auspices of the so-called Project Avani,
conceived by the then Director-General of NIA, an operation run in a very
clandestine manner on an extreme need-to-know basis, even pertaining to
very senior NIA officials.

Let me quote from the executive summary of the Inspector-General of
Intelligence on this:


  Given the selective Project Avani clientele of the Director-General and
  the potential for crossing the line between intelligence collection in
  the interest of national security and intelligence collection and
  interest camouflaged as counter-revolutionary threats, or for that
  matter, threats against particular political interests, the risks of
  undermining constitutionally protected political freedoms and of
  descending into the abyss of abuse of state resources and compromise of
  intelligence mandate integrity with a project of this nature calls into
  question the activity of political intelligence gathering that
  underpinned Project Avani.

That is exactly what happened, what we had warned about long before this
mess even started. Not only have the basic human rights and privacy of
certain individuals and their rights to political freedom been invaded, but
the integrity of our intelligence service and our country as a whole has
been compromised. These actions brought shame on our country and everything
that our Constitution stands for. It must be prevented from ever happening
again.

Now, this is the report we are discussing today. At the outset, let me be
very clear about one thing. The JSCI did not re-investigate the matter. We,
in terms of our oversight mandate, interacted over a lengthy period with
the Inspector-General and various other parties in considering the IG’s
three reports and their annexures.

We did not set out or try to prove or disprove allegations that led to the
IG’s findings and recommendations. That is for the courts and other
disciplinary mechanisms to decide. As several matters dealt with in these
reports are still under investigation and/or sub judice, we refrain from
pronouncing on these at this time. It may very well mean that, at the
appropriate time, we will table another report.

What we did was to consider in particular the procedures followed by the IG
with reference to his mandate and oversight role, with specific reference
to the utmost importance of his independence, both factual and perceived,
it being vital to the success of his office.

This investigation was the first of its nature undertaken by the IG, and we
found the lack of regulations to guide him in this regard to have been
problematic. This lacuna must be rectified immediately.

A hard, critical look at procedures followed is just that - to recommend
guidelines for future actions, and should never be interpreted as attacking
the validity of his findings and/or recommendations.

I shall now look at some of our recommendations on this report. Firstly,
the JSCI found the declassification of parts of the IG’s final report
problematic. Strict adherence to the regulations for the classification and
declassification of such documents should be followed at all times.

Secondly, there are serious problems with the financial controls over the
management of the Discretionary Fund of the DG of NIA. The manner in which
all discretionary funds are managed must be reviewed and proper control
measures instituted. The JSCI requests a report from the new Director-
General of NIA within three months.

With reference to pending disciplinary matters against wrongdoers, all must
be dealt with in a thorough and inclusive manner. We require a report on
this from the DG, also within three months.

As the chairperson said, there are still some unclear issues surrounding
the hoax e-mails, in particular regarding the details of their origins.
This investigation should continue, and the progress report given to the
JSCI by the DG within three months.

The instructions by the Minister regarding the control of intelligence
projects, which he announced late last year, must be in the form of
specific written policy directives or regulations.

It is very important that we stress the absolute adherence to the
regulations for authorising of telephone interceptions. Never again must
the privacy of any individual in this country be invaded in this or any
other manner.

Various other recommendations, in particular regarding procedures and
oversight, may well be addressed by what comes from the task team, which
the Minister of Intelligence put in place late last year, and we will
follow progress in this regard closely.
Lastly, we took cognisance of the negative impact of these matters on the
morale of the services, particularly within the NIA. We encourage all the
members to remain committed to our national security, and recommend that
senior management in NIA take urgent steps to boost the morale. The JSCI
requests a progress report within six months.

If any good can come from this scandal, it must surely be the emphasis on
the dire need for clear and proper directives to guide all actions
undertaken by our intelligence services. This must be coupled with the
absolute necessity of continuous oversight and democratic transparency that
the JSCI is committed to.

I want to thank the members of the JSCI and the Minister for the commitment
to this that they have shown thus far. Lastly, allow me to thank the IG and
his task team for work done under very difficult circumstances, with
restraints as mentioned. We are happy with what they are doing. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M J BHENGU: Madam Deputy Speaker, this debate takes place at a time when
there are some prosecutions going on, in respect of some National
Intelligence Agency senior officials. That on its own indicates the
seriousness of this report, which is in front of hon members.

I must join my previous colleagues in commending the Inspector-General on
producing such a comprehensive report. Lengthy as it was, it had a lot of
substance, and we were able, as the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence, to actually go through it chapter-by-chapter, paragraph-by-
paragraph and line-by-line to get to the bottom of the matter.

It was interesting that at one stage we realised that ...

... ngesiZulu bathi uzama ukubamba utalagu ... [... in isiZulu they say you
are trying to grasp the mirage ...]

... you cannot actually get to grips with the matter. But that is the
nature of the whole situation.

Therefore, the report in front of hon members is actually a response from
the JSCI, a report that we developed independently, and we were not
influenced by any newspaper reports. We believe that it is our duty in
doing our oversight role to actually make it a point that we do that work
quite thoroughly, without being influenced by any party. We hope that it is
a report that will address what Dr Cwele said just now – that the dark
cloud seems to have gone. Let’s hope it has.

I must say that we are hopeful that the Minister is doing everything in his
power right now to come up with some measures in terms of addressing the
concerns and frustrations expressed in both the IG’s report and in the JSCI
report. It is important that those concerns are addressed as soon as
possible.

The most important thing of all is the development of the national security
doctrine, which has to be adhered to by most managers and everybody else in
the intelligence community. In that sense, when that document is developed,
it has to be underpinned by national unity, because otherwise it won’t see
the light of day. Therefore, I hope that, as everybody indicated, the dark
cloud came, but now it has gone. We hope that this House and the nation at
large will accept that and will be assured that what has happened has now
subsided. The storm has passed. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we have with us today the SA Navy cadets
based in Simons Town, who are visiting our institution. Welcome to
Parliament. [Applause.]

Ms H C MGABADELI: Deputy Speaker, hon members and members from the
intelligence community, I’m happy to debate today when there are young
people of the Navy present. It’s our luck.

This debate comes at a time when most people of our motherland, the region
and internationally have been reading in the newspapers so many articles
about the subject. What was lacking in those stories was that they were not
giving a holistic picture. Even we ourselves today cannot claim to be
giving a final, complete picture as yet, because the process continues in
court as we are debating.

Our country, our motherland, the Republic of South Africa is fortunate to
have attained her freedom in 1990 through hard work and sacrifice, for
those who have forgotten, and her first democratically elected government
in 1994. This democratically elected government came with a lot of changes,
including transparency and all kinds of human rights; hence the Chapter 9
institutions and others.

This democracy came with removing some shadowy structures and brought them
to the fore. It came with different powers assigned by the Constitution
without each power endlessly standing on its own, but working together
according to their mandates towards achieving a nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic South Africa.

This is how the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, just like other
committees, came into being to do oversight on intelligence, and no other
things but intelligence. Our chairperson has set out the legislative status
of our committee. It is not an ad hoc committee. It is a standing
committee.

The fact that it is a standing committee allows it, unlike the media that
has been issuing patchwork-like articles that never gave a complete
picture, to deal with all the pieces and come out with the big picture,
which is not yet complete. There is therefore no harm in each piece coming
with its own shape, content, etc, according to its own mandate,
responsibility and accountability, among other things.

Because of time limits we will not dwell so much on the minute details, but
we are saying this report is now public property, not media property. The
public representatives, who are our hon members, need to take the report to
their constituencies and continue to educate, re-educate and introduce
those who were never introduced to the processes of democracy in action
within a holistic approach.

The song that was written by the class of J B Mnyataza, if I’m not
mistaken, for those of us who like music, describes the whole scenario of
how people can walk together, observe together, but in the end come out
with different conclusions. The song goes:


   Amadoda ambalwa
   Anqamula esigangeni
   Umlimi wabona utshani bodwa
   Omunye wabona izinkanyezi
   Inyanga yabona amanzi azimeleyo
   Yacabanga ngokulapho
   Kwalandela iqhawe elabona ukuthi umhlaba
   Ulungele impi emnandi


   Kwalandela ngothengisa izwe
   Owabona izibaya kanye
   Nezinye izindlu
   Kanjalo kwakusekhona abanye futhi
   Abantu ababedlula khona lapho
   Kodwa bengacabangi lutho


   Izinyoni ezihlahleni
   Zazihlabelela kamnandi
   Zazingazi okwenzeka
   Emicabangweni yabantu
   Abahamba kulelo zwe elihle


What caused those differences when these men have been exposed to the same
input?

Isiganga siyasazi sonke. [We all know the culprit.]

It’s a tranquil place with no high-rise buildings, but what caused them to
think separately? Was it the tranquillity at that time that brought back
their schooling, their thinking, their wishes? What was it? Among other
differences it was the orientation, it was the mandate, the accountability,
the report-back and other things.

This scenario also reminds us that life does not come to a standstill just
because there are these differences caused by other realities. Our chair
has said that.

The line of this song that says, “Izinyoni ezihlahleni zazihlabelela
kamnandi,” [Birds were singing beautifully in trees.] shows that it’s up to
us to create our South Africa to be liveable, even in nature, because if we
are not doing that the birds won’t sing. They’ll disappear because there’ll
be no trees and nothing will make them come and sing for us, regardless of
whatever happens.

What will assist us further to be able to have a better understanding of
these differences will be our legislation, their interpretation, their
implementation against all odds, the monitoring of our legislation, the
evaluation of what has been gained by having such legislation, as well as
planning further, including reviewing where and whenever necessary.

I want to share with you the story of unoxhaka [a trap]. Those of you who
know unoxhaka know that the farmers don’t use the small unoxhaka that we
use when we are setting a trap for mice. They use the big one that is able
even to deal with wolves. You know, when you set unoxhaka, it’s not an
issue of who unoxhaka caught in the evening. It’s the duty of unoxhaka to
catch.

If, by some strange mistake unoxhaka caught the owner of a shop that feeds
you - maybe your - neighbour has a butchery and he gives you meat,
leftovers and stuff like that - your unoxhaka will do that and it becomes
an embarrassment in the morning when you see even this one is the one who
is causing chaos in your family and in your yard.

We are therefore appealing to our intelligence community and to everybody
who is involved - our Minister, our Inspector-General, our country - not to
think that we don’t need to tighten the screws of onoxhaka bethu [our
traps]. The fact that you are members of the global village does not mean
that you need to melt. I still have something that is uniquely mine that is
envied by others. I would want to strengthen my unoxhaka to deal with those
things, because this democracy has the right to exist, the right to develop
and the right to succeed. We’d like to thank everybody who has been
involved in the putting together of everything starting from day one till
today. We thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, who are we to believe in this strange
affair called the e-mail spy saga - the politicians or the spooks?

Want dit is die klassieke geval van die luiperd en die  jakkals  wat  mekaar
beskuldig dat die ander een die hoenders opgevreet het. Ons weet  dat  albei
skuldig is, maar dis moeilik om te bewys wie die eintlike  vabond  is,  want
geeneen van hulle het bloed aan hulle  nie.  [Tussenwerpsels.]  (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Because it is the classic case of the leopard and the jackal that accused
each other of eating the chickens. We know that both were guilty, but it is
difficult to prove who the actual rogue is, because no one has blood on
them. [Interjections.]]

What seems beyond dispute is that the e-mails formed part of Project Avani,
an NIA operation, and the abuse of state resources in this matter is
unforgivable. If anything, the so-called e-mail spy saga has highlighted
the yawning gap between the groupings among senior figures of the ruling
party as they fight for control of the party. Thank you.

Mr I VADI: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is a privilege to participate in this
debate on the report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence. The
brevity of the committee’s report on the technical nature of its drafting
should not obscure the profound issues relating to intelligence that
underlies it.

In fact, the report deals with fundamental questions about intelligence as
an activity, an organisation and as processed information for political
clients. It is about the day-to-day work of our intelligence services and
how they go about doing this work. Crucially, it is also about exercising
appropriate parliamentary scrutiny over the intelligence services of our
country.

The heart of the matter is the abuse of intelligence activity and
information by the National Intelligence Agency, and the necessity of
expressing parliamentary censure. We must be clear about one more thing;
intelligence is an indispensable national resource for the advancement of
our national security, the security of our people and their social
development.

It is a powerful shield for the protection of our democracy. So, our
intelligence services, therefore, are not sinister organs that are alien to
our democratic values and ethos. But for them to enjoy the trust of
Parliament and the nation at large, we must be satisfied that they operate
effectively and efficiently and that they operate within the rule of law
and the constitutional framework, that they strike a delicate balance
between secrecy and accountability and that they posses credible covert and
counter–intelligence capabilities to perform their tasks properly.

Unfortunately, the events of the recent past have cast a shadow of doubt on
the integrity and credibility of the National Intelligence Agency. This
prompted Minister Kasrils to ask an important question: Who guards the
guardians? Are ordinary South African citizens safe from the intrusive and
prying eyes and ears of spooks?

South Africa can be proud of itself. It ranks among a handful of countries
in the world that has established several mechanisms to enforce the
principle of civilian accountability over intelligence.

We have a Minister responsible for investigations into breaches of the law;
a parliamentary committee to exercise oversight. So, we do have powerful
guards to protect ordinary citizens against any abuse of intelligence.

Unfortunately, since the publication of our report, the print media has
played a game that is fraught with danger. By reporting selectively on
aspects of our report, it has attempted to set up the committee against the
Minister and the Inspector-General. The media reports portray the committee
as flexing its muscle against the Minister and asserting its authority over
Cabinet.

Some have even suggested that the committee has altogether rejected the
Inspector-General’s Report. Nothing can be further from the truth.

The truth is that all three instruments, the Minister, the Inspector-
General and the Committee, exercise distinct forms of oversight over our
intelligence community. These are not necessarily in conflict with one
another, but are actually complementary. All three instruments serve to
strengthen our parliamentary democracy. And if there are different points
of emphasis, as there is in this instance, it is healthy for our democracy.
It shows that there is a sound system of checks and balances in place to
defend our national security and the human rights of our people.

I now wish to turn to two specific issues raised in the committee’s report.
The Inspector-General had pointed out several instances of either attempted
interceptions or actual unlawful interceptions of private, telephonic
communications of politicians, journalists and others. It is evident that
intelligence officers did not adhere to regulations in this regard.

The committee is clear that any intelligence service worthy of being called
a service should have the right to intercept private communications of
individuals if the interest of national security so demands. But in our
democracy this is not an unrestricted right. Interception of
telecommunications is governed strictly by judicial approval.

It requires a formal application and motivation to a Judge, and explicit
permission for that interception. This is a vital requirement for lawful
conduct and it remains a key distinguishing feature between a
constitutional democracy and a dictatorship. It is a critical barrier to
protect the rights and civil liberties of ordinary citizens.

The committee recommends that the National Intelligence Agency reaffirms
the established policy on lawful interceptions among its personnel. It
should further review the internal procedures by which its personnel are
instructed to carry out the actual tasks of bargaining interceptions. A
culture of respecting the rule of law must be cultivated within the
intelligence community, and members must be empowered to disobey any
instruction that is manifestly unlawful.

Secondly, the physical surveillance of individuals and their properties by
the intelligence community is permissible. But it must be understood that
any surveillance has an impact on the human rights and civil liberties of
citizens. Therefore, every surveillance operation must be properly and
thoroughly planned. It must be duly approved in terms of existing
regulations.

What cannot be accepted is shoddy planning, particularly for sensitive
surveillance operations and the continuation of an operation long after it
has been exposed. Such an intelligence failure brings untold embarrassment
to our government. And it serves to undermine public confidence in our
intelligence services as well as in our democracy.

The committee is of the view that the existing regulations are adequate in
guiding surveillance operations and do not require revision.
However, it does call for strict adherence to the regulations and proper
planning and authorisation for all surveillance work. It also requires a
report within three months from the Director-General of the National
Intelligence Agency on further disciplinary measures being instituted
against personnel who were involved in the botched surveillance operation
against Saki Macozoma.

Parliament must insist on the rule of law and respect for administrative
procedures by our intelligence community. Not to do so would mean that we
would be closer to a dictatorship than a constitutional democracy. Thank
you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, vroeër in die jaar tydens die
begrotingspos van die agb Minister, het ek spesifiek gepraat oor die
aangeleentheid van afluistering van die publiek. Die agb Minister het hier
van die podium af die versekering gegee dat die publiek nie bekommerd hoef
te wees nie.

Hier sit ons met ’n prima facie-bewys vandag in die Parlement dat amptenare
net eenvoudig nie die regterlike toestemming verkry het nie, die wet
verbreek het en lede van die publiek net eenvoudig afgeluister het. Volgens
hierdie verslag is dit duidelik dat enige persoon in Suid-Afrika vandag
afgeluister word, sonder toestemming.

Ek wil vir die agb Minister vra: wat het gekom van die versekering wat hy
gegee het? Ek wil hom vra om op te tree. Die eerste stap wat hy behoort te
doen, is om sigbaar te wys dat hy gaan optree deur hierdie amptenare net
eenvoudig te ontslaan.

Ek hoop dat die persone wat afgeluister is, hierdie prima facie-bewyse sal
gebruik en siviele eise sal instel teen die agb Minister. Aan die einde van
die dag is dit die belastingbetalers wat betaal. Dit het tyd geword dat die
agb Minister persoonlik moet betaal. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of
Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, earlier this year during the budget
vote of the hon Minister I specifically spoke about this matter of
eavesdropping on the public. The hon Minister gave the assurance from the
podium that the public should not be worried.

Here today in Parliament we sit with prima facie proof that officials
simply just did not get the judicial approval, violated the law and just
eavesdropped on members of the public. According to this report it is clear
that today one can eavesdrop on any person in South Africa, without
permission.

I want to ask the hon Minister: what happened to the assurance that was
given? I want to ask him to act. The first step he needs to take is to
demonstrate visibly that he is joint act by simply discharging those
officials.

I hope that those people who were eavesdropped on will use this prima facie
proof and instigate civil claims against the hon Minister. At the end of
the day it is the taxpayers that are paying. It is time that the hon
Minister personally paid. [Time expired.]]

Ms M P MENTOR: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is such a good thing to be a South
African, because in the true spirit of South Africa we are able to sit here
today, even under a wrong perception of the media, and differ with the
executive – like they think we do - in terms of the findings of the
inspector-general’s report.

The members of the committee have already thanked the Inspector-General. I
take this opportunity to thank the Minister, the executive and all South
Africans for embedding in our Constitution the possibility that we can do
our work as the executive, as the oversight authority, as Parliament and as
the intelligence community without fear, favour or prejudice; and that,
where necessary, we will amicably differ where we should differ.

According to our Constitution, intelligence agencies, as well as law
enforcement agencies, together with the executive and Parliament, have a
responsibility of ensuring national security. My role today is to unpack
this idea of national security and the national interest and try to define
what it is and what it is all about.

National security entails securing the well-being of the state, its
integrity and its people. The integrity of our state, in particular,
depends on how the executive, Parliament and the oversight bodies as well
as intelligence agencies do their work and stick to constitutional
principles and legal activities. National security is further defined by
what happens across and within the borders of a country to the people and
their well-being as well as what happens to the resources and wealth and
how these are distributed amongst the people.

The group of nations that any country or our country chooses to relate or
not relate to and the content of this relationship with other nations also
inform what will become our country’s or any other nation’s national
interest. When we define national security we must therefore use the
wellbeing of our people and our republic as a guide post and not
necessarily the threats of terror and war as it is the case with other
nations.

Our people therefore must form the cornerstone of what we mean when we
refer to national security. How the executive and Parliament as well as
intelligence services do their work should be informed first and foremost
by the interests of our people and our nation and its wellbeing. Our people
do not want to hear anymore about the abuse of power of state, whether it
be by the executive or by Parliament or by oversight bodies or by officers
in the intelligence community. It is not tolerated and it is not wanted.
Our people only yearn to live in peace and prosperity with other nations in
a way that improves their quality of life and the quality of life of
citizens of the world.

We have decided as the nation therefore that our interests will be linked
to the interests of the poor of the world. We therefore today challenge
world power in a manner in which nobody has ever done before. We challenge
the unipolar nature of the world we live in today that refuses to subject
itself to multilateralism. As South Africa, together with our friends, we
demand a new world order and a new set of power relations. In this way, we
unsettle the rich and the powerful nations of the world.

As we do this, we must make sure that our state is intact and has integrity
and credibility. We must make sure that in front of us and behind us, we
have intelligence and counter-intelligence that is sound and strong. We
must be alert to the fact that we are becoming the envy of many nations and
that they will set their forces amongst us to influence our course and
direction. We have become a force to be reckoned with in all matters of
world affairs, and we are therefore targeted by those who like us and those
who do not.

Therefore we cannot afford to falter and open our people, our country and
its resources, both human and capital, to exploitation and undue influence
by other nations, especially those who do not have a common interest with
us. So let us say once more to our people and to our intelligence forces
today that we, as Parliament and as the executive, respect the Constitution
and the rule of law; and that we will uphold this at all times. We must say
that we remain truthful to the oath of allegiance that we have taken
concerning the Republic, our people and the Constitution. We must refuse to
be open to infiltration by other forces of a foreign nature. We must refuse
to allow sinister political forces, with their invisible hands, to
manipulate the course of our history and our country.

Because, as a nation, we have progressed in leaps and bounds in rebuilding
our economy and redeveloping our county, we must also expect that we will
be infiltrated and will be influenced. Regarding these matters, we say we
will be open and alive to the possibility that in the endeavours to change
the world and reorder it and make South Africa and the world a better place
to live in, there is a possibility that our forces that used to operate
under the cloak of darkness would become vulnerable to use and abuse, and
to the abuse of power.

However, this does not give us, as the executive or as Parliament itself,
the right to avoid the Constitution and the rule of law. We remain
committed to civilian intelligence oversight. We will instil in our
intelligence officers a culture of constitutionalism and patriotism only
and not a culture of fear of those who occupy superior or commanding
positions.
Lastly, we want our people to trust that, as Parliament and as the
executive, together with the intelligence and law-enforcement agencies, we
are committed to their well-being. We have learned serious lessons from
this saga and will not forget them. We emerge out of this saga as a
stronger and better nation. We will adhere to the important lessons that we
have pinpointed in this report and we will follow them through as the Joint
Standing Committee on Intelligence. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER FOR INTELLIGENCE: Thank you, Chairperson and hon members, as
the hon speakers have been pointing out here, the events of the past year
have raised many questions, not only for intelligence services but for the
oversight structures. The clouds were rather dark and I do agree that they
have passed over. We must make sure that it remains the case.

Everybody, except one, has raised pertinent points. The committee has
correctly noted in its report tabled before this House that the Inspector-
General’s investigation was –

  ... unprecedented in the history of South Africa’s intelligence and that
  the inspector-general concluded a complex investigation in a diligent
  manner.

There have been many meetings between him, the committee and I. I commend
the committee for its commitment and for its hard work in preparing this
report.

The blatant disregard by the former director-general and certain NIA
members for the Constitution and rights of those violated by their conduct
needs to be strongly condemned. The finding by the Inspector-General that
the former director-general deliberately misled and lied to both the
Minister and the Inspector-General about the nature of the surveillance
operation is a shocking finding. The former director-general refused to co-
operate with the Inspector-General and concealed his involvement in the e-
mail saga. The Oversight Act makes it clear that there is no justification
for any member of the services to withhold information from the Inspector-
General. However one chooses to frame the events of the past year, it is
clear that members of the NIA instructed by the director-general broke the
law and undermined the Constitution.

I would like to use this opportunity therefore to correct the misconception
that the rights of Mr Masethla, the former director-general, were violated
during the course of the Inspector-General’s investigation and that he was
not afforded an opportunity to provide his version of events. The Inspector-
General interviewed the former director-general once at the beginning of
the investigation. At this meeting the former director-general deliberately
misled the inspector-general and lied about the circumstances surrounding
the surveillance of Mr Macozoma. Following the extension of the terms of
reference, the former director-general was asked to provide information
related to his knowledge of Project Avani.

He refused to co-operate unless his legal representatives were present and
subsequently brought an application to the High Court to compel the
Inspector-General to allow his lawyers to be present. There is no precedent
on the rights of employees, both in public and private sectors, to outside
legal representation in internal processes, even when, in the case of
disciplinary proceedings, the outcome of such proceedings may result in
action being taken against the employees.  The constitutional right to
legal representation applies only to accused persons in judicial or
criminal proceedings. Despite this, the Inspector-General agreed that the
former director-general’s lawyers could be present to advise him of his
rights and that they could observe the proceedings. His lawyers argued for
the right to participate actively and when no agreement could be reached,
the Inspector-General decided that he was not interested in interviewing
the former director-general further. By that stage he had sufficient
information to complete his inquiry.

There is also the question about the Inspector-General’s decision to
finalise his report without interviewing the former director-general and
taking his version of events into account. Regarding the argument that the
audi alteram partem principle was not applied, we need to set the record
straight here. The phrase we know means literally “to hear the other side”,
stands for the principle that no one should be condemned without a hearing
in which they are to be given an opportunity to respond to accusations. The
former director-general had ample opportunity to explain his involvement
and he chose not to do so. He was at no stage an accused person. His co-
operation was required because by virtue of his position as a director-
general at the time, he was in possession of information relevant to the
Inspector-General’s inquiry. There can be no justification for an
accounting officer to refuse to disclose information at his disposal, by
virtue of his official position, to a person authorised to receive such
information.

The former director-general said he had nothing to hide. If he had nothing
to hide he would surely have had no difficulty in explaining his role.

Given the media speculation following the tabling of this JSCI report, it
is important to note that despite the comments and criticisms of the
committee in respect of some of the procedural aspects of the Inspector-
General’s investigation, the committee does not question the substantive
findings. This is because the report was informed by a sound investigation
for which the inspector-general and his staff should be wholeheartedly
congratulated.

We welcome the findings of the JSCI that any person who acts in
contravention of the prescribed procedures is guilty of an offence. We
welcome further their finding that surveillance operations conducted by the
agency must be done in accordance with internal procedures. The observation
of the committee that there is insufficient financial control over the
management of the discretionary funds is noted and is serious. But what it
does is that it confirms the findings that the former director-general made
unauthorised use of the funds. Of course, and I say this to the hon
Groenewald, this and the other aspects are all loopholes that are being
addressed. Thanks to the committee; they have helped to really focus
attention on it.

I want to come to a most important aspect and that is the use of my powers
in terms of commissioning the inspector-general to carry out the enquiry.
The committee looked at this and looked at another aspect of the oversight
Act. It is necessary to clarify this. Section 7(7) of the Act sets out the
functions of the Inspector-General. Section 7(7)(cA) provides for the
Inspector-General to receive and investigate complaints from members of the
public. In addition section 7(7)(c) allows the Inspector-General to perform
functions designated by the President or the Minister. The committee’s
report suggests that the investigation should have been referred to the
Inspector-General in terms of that section 7(cA) of the Act and not that
part of the Act in section 7(7)(c) which I invoked. They feel that this in
some way undermined the impartiality of the process. I do respect their
approach but I here have to clarify my approach.
The complainant, Mr Macomoza, was not a complainant in the context of
section 7 (7) (cA), he did not complain to the Inspector-General. He
complained to the Minister. My immediate reaction was to obtain an
explanation from the director-general of NIA. I found his report totally
unsatisfactory and it raised my suspicions regarding possible misconduct.
As a result, I requested the inspector-general to investigate the matter. I
felt I could not rely on the NIA at that time under the control and the
command of that former director-general.

Section 7(7)(f) of the Act provides further for the Inspector-General to
report back to the Minister or the President on the matters referred to him
by the President or me. If one looks at that, I contend that one would see
that we, at all times, in fact acted in accordance with the Act and the
law. As Minister I am charged with overall accountability for the
functioning of the civilian intelligence structures and am obliged at all
times to act in the public interest. By referring the matter to the
Inspector-General, I believe I acted in the public interest and within my
constitutional responsibilities as Minister.

Section 8(1) of the Act provides for the Minister, in consultation with the
committee, to make regulations regarding the performance of the functions
of the Inspector-General. The committee notes the absence of regulations to
guide the Inspector-General in discharging his oversight mandate, and
correctly recommends that their finalisation be fast-tracked. We accept
this unreservedly.

The authority to investigate allegations of abuse of power or
transgressions of the Constitution and applicable legislation is confirmed
on the Inspector-General by the Oversight Act. Unfortunately, this Act is
silent on the precise procedures to be followed in conducting any
investigation. The Inspector-General was simply obliged therefore to
conduct his inquiry fairly and in accordance with principles of
administrative justice. The committee has rightly highlighted this issue as
an area that needs urgent attention. I wish to assure the committee and the
House that the process of finalising the regulations is receiving the
urgent attention of both the Inspector-General and me – indeed, in
consultation with the JSCI.

The committee contends that individuals implicated in misconduct in the
inspector-general’s report should have been dealt with in terms of NIA’s
internal disciplinary provisions, as set out in Chapter XXVIII of the
Intelligence Services Regulations. It argues that this omission on the part
of the Minister resulted in members resorting to court applications to
enforce their rights.

I am very pleased at the point that the chair of the committee made that in
fact, members should not seek redress from the courts but rather
internally. I have explained to the committee that I acted in terms of
section 19 of the Intelligence Services Act, which allows the Minister to
serve, suspend or transfer members in the public interest, provided that
the President is consulted if a suspended member is at the level of a DDG
or up. The legal advice I received was that it was appropriate for me to
act in terms of this provision, as long as I acted fairly and within the
provisions of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act.

The report of the JSCI criticises the Inspector-General for what it
describes as his decision to “declassify” his report, without following
prescribed procedures. Well, in this respect, we do not need to straighten
the matter, because the statement is wrong. The Inspector-General’s report
has not been declassified and the full report has not been publicly
released. What happened was that the Inspector-General released an edited
version of the report and that followed consultation with the President and
me, and on the instruction of Cabinet. I do understand how the committee
came to make that error. As I have explained to the committee, section 8(b)
of the Intelligence Services Oversight Act provides for the Inspector-
General to disclose any intelligence or information after consultation with
the President or the Minister.

In conclusion, the report contains a number of recommendations intended to
ensure greater adherence by the intelligence structures to constitutional
values. The committee has noted with concern the fact that some members of
the intelligence services were afraid to disobey what they considered to be
unlawful instructions from their immediate managers for fear of
intimidation. We can report that a training curriculum aimed at instilling
an appreciation of the law and the importance of human rights in the
conduct of intelligence, is being developed and will be piloted next year.

In addition, I intend tabling for discussion with the committee a
regulation on the co-ordination of intelligence that sets out in greater
clarity the process and criteria for identifying subjects of investigation
and the authorisation required, as well as control processes. This really
answers the question put to me by the hon member of the FF Plus. The JSCI
is a statutory committee provided for in terms of the oversight Act. This
provides the opportunity for ongoing engagement between the committee and
the executive on all aspects of the report. I agree with the recommendation
that the House notes the committee’s report.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Inspector-General and his task
team and the Joint Standing Committee for Intelligence, its chairperson and
hon members, for their hard work, for their commitment to ensuring
compliance by our intelligence structures with the law and the
Constitution. I believe we emerge from these challenges stronger than ever.


Certainly, as members have pointed out, there are lessons to be learned
about how to strengthen our oversight functions. I can report that much is
being done to deepen understanding of the Constitution and the law within
our intelligence services. This has been of positive value in uplifting
their morale. I am politically satisfied with the commitment of the new
leadership of the NIA. And as they say: Every cloud has a silver lining.
From the dark clouds that were referred to by several speakers, on behalf
of the committee, I feel we can positively say that we have learned a lot.
We will ensure far greater control. Above all, the people of our country
can be confident that the decisive measures taken to stamp out the abuse of
power that unfortunately occurred will ensure that our services respect the
law. Siyabonga kakhulu. Baie dankie. [Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST ON RECOMMENDATIONS ON APPOINTMENT OF COUNCILLORS
        TO THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH   AFRICA

Question put: That Dr A J Barendse, Ms M Mohlala, Mr R Nkuna, Ms B Ntombela
and Prof J C W van Rooyen be approved for appointment as councillors to
fill vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority
of South Africa.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs S C VOS: Chairperson, the IFP opposes this report on a matter of
principle, and on principle only. We oppose the appointment of a
departmental official in the Department of Communications to a Chapter 9
body, which is tasked with regulating electronic communications and postal
services - in other words, a body that is tasked with regulating the very
same issues with which he has been working in the department. No matter
that this official will of course resign from the department to become an
appointed councillor with Icasa; there is the damaging perception that the
department official is being placed and his position could in fact end with
the bidding of the Minister. We find this undesirable and damaging.

It doesn’t bode well for what the industry will feel about an independent
regulator when departmental officials are placed within the very body which
is supposed to be independent and regulating the industry independently.
Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms M SMUTS: Chair, the list sent back by the Minister to this House
complies with the Icasa Act. The National Assembly compiled a list of eight
nominations. Under the Icasa Act, as amended, the Minister may then select
five names. It is one of the points upon which the President sent this
particular Bill back to the National Assembly that this House must then
apply its mind in either approving or rejecting the Minister’s choice of
five. It must apply its mind against a very specific section - section
5(3). All of the five persons nominated by the Minister comply with that
subsection.

There was one single case where we had concerns about whether the relevant
candidate met the criterion for openness and accountability. We questioned
her on this matter which gave rise to the concerns during her interview.
She had in fact undertaken certain legal work which it was felt was
possibly in conflict with her councillorship of Icasa when she last held
it. She answered us to our satisfaction. She gave us an undertaking that
she would not again, if appointed, do such work.

She also argued that in her view what she had done was not in conflict with
the law as it then stood. In her view it would be in future, and she gave
an undertaking. Therefore, she too now complies with the law as far as we
are concerned.

The matter of being a departmental official is part of the broader criteria
under which you nominate in the first place. It’s on record that we too
prefer that departmental officials not be appointed. The one particular
official against whom we would have raised fundamental challenges under
subsection 3, has not in fact been nominated by the Minister - to our very
great pleasure. Yet another candidate who, in our view, holds a conflict of
interests in a commercial sense has likewise not been nominated.

It is our firm view that the five names chosen by the Minister do comply
with sub-section 3. It is narrower than those that apply the considerations
under which you appoint. We therefore think it is logical and we support
these five names. [Applause.]

Mr K M KHUMALO: Chairperson, the ANC had agreed to the five names as
recommended by the Minister. The five names come from the original eight
that Parliament adopted. Dr Barendse is from the Western Cape, and is
actually self-taught and has been for more than 15 years in the
telecommunications industry. He is at present based in another country but
he is prepared to come back.

The second candidate is Mr Robert Nkuna, a very young, good and dynamic
person who holds a Masters degree in Public Policy and Development.

The third candidate is Mamodupi Mohlala, a very good attorney. She received
her education in Mazimbu, which later became Solomon Mahlangu Freedom
College where she obtained BA Law, LLB, and Masters degrees and she has
been a councillor in Icasa. The fourth one is Professor Van Rooyen, a
jurist who was an Acting Judge. He wrote the film and publication board
law. He is actually a very good person who was also a chairperson of the
Broadcasting Complaints Commission.

The four people that we have chosen are Dr Andrew Barendse, Ms Mamodupi
Mohlala, Mr Robert Nkuna and Ms B Ntombela. They are the people we are
actually recommending and we believe that these are good people. If there
is any other name I have left out – yes Ms B Ntombela. That is the name the
opposition actually think there is a problem with. In terms of the law, any
person in South Africa can apply to become an Icasa councillor. But in the
event that these persons are appointed, they will then resign their
position to take that position in Icasa because Icasa is a full-time
position. So, there is no contradiction, and there is no problem.

Ms Ntombela holds a Masters degree and she is currently a chief director in
the office of the Director-General for Posts and Telecommunications. The
postal regulatory has been incorporated into the new law in terms of
convergence. We believe that these two women – Mamodupi Mohlala and Ms
Ntombela – will be able to strengthen Icasa. But most importantly, there
are only four Icasa councillors left in the authority. We are bringing in
five new ones now.

As the ANC we are concerned that the names that are given will then give
you a number of six men and three women. We therefore recommend that in the
event that there could be one of them dropping out, those women who are
left out, whom the opposition has problems with – Ms Mashile Matlala, Dr
Marcia Socikwa and Kedibone Serero-Chiloane - must be considered in the
event of there being a vacancy. That’s the ANC position and we believe that
these are good people who will strengthen the authority.

There are a lot of issues that the authority must deal with – the issue of
the global satellite mobility, the issue of the internet broadband and the
issues that relate to satellite navigation systems. These are big
challenges that are facing Icasa and we believe these people – all of them
– will make a very strong authority. That is the ANC’s position. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Question agreed to (Inkatha Freedom Party dissenting).

Dr A J Barendse, Ms M Mohlala, Mr R Nkuna, Ms B Ntombela and Prof J C W  van
Rooyen  accordingly  approved  for  appointment  as  councillors   to   fill
vacancies on the Council of  the  Independent  Communications  Authority  of
South Africa.

Request accordingly approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON NOMINATION OF PERSONS TO
               FILL VACANCIES ON COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, in terms of
section 193(5)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the person recommended for
appointment as commissioner must be approved by the majority of the members
of the National Assembly. Although a division has not been demanded,
members are required to record their support for the recommendation of the
nominations as called out for appointment as commissioners. Members will
therefore be required to record their support by means of the electronic
voting.

Before the bells are rung, we will allow the chairperson to introduce the
report.

Ms P TSHWETE: Chair, Minister and Deputy Ministers, ladies and gentlemen, I
would like to thank this House for giving us the opportunity to recommend
candidates for the filling of vacancies on the Commission on Gender
Equality.

The Ad Hoc Committee on Nomination of Persons to fill Vacancies on
Commission on Gender Equality, was appointed by the House on 2 November
2005 to make nominations to the House in order to enable it to recommend to
the President persons to fill vacancies on the Commission on Gender
Equality in terms of section 3(2) of the Commission on Gender Equality Act,
Act 39 of 1996, read with section 193 of the Constitution. The committee
was to report to the House by no later than 15 February 2006.

The committee’s deadline had to be extended due to several factors coming
into play. For instance, time had to be given to accommodate the local
government elections and also to allow time for the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development to re-advertise invitations to the public to
nominate suitable candidates for consideration by the committee.

The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development received
nominations and curricula vitae and submitted those to the National
Assembly during August 2006 for consideration by the committee. The
committee received 75 nominations and shortlisted 19 candidates. Two
candidates withdrew and the committee therefore interviewed 19.

The committee, in assessing the candidates, took into consideration various
criteria which would assist the Commission on Gender Equality to fulfil its
mandate.

The committee notes that in terms of section 3(4)(a) of the Commission on
Gender Equality Act, the members of the commission may be appointed as full-
time and part-time members and shall hold office for a period not exceeding
five years, as the President may determine, provided that the term of the
office of full-time members shall not expire simultaneously.

The committee has completed its interviewing task and nominated the
following candidates for recommendation to the President to appoint as the
commissioners: The six full-time members are Dr Tebogo Maitse, Ms Nomboniso
Papama Gasa, Ms Janine Louise Hicks, Mr Dizline Mfanozelwe Shozi, Miss
Yvette Abrahams and Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane. The five part-time
members are Adv Salome Khutsoane, Ms Nomazotsho Memani-Balani, Ms Rosieda
Shabodien, Mr Bafan Gideon Khumalo and Ms Kenosi Vanessa Meruti.

The committee further recommends that consideration be given to the
staggering of the term of office of the full-time commissioners over the
period of five years.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members of the ad hoc committee
for their support and efforts throughout the entire process. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: On a point of order: Why are we ringing the bells again?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! The bells are ringing. There
is no point of order for now.

Mrs S A SEATON: I hope the doors are going to be closed, Chairperson, with
all due respect.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! The bells are ringing and
once they have stopped ringing we will close the doors.

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, with all due respect, the bells rang for a
sufficient length of time. There is no way we can have more people coming
in.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! I did announce that the bells
will ring for three minutes, and that’s it. So, there is no point of order
on that issue.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I think just for the
record: The voting stopped and the doors were opened and some members left.
Therefore, it’s perfectly in order for the bells to ring to call members
back.

Mr D J SITHOLE: Chairperson, I can hear that the instruments are now
working - Bhoola is back! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Hon members, we will now try
our instruments, and I hope they will not fail us again. I’m not sure about
what the hon Sithole said about them working now. He is not a technician.

Question put: That Adv S Khutsoane, Ms N Memani-Balani, Ms R Shabodien, Mr
B G Khumalo and Ms K V Meruti be recommended for appointment as part-time
councillors, and Mr T Maitse, Ms N P Gasa, Ms J L Hicks, Mr D M Shozi, Ms Y
Abrahams, and Ms N E P Loyilane be recommended for appointment as full-time
councillors on the Commission for Gender Equality.

   AYES-176: Abram, S; Ainslee, A R; Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Asmal, A K;
   Batyi, F; Benjamin, J; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu, F; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B;
   Bici, J; Bloem, D V; Booi, M S; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I
   M; Cele, M A; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Coetzee, R; Cronin, J P;
   Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Daniels, P; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlali, D
   M; Doidge, G Q M; Doman, W P; Farrow, S B; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T;
   Fubbs, J L; Gaum, A H; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Hajaig,
   F; Hanekom, D A ; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Jeffery, J H; Johnson, C
   B; Johnson, M; Kasienyane, O R; Kasrils, R; Kekana, C D; Khumalo, K K;
   Khumalo, K M; Khunou, N P; King, R J; Koornhof, G W; Kotwal, Z; Landers,
   L T; Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Luthuli, A N;
   Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madlala-
   Routledge, N C; Maduma, L D; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M;
   Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Maja, S J; Makasi, X C; Maloyi, P D N;
   Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashigo,
   R J; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Mbili, M
   E; Mbombo, N D; Mdaka, N M; Mentor, M P; Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C;
   Minnie, K J; Mnguni, B A; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
   Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mokoena, A D; Moloto, K A;
   Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-
   Hounkpatin, S D; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mzondeki, M J
   G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
   Ngele, N J; Njikelana, S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nkem-Abonta, E;
   Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, B M; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Ntuli, S B;
   Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A;
   Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R
   D; Radebe, B A; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
   Rasmeni, S M; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Seadimo, M D;
   Sekgobela, P S; Semple, J A; Sibanyoni, J B; Sigcau , S N; Sithole, D J;
   Skosana, M B; Smith, V G; Smuts, M; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Sotyu, M M;
   Swart, M; Swart, P S; Swathe, M M; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V;
   Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den
   Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van
   Wyk, A.


   ABSTAIN-9: Bhengu, M J; Chang, E S; Mpontshane, A M; Rabinowitz, R;
   Sibuyana, M W; Smith, P F; Spies, W D; Vezi, T E; Vos, S C.


Majority of support required in terms of section 193(5)(a)(ii) of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, not obtained.


Decision of question postponed.



             HIGH COURT DECISION ON THE CASE AGAINST JACOB ZUMA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L N DIALE (ANC): Chair, I have the honour of reading the statement of
the High Court ruling before this august House. The ANC accepts the
decision of the Pietermaritzburg High Court to strike off the roll the case
against ANC Deputy President Comrade Jacob Zuma. As we have maintained
throughout the course of this matter and, consistent with the provisions of
our Constitution, the ANC respects the rule of law and the decisions of our
courts. The ANC therefore calls on all South Africans to respect the
judgment handed down by the Pietermaritzburg High Court yesterday.

We also extend our appreciation to the members of the ANC and the broad,
democratic movement that demonstrated their principled and disciplined
support for the ANC Deputy President throughout this difficult period. The
ANC commends the manner in which the overwhelming majority of our members
conducted themselves during this time. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

               ATTEMPT TO REPLACE CAPE TOWN MAYOR HELEN ZILLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W P DOMAN (DA): Chair, the DA notes with alarm and disgust the attempt
by the ANC to replace the governance system in Cape Town in a self-evident
attempt to oust the popular Mayor Helen Zille and her highly effective
multiparty mayoral committee.

Dit is duidelik dat  die  ANC  jaloers  is  op  die  puik  dienslewering  in
Kaapstad en die gesonde administrasie  wat  daartoe  lei  dat  agterstallige
skuld ingesamel word teen ’n koers van meer as 100% van die bedrag  van  die
rekeninge wat elke maand uitgestuur word.

Die stad is natuurlik ook gerat om ’n suksesvolle  2010  Sokkertoernooi  aan
te bied. Dit is skynheilig van die ANC dat in die  res  van  die  land  waar
hulle  die  meerdeheid  in  munisipaliteite  vorm  hulle   die   uitvoerende
burgermeesterstelsel verkies om alle mag vir hulself toe  te  eien.  Dit  is
verder treffend dat die ANC geen verandering aan die  regeringstelsel  beoog
by enige van die ander 29 munisipaliteite in die Wes-Kaap nie.  (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is obvious that the ANC is jealous of the excellent service delivery in
Cape Town and the sound administration that is resulting in overdue debts
being collected at a rate of more than 100% of the amount of the accounts
that are sent out every month.

The city is also geared to host a successful 2010 Soccer tournament. It is
hypocritical of the ANC that in the rest of the country where they form the
majority in municipalities they prefer the executive mayoral system to
arrogate all power to themselves. It is also striking that the ANC plans no
further changes at any of the other 29 municipalities in the Western Cape.]


The voters are not stupid. They will recognise this for what it is: a cheap
attempt by the ANC to satisfy its insatiable lust for power and a sign of
its inability to accept defeat at the polls.

The ANC should respect the electoral wishes of the Capetonians who voted in
large numbers for the DA and the other parties. The only thing that these
people need is service delivery and not unnecessary anxieties.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]


          SETBACKS SUFFERED BY DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Chair, the IFP notes with grave concern the latest
setbacks suffered by the Department of Correctional Services. The Minister
this week conceded that 738 Correctional Services personnel had been
suspended pending disciplinary action during 2005-06, and 555 of the
warders on suspension were suspended for longer than 30 days. On average,
these Correctional Services personnel spent 92,5 days on suspension – more
than three months.

Of even greater concern is the fact that suspended warders’ salaries
amounted to a staggering R34 million in the same financial year. The IFP
finds this totally unacceptable. The high number of fully paid suspended
warders is deplorable, and the IFP calls for a speedy investigation into
this matter. Suspended warders should be investigated faster, and their
disciplinary hearings, if needed, should be concluded quickly so that the
taxpayer does not end up footing a bill running into many millions of rand.
Thank you.




                    JIPSA’S FOCUS ON GROWING SKILLS BASE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R P Z VAN DEN HEEVER (ANC): Madam Chairperson, the Joint Initiative for
Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, is focusing on organically growing the
skills base that is required to make the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa, a success.

There is a shortage of engineers, artisans and other technically skilled
people who are essential in delivering the government’s R372-billion five-
year public infrastructure investment programme. Between 1990 and 2000
there was more than a doubling of the proportion of female engineering
employment from 5% to 12% of the total. The proportion of black engineers
grew in the same period from 10% to 28%. Though both of these increases are
dramatic, there is still much room for improvement.

Engineers have played a crucial role in the industrial development of South
Africa, but it appears that their importance is declining largely because
of a declining employer demand of their skills. South Africa’s universities
and universities of technology must increase the number of engineering
graduates by a total of 1 000 graduates a year. To make this a reality, the
Department of Education has allocated an amount of R48 million to
universities in order to increase the number of engineering graduates.

The ANC commends the Department of Education on its efforts to improve the
skills of our people. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


                  NEW DRUG-RESISTANT STRAIN OF TUBERCULOSIS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N C NKABINDE (UDM): The UDM is concerned about the escalating number of
reported cases of a new drug-resistant strain of tuberculosis, which has
claimed the lives of more than 50 people in KwaZulu-Natal. This type of TB
has recently been reported in Gauteng and now also in the Free State. What
we need to see in a case such as this is a public awareness campaign that
prevents the outbreak from escalating into a large-scale pandemic. What we
have not seen thus far is any public message identifying the likely
symptoms, what people can do to avoid infection and where people displaying
symptoms can report for treatment. It must be emphasized that this
particular strain of TB poses huge risks for the South African population,
because of the widespread HIV prevalence and immune deficiency, which lead
to a very high rate of mortality. We need government to lead the campaign
against silence and stigmatisation that surrounds diseases in the country.
Too many people for fear of being stigmatised do not report their illness
or seek proper treatment.




                        EMPLOYMENT EQUITY STATISTOCS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr W D SPIES (FF  Plus):  Voorsitter,  die  agb  Minister  van  Arbeid  het
verlede week ’n striemende aanval teen  die  privaatsektor  geloods  en  die
name van ’n klompie maatskappye bekend gemaak wat volgens  hom  nie  voldoen
het aan die bepalings van die Wet op Billike  Indiensneming  nie.  Die  nie-
nakoming van dié wet is ’n kriminele oortreding waarvoor ’n  maatskappy  met
tot  R1  miljoen  beboet  kan  word.  Die  Minister  het  dus  die  betrokke
maatskappye, waarvan sommige gerespekteerde, genoteerde instellings  is,  in
die  openbaar  van  kriminele  gedrag   beskuldig.   Ons   het   gister   in
Pietermaritzburg  gesien  wat  kan  gebeur  as   die   staat   persone   van
kriminaliteit beskuldig, voordat sake behoorlik ondersoek is.  Die  Minister
het in hierdie geval presies dieselfde fout gemaak.  Nie  net  het  verskeie
maatskappye onmiddellik bewys gelewer dat hulle wel voldoen het aan die  wet
nie, maar die Minister se lys het ook gewys dat sy eie huis nie in orde  is.
Die Departement van Arbeid se kantoor in KwaZulu-Natal is ook  op  die  lys;
so ook nege ander nasionale departemente, 12  provinsiale  departemente,  14
staatsinstellings  soos  die  Kantoor  van  die  Openbare   Vervolger,   die
Parlement en Transnet en 25 munisipaliteite.  Dit  is  algemeen  bekend  dat
staatsinstansies en munisipaliteite wat nie verslae ingedien het  nie,  juis
van die mees getransformeerde instansies in die land is. Deurdat  hulle  dus
buite rekening gelaat is, is ’n skeefgetrekte prentjie oor die  samestelling
van die arbeidsmag en topbestuur in Suid-Afrika die  wêreld  ingestuur.  Die
geloofwaardigheid van al die syfers wat deur die Departement van  Arbeid  se
Billike Indiensnemingskommissie oor die  stand  van  regstellende  aksie  in
Suid-Afrika gepubliseer  is,  is  dus  onder  verdenking.  [Tyd  verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, the hon Minister of Labour launched a scathing
attack against the private sector and revealed the names of some companies
that according to him did not comply with the provisions of the Employment
Equity Act. Non-compliance with this Act constitutes a criminal offence for
which a company can be fined up to R1 million. The Minister has therefore
publicly accused the companies concerned some of which are respected,
listed institutions - of criminal activities. Yesterday in Pietermaritzburg
we saw what can happen if the government accuses people of criminality
before cases are properly investigated. In this case the Minister made
exactly the same mistake. Not only did various companies immediately
provide evidence that they had in fact complied with the Act, but the
Minister’s list also showed that his own house is not in order. The office
of the Department of Labour in KwaZulu-Natal is also on the list; as are
nine other national departments, 12 provincial departments, 14 government
institutions like the Office of the Public Prosecutor, Parliament and
Transnet and 25 municipalities. It is generally known that government
institutions and municipalities that did not submit reports, are precisely
amongst the most transformed institutions in the country. Because they were
not taken into account, a skewed image of the composition of the labour
force and top management in South Africa has been sent out into the world.
The credibility of all the figures that were published by the Department of
Labour’s Employment Equity Commission on the state of affirmative action in
South Africa is therefore under suspicion. [Time expired.]]




                         NONALIGNED MOVEMENT SUMMIT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson, given the 14th Summit of the
Nonaligned Movement that was held recently in Havana, it augurs well to
share with this House the statement of note by our leaders who undoubtedly
are charting a historic course for a new global order. The Indian Prime
Minister called for a redefinition of NAM as a forum for economic
bargaining with the West and as a multicultural forum to project the theory
of the confluence of civilisations, as opposed to the theory of the clash.
The acting President of Cuba quoted Fidel Castro’s speech to the NAM summit
in Havana delivered 27 years ago, when he insisted on unity and demanded
economic justice and for other nations to stop domination of our resources
and soaking up the sweat of our brows. Pres Mbeki further said that South-
South co-operation was an important means through which to empower
developing countries to help each other access modern technologies and to
move the nations away from underdevelopment into development. At the 52d
national conference, the ANC resolved to take initiatives to reform,
restructure and democratise the United Nations and develop a comprehensive
strategy for South-South co-operation. I thank you.




                      RECAPITALISATION OF TAXI INDUSTRY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S B FARROW (DA): Thank you, Chair, according to presentations to the
Portfolio Committee on Transport yesterday, the Taxi Recapitalisation
Scheme appears to be heading for chaos. Clearly, to remove 10 000 old and
unroadworthy taxis by December 2006 will not be achieved. Despite the roll-
out dragging on for over 7 years, problems and confusion still exist with
regard to specification, consultation and affordability. Regulations were
gazetted, which caused confusion and conflict with the National Land
Transport Transition Act, to the extent that all taxi registrations
currently in operation could be noncompliant; and coupled to this has been
the recent recall of the new Gazelle taxi vehicles for safety reasons. The
safety of our commuters must come first, putting the new taxi vehicles into
the hands of owners and operators without proper training and law
enforcement, could have disastrous consequences. The DA will be monitoring
any progress in this regard with interest. Thank you.




                      APOLOGY REQUESTED FROM MR COETZEE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Voorsitter, dit wil voorkom asof sommige lede van die
DA nie eers meer die basieste ordentlikheid aan die dag kan lê nie. Na
bewering het die agb Ryan Coetzee vroeër die maand op ’n parlementêre
skoonmaker, mev Martha Fischer, gevloek en gesê: “F... you and go to hell.”
Dit het gebeur nadat hy nie die toilet in die Marksgebou kon gebruik nie,
want mev Fischer het vir hom gesê dat die badkamervloer nat was. Ons besef
dat die DA geen respek vir lede van ander partye het nie, maar vir ’n DA-
lid om vieslike taal teenoor ’n parlementêre werknemer te gebruik wat sy ma
kon gewees het, is net eenvoudig skokkend. Die ANC is oortuig dat die DA
hiermee die menswaardigheid ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Chairperson, it appears that some members of the DA do
not even have any common decency left. The hon Ryan Coetzee allegedly swore
at a parliamentary cleaner, Mrs Martha Fischer, earlier this month and
said:”F... you and go to hell”. This happened when he could not use the
toilet at the Marks Building because Mrs Fisher had told him that the
bathroom floor was wet. We realise that the DA has no respect for members
of other parties, but for a member of the DA to use filthy language towards
a parliamentary employee who could have been his mother, is simply
shocking! The ANC is convinced that the DA hereby violated the human
dignity ...]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: On a point of order: The hon Gaum is well
aware that this matter is in the hands of the police and he is also well
aware of the fact that the hon Mr Coetzee denies these allegations. He
should not come and present them as a fact. He is deliberately misleading
the House.

Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Voorsitter, ek is nie besig om dit vir ’n feit voor te
hou nie. Ek het gesê, “na bewering” word hierdie bewerings gemaak.
[Tussenwerpsels.] Die ANC is oortuig dat die DA hierdeur die
menswaardigheid van mev Fischer geskend het en haar verneder het. Geen mens
verdien om so beledig te word nie. Die ANC doen vervolgens ’n beroep op die
agb Ryan Coetzee om mev Fischer om verskoning te vra. Die agb Gibson wil
ook nie mense om verskoning vra nie. Ons wil hom egter versoek om
verskoning te vra vir sy laakbare gedrag en nie woordspeletjies met die
media te speel nie. Dit is tyd dat die DA leer om alle mense met respek te
behandel. Goeie maniere kos niks.

In dieselfde asem kan die agb Doman dalk vir ons verduidelik wat van die DA
se verkiesingsbelofte geword het, om ’n veelparty uitvoerende
komiteestelsel in Kaapstad in te stel. Skynheiligheid moet dalk voor die DA
se deur gesoek word. U was die mense wat ’n uitvoerende komiteestelsel
voorgestel het, maar daarvan het blykbaar niks gekom nie.

Die HUISVOORSITTER: (Ms C-S Botha): Agb lid, ons sal kyk na die bewerings
soos deur die agb Gibson gestel en sal miskien na u toe terugkom daaroor.
In die tussentyd, agb Gibson, sal ek vra dat u u woorde van “deliberately
misleading” terugtrek.

Die HOOFSWEEP VAN DIE OPPOSISIE: Voorsitter, ek trek my woorde terug.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Adv A H GAUM (ANC): Chairperson, I am not stating it as a fact. I said:
“allegedly” these allegations are being made. [Interjections.] The ANC is
convinced that the DA, by so doing, thereby violated the human dignity of
Mrs Fischer and humiliated her. Moreover, the ANC appeals to the hon Ryan
Coetzee to apologise to Mrs Fischer. The hon Gibson is also one who refuses
to apologise to people. However, we would request an apology from him for
his bad behaviour and not to play word games with the media. It is time for
the DA to learn to treat all people with the necessary respect. Good
manners do not cost a cent.

In the same breath, the hon Doman can perhaps explain to us what has
happened to the election promises of the DA of establishing a multi-party
committee system in Cape Town. Maybe, hypocrisy should rather be sought at
the door of the DA. You were the ones that suggested a committee system but
apparently nothing has come of it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, we shall look at the
allegations as stated by hon Gibson and maybe come back to you on that. In
the meantime, hon Gibson, I request a retraction of your words
“deliberately misleading”.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I retract my words.]




                              CRIME STATISTICS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Madam Chair, according to crime statistics about 20
000 people are killed every year. Crime has reached an alarming proportion
nationally. The Pretoria court recently said in no uncertain terms that the
courts were fed up with the disregard criminals have for the lives of
innocent people. However, despite the court’s remarks and just after the
release of the shocking national statistics on crime, a prosecutor was
attacked while in her Pretoria office. It is reported that she was stabbed
10 times by the attacker who was out on bail on a murder case. He tried to
rob the prosecutor of her cellphone. Even worse is that her attacker has
been caught several times stealing cellphones, but the police allegedly
always let him go. It is also not known how the suspect had entered the
building with a knife, despite the use of metal detectors at the entrance.
It is therefore increasingly critical that the Department of Safety and
Security ... [Time expired.]




      WORLD LEADERS’ COMMITMENT TO ACHIEVING DEVELOPMENT GOALS BY 2015


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B J MNYANDU (ANC): Chairperson, in 2000 world leaders pledged their
commitment in the Millennium Declaration to achieving eight development
goals by 2015. The goals set clear-cut targets to fight poverty; to improve
health, education, sanitation and access to water; and empowerment for the
world’s poor. The last-mentioned goal, amongst other things, calls for
systematic changes in financing development and global governance
structures. It further proposes that the benefits of new technologies,
especially ICT, are made available to all the citizens of the world.

The ANC thus welcomes the initiatives undertaken by the free and open-
source software movement, FOSS, for all to benefit from technological
development. We need solutions that are widely available and affordable to
all, especially for remote rural and poorly resourced areas. The free and
open-source movement has been one of the most profound revolutions taking
place in the ICT sector.

Access to knowledge is a matter of human rights and freedom. Health,
literacy, education, freedom of speech and participation in the knowledge
economy all involve matters of human development and human rights. The
synergy between the political objectives of the FOSS movement and many of
the progressive movements, which include women’s organisations, stand to be
of benefit to the poor masses of Africa and they advance the cause of
marginalised people across the world. I thank you. [Time expired.]


    IMPLICATION OF JUDGE HERBERT MSIMANG’S DECISION IN JACOB ZUMA’S CASE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R COETZEE (DA): Chairperson, the ANC needs to know that the hon Gaum is
alleged to have once run an election campaign in Stellenbosch under the
slogan “Gaum, Gaum vir Lebensraum”, and you will know that that call is
notable for its connection to the Nazi party in Germany. In addition, the
decision by Judge Herbert Msimang to strike from the roll the Jacob Zuma
corruption hearing is an embarrassment for the National Prosecuting
Authority, which has failed to prepare an adequate case against him to
date.

The implications for our democracy are likely to be profound, because he
can now claim judicial respectability for his claim to be the victim of a
political conspiracy, and he may well go on to become president of the ANC
before the matter is brought back to court, if it ever is.

The DA is on record as opposing the tendency of President Mbeki to demonise
his critics as racists, to centralised power in the Presidency, and to his
conducting his business in obscurity out of the public eye. South Africa
needs a more inclusive, more open Presidency, but it does not need Jacob
Zuma whose populism and popularity are not based on a coherent or indeed
even discernible vision or policy platform, but on crude anti-Mbekism.

The ANC often boasts about the depths of its leadership, but surely it can
do better than Jacob Zuma? Now is the time to prove it.


                   REGIONAL INTEGRATION IN SOUTHERN AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M D NXUMALO (ANC): Chairperson, my statement is on regional integration.
Solidarity in Southern Africa, forged in the heat of struggle, can today,
if properly harnessed, help us forge regional integration at a greater
pace. This is based on the recognition that the contemporary global
situation makes it impossible for any country to be an island sufficient
unto itself.

The SA Sugar Association has thrown its weight behind the economic
regeneration initiatives taking place in the Southern African Development
Community. The association has joined forces with its counterparts in
Mozambique, Swaziland and Zimbabwe, and has invested R70 million in a
regional sugar terminal in the port of Maputo.

The regional terminal, which will increase the sugar storage capacity in
the port by 50 000 tons, was opened last week by Mozambique’s Minister of
Transport and Communication. The ANC applauds this initiative by the Sugar
Association of our country. This demonstrates their confidence in our
people and the region. I thank you.




              FNB PLAN TO TAKE BANKING SERVICES TO RURAL AREAS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs F MAHOMED (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC believes that the financial
sector should play a positive developmental role by supporting savings and
translating them into investment, and by increasing economic activity
through the provision of credit and efficient payment mechanisms. It needs
to be noted that on Monday, 18 September, the First National Bank unveiled
its plan to take banking services to the rural communities. Ten banks-on-
wheels vehicles will be deployed in communities to eliminate the need for
customers to travel long distances to conduct their banking.

South Africans who previously did not have access to banking services
responded equally by taking up the Mzansi account. By the end of June this
year, the number of Mzansi account holders had reached 3,3 million. Indeed,
this indicates the interest of our people in banking services.

The ANC calls upon all players in the banking sector to extend banking
services to the poor communities beyond the Mzansi account. I thank you.


                     ANC CONTROL OF THE EKHURULENI METRO


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Chair, the ANC-controlled Ekhuruleni Metro is placing the
lives of its residents and emergency personnel at risk. Of the 864 fire-
fighter positions across the metro, 308 are vacant; in other words, one in
every three positions. Only two fire stations out of the 27 have their full
complement of personnel, resulting in most shifts having fewer than the
minimum number of fire fighters needed. This is placing the lives of fire
fighters at risk, as they do not have the necessary backup in life-
threatening situations.

The situation has become so dire that one fire fighter at the Edenvale fire
station has tried to commit suicide owing to the frustrations at the
workplace. He cited the fact that no strict criteria were used when
appointing new personnel, and that he could no longer cope with colleagues
who were scared of entering burning buildings, were scared of heights, who
could not drive emergency vehicles properly, and who did not know how to
perform basic procedures such as the resuscitation of patients and the
taking of blood pressure.

This means that some people have been employed as fire fighters without the
Metro ensuring that they have passed their basic ambulance course, which is
supposed to be a prerequisite to becoming a fire fighter. In Kempton Park,
when a house was on fire, a fire engine arrived with only two fire fighters
and neither of them knew how to use the equipment on the vehicle, resulting
in the house burning to the ground.

The ANC-controlled Ekhuruleni Metro is making a mockery of this once-proud
profession and needs to realise that fire fighting is an essential service
that benefits all the residents of Ekhuruleni, rich and poor, and that it
needs to be placed at the top of the agenda. I thank you, Chair. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]


            MEASURES TO FIGHT EXTREME DRUG-RESISTANT TUBERCULOSIS


                            (Minister’s Response)

IPHINI LIKANGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, angiphendule lapha isitatimende
esenziwe yilungu elihloniphekile le-UDM. Angigcizelele ukuthi le nhlobo
yesifo sofuba okunzima ukuyelapha ebizwa nge-extreme drug-resistant TB
ifana nse nesifo sofuba lesi esaziwayo esikade saba khona. Kusho ukuthi
izimpawu ziyefana nse: ukujuluka ebusuku ulele, ukukhwehlela kuze kudlule
amasonto amabili ulokhu ukhwehlele njalo, ukungakufuni ukudla nokuncipha
komzimba.

Lesi sifo siba khona-ke nakwezinye izitho zomzimba. Kubalulekile ukuthi
sazi ukuthi siba khona nakwezinye izitho zomzimba, okusho ukuthi kungenzeka
ungabi nazo lezi zimpawu esengizibalile ezifana nokukhwehlela.

Kodwa-ke ilungu elihloniphekile sifuna nje ukulazisa ukuthi kunomkhankaso
okhona ngaphandle. Mhlawumbe njengoba silapha ePhalamende ezinye izinto
asizazi futhi asizizwa, kodwa kunomkhankaso osunesikhathi uqalile. NgoMashi
savakashela laphaya kwaMakhutha lapho safike savula uhlelo lokulwa nesifo
sofuba, singuMnyango wezeMpilo. Kusho ukuthi siye sakhetha izifunda
ezithize njengeTheku, Amathole ukuze sikwazi ukuthi sifake umfutho namandla
ekutheni kuliwe nesifo sofuba.

Maqondana nalesi sifo sofuba esibizwa nge-extreme drug resistant TB ngifuna
ukwazisa ilungu elihloniphekile ukuthi njengoba sitholakale laphaya eTugela
Ferry, lesiya sibhedlela singaphansi koMnyango futhi sisebenzelana
neYunivesithi yaKwaZulu-Natali. KwakunguMnyango wezeMpilo owacela ukuthi
baphenye ngalolu hlobo lwesifo. Yikho-ke kunemiphumela. Ngizama ukubonisa
ilungu elihloniphekile ukuthi sengathi alikho kahle iqiniso ekutheni
uMnyango wezeMpilo awenzi lutho ngalesi sifo sofuba.

Kodwa-ke okokugcina engizokugcizelela ukuthi, njengoba emasontweni
amathathu edlule ubuziwe umbuzo ngesifo sofuba, ngiye ngasho ukuthi
kubaluleke kakhulu ukuthi sonke sibambisane ukuze sikwazi ukulwa nalesi
sifo sofuba – ikakhulukazi kulabo abaphila negciwane leNgculazi ngoba
igciwane leNgculazi lenza ukuthi izivikela-mzimba zehle, umzimba ube
ntekenteke. Kubalulekile ukuthi sisebenze sonke ngokubambisana. Kodwa-ke
asikho isidingo sokuthi bese siyethuka ngalesi sifo sofuba; okudingekayo
kuphela nje ukuthi sisebenzisane ukuze silwe nayo. (Translation of isiZulu
member’s statement follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me respond to the
statement made by the hon member of the UDM. Let me emphasize that this
type of tuberculosis, which is difficult to cure,  is called-extreme drug-
resistant TB. This type of TB is the same as the commonly known
tuberculosis which has been around for a long time. It means that the
symptoms are the same: sweating at night while one is asleep, poor appetite
and loss of weight.

This disease is also found in other parts of the body. It is important that
we take note of the fact that it is also found in other parts of the body,
which means that it can happen that you may not have these symptoms which I
have mentioned, like coughing.

However, we want to inform the hon member that there is a campaign going on
out there. Perhaps as we are here in Parliament there are some other things
we do not know and we do not hear about them, but there is a campaign which
started a long time ago. In March we visited KwaMakhutha where we, as the
Department of Health, started a programme to fight tuberculosis. It means
that we selected certain regions like eThekwini and Amathole so that we are
able to instil some more energy into fighting tuberculosis.

With respect to the tuberculosis called extreme drug-resistant TB, I want
to inform the hon member that this disease was discovered in Tugela Ferry,
and that particular hospital is under the Department of Health and works
hand in hand with the University of KwaZulu-Natal. It was the Department of
Health that requested them to investigate this type of tuberculosis. That
is why there are results. I am trying to prove to the hon member that it is
not true to say that the Department is not doing anything about this
tuberculosis.

But lastly I would like to emphasize that, as the question was asked three
weeks ago in connection with tuberculosis by the hon member, it is very
important that we all co-operate so that we are able to fight tuberculosis,
more especially for those who live with Aids, because Aids causes the CD4
count to drop and the body becomes weak. It is important that we work co-
operatively. But there is no need for us to panic about this tuberculosis;
what is needed is only to work co-operatively so as to fight it.]

                        EMPLOYMENT EQUITY STATISTICS
              OUTCOME OF THE ANC DEPUTY PRESIDENT’S COURT CASE
               ALLEGED CENTRALISATION OF POWER BY THE PRESIDENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, with regard to the issue
raised by the hon member from the FF Plus about employment equity, I wonder
if he would be as vocal in support of this policy. I really would like to
challenge him because we have not heard much from him supporting this
policy and making suggestions about how he thinks it should be implemented
successfully.

We have now heard his complaints and comments, but they are not enough.
South Africa is changing. We would like to hear him saying how he thinks
this policy should be implemented in a manner that would allow his concerns
to be addressed.

With regard to the matter of the judgement yesterday, I think it is
important to say to the DA that the ANC will decide its own leadership.
Surely, we will not be told who to elect, on the basis of whatever reasons
that the DA may have. The deputy president of the ANC has always called for
his day in court and he got it. He is a great democrat and respects our
constitutional democracy. He has a great track record and the depth of his
leadership, unfortunately, cannot be understood by the likes of the DA.

The trial of the deputy president; the noninterference of the ANC and the
government; and the decision of the judge yesterday all attest to the
strength of our democracy as well as the independence of our courts. To say
here that the President is centralising power is a fallacy and a figment of
the imagination of those who make that allegation. There is nothing that
can be proved to that effect.

Every single power that the President of the ANC enjoys has been given to
him by the national executive committee of the ANC. Every single power he
enjoys under the Constitution was granted to him in broad daylight when we
adopted the Constitution in 1996. It would be sad to be advised that when
Parliament adopted this Constitution, the hon members of the opposition
were snoozing and that only now have they woken up to realise that the
President has too much power.

I think the President does not have too much power, but we are building a
democratic state that is the antithesis of a new liberal state and we are
on a great course.

In so far as all of these things are concerned, including the trial of the
deputy president of the ANC and the judgement, our democracy is strong and
our courts are truly independent. I thank you. [Applause.]


                    JIPSA’S FOCUS ON GROWING SKILLS BASE


                         NONALIGNED MOVEMENT SUMMIT


                      RECAPITALISATION OF TAXI INDUSTRY


                              CRIME STATISTICS


                           (Minister’s Responses)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, firstly, I would like to welcome
the ANC member’s comment on our attempt to improve the skills base in South
Africa. We hope we will see more such support for universities and FET
colleges as well as universities of technology because we do need to train
more and more skilled persons for the various industries in our country. In
fact, it might be a good idea if some of the hon members themselves did
some training in engineering and other critical skills so that as we
increasingly get rid of them out of Parliament, they do have some form of
future outside the House. [Laughter.]

In addition I really sincerely welcome the hon Gibson, a former artisan who
appears fairly frail now. But our FET colleges are open to him as well.

I would like to welcome the statements hon members made concerning the
strengthening and equalisation of trade ties across the world and the
improving of access for developing countries’ goods to the developed world.
The current trade regimes are unfair, particularly to the countries of the
South. Something needs to be done in order to create a far fairer platform
of trade.

I think the current conditions and the remarks made by all the presidents
at the Non-Aligned Summit pose a challenge for our Parliament and the
Members of Parliament to more carefully assess all these issues in so far
as they impact on South Africa. How far are we proceeding in so far as
bridging the digital divide? How might we use technology in order to
support development in South Africa? How are our farmers affected by the
subsidies granted to farmers in the North? What status do our products
enjoy? Why is it that while countries such as Australia expanded their
commodity production base, we who are such a large commodity-based economy
are not expanding in similar terms?

These are concrete issues, which you don’t just direct as statements in the
House but which, as Members of Parliament, you actually have to
investigate. I think the leaders in the Non-Aligned Summit have given clear
signals of an agenda which the parliaments in the various countries should
be pursuing and looking into far more carefully. As parliamentarians, we do
interact with members of parliament of other jurisdictions and we should be
saying to them they should address the matter of equity in trade access and
greater support to the developing world and that they need to move beyond
good statements to actual action to ensure that we enjoy access and
equality of trade.

The Taxi Recapitalisation Programme is an important programme. It is not in
chaos. There are challenges when you make such a major change to a system
of transport in our country. We need to improve the level of transport that
is provided for the public in South Africa. But we must do that by making
this recapitalisation process work. The current condition cannot be allowed
to continue. So, I think what hon members should do is to put their
shoulders to the wheel by ensuring that indeed we proceed and stop with the
notion that there is chaos there. There isn’t. The Gazelles are not being
withdrawn by government but by the makers of that particular car. So, curb
everything in a way that it doesn’t actually have an association.

Finally, certainly hon member, one should be concerned – and we said this
time and again – about the murder statistics in our country. It does beg a
number of questions which we must ask about our society, especially because
if you study the statistics carefully, one of the factors that emerges is
that the bulk of the murders are committed by persons who know their
victims.

We therefore must ask: How do we engineer social change in the way that we
conduct ourselves in the home, in social settings and other areas so that
we stop this practice of violence against each other? It is not merely a
question we put here; it is a question we must address in our constituency
work, in our social relations so that we alter this propensity to violence
that exists in our society. Something that concerns us must concern all of
us but it is something we address together as South Africans. We are
attempting to do so as government, but we would ask members to lend a hand.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

                         RULING ON OFFENSIVE REMARK

                                 (Statement)
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Before I ask the Secretary to
read the last Order of the Day, I would like to make a statement on a
ruling I gave yesterday, 20 September 2006.
During the debate of the House yesterday on a motion of censure by the hon
Chief Whip of the Majority Party against hon D H M Gibson, I asked hon R B
Bhoola to withdraw the remarks he had made that reflected on the integrity
of Mr Gibson.

I want to say that before I continue with the prepared statement on my
ruling, it has kindly been brought to my attention that some members
genuinely had not heard the offending remark and that others genuinely
believed that I had not heard them either. If my subsequent explanation
unwittingly contributed to the ensuing confusion, I apologise for that. But
hon members, I had quite clearly heard the remarks and made a carefully
considered ruling.

In response to my request, Mr Bhoola asked exactly what he had to withdraw.
I replied that he had to withdraw the reference that he had made to Mr
Gibson. Mr Bhoola refused to withdraw his remarks. I gave him a further
opportunity to withdraw, and again he refused. As Mr Bhoola was acting in
defiance of the Chair, I ordered him to withdraw from the Chamber, as is
required in terms of the Rules. It was clear at that point that Mr Bhoola
knew full well what remarks had given offence, therefore his refusal to
withdraw them.

Several points of order were raised contending in effect that the Chair
should have repeated the offensive remarks so that Mr Bhoola and members of
the House could know what he was expected to withdraw. The mere fact that I
from the Chair chose to intervene in this case without waiting for a point
of order to be raised indicates that I found his remarks offensive in the
extreme, as hon members should have. I do not believe that it can be
expected of the Chair to repeat such offensive words. Their repetition
would only lend them a credence, which they most certainly do not deserve.

When points of order are raised in terms of the Rule on Unparliamentary
Language, the hon member raising the point of order often repeats the
offensive remarks in order to draw the Chair’s attention to the exact words
or precise phrase he or she is objecting to. In this case, as the Chair had
elected to intervene, it was not necessary to repeat the offensive remarks.
It’s also the duty of all members in the House to listen to what is being
said in the debate.

Furthermore, the words that gave offence have been recorded in Hansard. So,
there is an official record of exactly what Mr Bhoola said for the
information of all members of this House and the public.

Having had the opportunity to study the unrevised Hansard of Mr Bhoola’s
speech, I repeat what I said yesterday: namely that I stand by the ruling I
gave at the time. Thank you. [Applause.]


       PROCLAIMING OUR AFRICAN IDENTITY THROUGH OUR CULTURAL HERITAGE


                          (Debate on Heritage Day)

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Thank you, Chairperson. Chairperson, I hope
you have your translation device.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I have, thank you.

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: Thank you.

Maloko ao a hlomphegago, Maafrika- Borwa ka moka, lehono re keteka letšatši
le bohlokwa la go ikgantšha ka botho bja rena ka ditšo tša rena. Potšišo
yeo re swanetšego go leka go e araba ka moka ga rena ge re le mo, ke gore a
bohwa bja rena ke eng? A botšo bja rena ke eng? A ke eng seo re ratago go
se šiela bana le ditlogolwana tša rena gore e be bohwa bja bona?

Ke nyaka go nea mohlala ka gore gantši ge re bolela ka mmušo wa peleng wa
kgatelelo re ama wola wa dingangele, wa bomaganagobušwa le wa bao ba bego
ba sa rate go bona lethabo. Re a lebala gore bophelo bo be bo no tšwela
pele tlase ga mabaka ao. Gape ge bophelo bo tšwela pele e be e le mo go
botse, go natefa ka nako tše dingwe ka ge bophelo re bo fiwa ke Mmopi.

Re gopola tšeo di diregetšego mo matšatšing a fetilego. Gape gantši re be
re re le ge re le tlalelong, re fela re sega. Go na le lebaka le lengwe leo
ke sa le lebalego leo ke felago ke gopotša ba bangwe bao ke ilego ka šoma
le bona mo nywageng yela ye methata. Ke ka mogwera wa ka yo a ilego a bona
gore a tlole moriri wa gagwe a o fetole mmala. Gabotsebotse yena e be e le
motho wo ka Seisemane re ka rego ke wa “Indian origin”. Yena o be a dirile
moriri wa gagwe gore e be o mošweu. Eitše ge maphodisa a fihla, a tlile go
mo swara, a mmotšiša gore o kile a bona kae Moindia wa moriri o mošweu?
[Where did you see a blonde Indian?] Lehono, ge re bolela ka tšeo re a sega
ka gore “lehulebe ke disego”.

Lehono lefase ka bophara le hlompha Afrika-Borwa ka tsela yeo e tlišitšego
diphetogo ka gona ka khutšo. Bjale bohwa bjo re nago le bjona, bjo re bo
tšerego go baetapele ba rena ba bjale ba go swana le boMadiba, ke go tseba
gore re ka kgona go rera melato le go fetša mathata a rena ka khutšo. Ke
bohwa bjo re bo šielago le bana ba rena.

Nhla ya bobedi, ke gore ngwageng wa go feta, Morena Kgotso Khumalo o itše
ge a eme fa, a re gopotša gore re le setšhaba sa Afrika-Borwa, re na le
dika le maswao ao e lego gore re tseba ka ona gore tše ke tša Afrika-Borwa.
Folaga ya Afrika Borwa ke le lengwe la maswao, Koša ya Setšhaba ke ye nngwe
yeo re e tsebago ka moka. Re na le mehlare, diphoofolo le matšoba.

Eupša ke nyaka go botša kgoro ye gore gantši ke a nyama ge ke lebeletše ge
go opelwa Koša ya Setšhaba, kudukudu ge e le mo go tlilego go ralokwa
kgwele ya dinao ntshe. Gantši ke bona masogana a rena ao a ralokago kgwele
ya dinao, ge a opela Koša ya Setšhaba, a opela a sohla borekhu, seo re se
bitšago “chewing gum”. O ka ipotšiša gore afa a a kwešiša gore Koša ya
Setšaba e ra goring? Ao ke manyami ao re bago le ona. O tlo hwetša gape
batho ba bangwe ba sa tsebe gore ba direng. Ba bangwe ba bea seatla pelong,
ba bangwe ba a se lekeletša, ba bangwe ba huna seatla ba nyaka go dira
“maatla” ka ge ba sa tsebe gore ge go opelwa Koša ya Setšhaba ba swanetše
gore ba direng.

Kganthe ge re le bathofeela, seo re swanetšego go se dira ke seo ka
Seisemane ba rego ke “attention”, e sego go bea seatla pelong goba phatleng
goba go se lekeletša e ke se a go imela. Tše ke dilo tšeo re swanetšego
gore re rutaneng ka tšona, le bana ba rena ba di tsebe.

Mokgwa ke gore tšeo mmušo o lekilego go di aga, ka nako ye nngwe ga re
boledišane ka tšona. Re na le lekgotla lela le bitšwago MRM -Moral
Regeneration Movement - ka Seisemane, yeo e lego gore e na le maswao e
kgona go thuša baswa gore ba tsebe dilo tše ka moka gore ge go direga eng
re swanetše re dire bjang rena re le batho. Ka ge e le Moporesidente feela
a beago seatla mo lehlakoreng la gagwe.

Matšatšing a go feta Kgoro ya tša Meetse le Kagodithokgwa, e re file
mohlašana ge ba be ba e laetša ka mola pele. Mo mehlašaneng ye ba bego ba e
swere, go be go na le mohlašana wo mongwe wo bitšwago “Wild Peach”. Re le
Maafrika-Borwa, bontši ga re tsebe gore mohlašana wo o mela kae le gore o
dira eng. Gape ka nako e ntši re ile ra tloša mehlare yeo re bego re na le
yona ka magaeng ka ge e be e šomišwa ke dikebekwa le maphodisa a kgale go
iphihla gona. Eupša bjale ke nako ya gore re thome go gaša mehlare yeo ka
magaeng a rena, kudukudu go gaša mehlare yeo e enyago dienywa tšeo re di
jago – go swana le diperekisi.

Ka ge re tseba gore gantši batswadi ba ya mešomong, ge ba boa mešomong bana
ba kgone gore ba raloke fao ba kgone le go ja dienywa. Ba banenyana le bona
ba kgone go ja borekhu bjo gore ba se ke ba phakiša ba eya kgweding ka ge
re tseba gore ke mathata ao re nago le ona matšatši a. Ke tlo ga nnyane go
leleme la Seisemane. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Honourable members, South Africans at large, today we celebrate a very
important day – the day we are able to show pride in who we are and in our
cultures. The question we should ask ourselves as we are here is what our
heritage is. Where do we originate from? What is it that we want to leave
behind for our children and grandchildren as their heritage?

I would like to give an example. Usually when we talk about the apartheid
regime, we are talking about the government of very difficult people –
rebels and those who were totally against peace. We forget that life went
on even under those circumstances. It was wonderful when life went on like
that, as it is God who gives us life.

Things that happened in those difficult times are still vividly clear in
our memories. We used to laugh at them sometimes when we were troubled.
There was this particular time that I shall never forget and I always
reminded my then-colleagues of it. It is about a friend of mine who dyed
his hair blonde. He was of Indian origin. When the police arrived to take
him in, they asked him where he had ever seen a blonde Indian. Today we
laugh as we talk about this and other memories. We laugh because it eases
the pain.

Today the whole wide world admires the peaceful way that transformation has
taken place in South Africa. What we have inherited from our leaders such
as Madiba is to know that we can negotiate and conquer peacefully. This is
the kind of legacy that we will leave for our children.

Secondly, when Mr Kgotso Khumalo was on this platform last year, he
reminded us that we are a South African nation and we have signs and
symbols that we identify with. The South African flag and the national
anthem is one of these symbols that we are all familiar with. We also have
indigenous trees, animals and flowers.

I must tell this august House though that I get very disappointed in most
cases when the national anthem is sung, especially during soccer sessions.
Most of the times I see the soccer players singing and chewing gum at the
same time. You ask yourself whether they really understand what the
national anthem is all about. This is the sad part of it. Some people do
not know what positions to take when they sing the national anthem. Some
will put their hands on their hearts, some will just let them hang loose,
and some will fold their hands into fists as a sign of power as they are
not sure what to do when they sing the national anthem.

But all we have to do is what is referred to in English as “standing to
attention”, and not put our hands on our hearts or foreheads or even leave
them hanging as if they’re heavy and a strain on you. These are the things
we must teach each other and ensure that our children learn them too.

Sometimes we never talk about the things that the government has
established. We have an organisation called in English, “Moral Regeneration
Movement”, the MRM, which has all the information required to assist the
youth in terms of what to do and how to go about it. It is only the
President who can put his hand on his side.

For these past few days, the Department of Water and Forestry gave us a
small tree at the time when there was a presentation. Among all the trees
they had, there was one called “Wild Peach”. Most South Africans are not
familiar with the requirements to plant that tree. In the past, we had to
cut down most of our trees because criminals and the police then used to
hide in them. Now it is time to plant trees round our homes, especially
those that will bear fruit that we will eat, like peaches.

As we know, in most cases parents have to go to work. Their children need
to play around these trees and eat the fruit. Young girls also need to eat
gum from the trees so that they do not start their menstrual cycles early.
We all know the challenges we face these days. I will speak in English for
just a little while.]

In 1997 some professors from the UK told us that they were transforming
their education system. One of the things they identified as important was
having their nursery schools next to the old age homes, because they
thought it was progressive to help growing children acquire certain types
of knowledge from the elderly people.

For us, who grew up with three or four generations in the home, we knew
exactly what they were trying to achieve. This came about because of the
indigenous knowledge here at home. We know that elderly people who have
enough patience, Mr Gibson, are able to educate children with wisdom. They
have all the patience.

With different generations growing up under one roof, one has the elderly
people representing the past, the parents representing the present and the
children representing the future. When all three generations interact, a
good culture matures in the process. This is one of the things I would like
us to revisit as South Africans, rather than to adopt things that prevent
us making progress.

Madam, I have just realised that time is really running out.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You still have two minutes and 45
seconds, hon member.

Ms S D MOTUBATSE-HOUNKPATIN: I want to remind the members that we also have
a very important commission here which we really need to work with and
engage in with our constituencies. This commission, formed under section
185 of the Constitution, is the Commission for the Promotion and Protection
of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities. This is
because it has some responsibility for promoting and developing peace,
friendship, humanity, tolerance and national unity amongst cultural,
religious and linguistic communities.

This, to me, is very important because if we want to promote a culture of
peace as South Africans in order to add to the foundation we have at the
moment, this commission will help give us more tools so that this can grow
and continue to be the culture of South Africa. Tolerance is one of the
strengths we have as South Africans.

Ke be ke maketše matšatšing a go feta ge re be re bolela ka go fa maina a
dibaka tše itšego, re thoma dikgogakgogano. Rena re godilego le ba bagolo,
re tseba gore kgotlelelo ke selo seo se bago gona kae kapa kae ge re le
batho re phedišana ka gore ge batho ba se na kgotlelelo – ge o le yo mo
botse o sa kgotlelele sekobo, sekobo le sona ke motho se na le seo se
tsebago go se dira. Ke ka fao ba felago ba re le se ke la mmona a le ka
mokgwa wo ke sekobo eupša pelo ya gagwe e a lewa.

Ge re kgotlelelana, re tla kgona go kgotlelelana gape re le batho ba mebala
ye e sa swanego. Re tla kgona go kgotlelelana re le banna le basadi, ka go
kwešišana gore ga re swane eupša re na le tšeo re kgonago go di phetha ka
go fapana ga rena. Ke ka fao le ba bagolo ba bego ba kgotlelela.

Re tseba gore ge re gola, ka moka e be e re ge ba bolela ba re re ya
thabeng tša gaMogale, re kwe ba bangwe ba šaetša ba re Magaliesberg. Ge re
bolela ka Polokwane re re Polokwane ga Maraba! Re re Tshwane a Mamelodi! ka
gore go reta ke tsela ya rena ya go phela. Re fo makala ge re kwa bona ba
bitša ka tsela yeo ba bego ba bitša ka yona e re ge ba šaetša re re a re ba
leseng, re a kgotlelela. Ke ka fao le lehono kgotlelelo ya rena re
swanetšego go e šomiša ka tsela yeo e swanetšego.

Go na le batho ba bangwe ka gore ga re kgone go bolela maleme a rena ka
tsela ye e swanetšego ka baka la ‘apartheid’ ke ka fao o kgonago go kwa ba
bangwe ba sa kgone gore Mpumalanga gona bjale ba re Mapumalanga. Feela re
swanetše gore re kgotlelele re ba thuše gore ba kwešiše. Pele re ruta bana
ba rena maleme a Sefora le Sejeremane, a re ithuteng gore rena re tsebe
maleme a rena mo gare ga naga, ka tsela yeo re tla kgona go tšwela pele –
re tla kgona gore bohwa bjo bja rena bjo re bo swarelele re tšwele pele ka
tsela yeo e swanetšego. Ke a leboga. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.]
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[An argument arose when we were naming particular areas in the past few
weeks. As we grew up with the elderly people, we know that it is necessary
to have tolerance. Beautiful people find it difficult to tolerate ugly ones
even though the latter are also human and might have something beautiful
about them; hence people say that someone is ugly but they have a beautiful
heart.

We would achieve racial and gender tolerance if we gave each other a
chance. We would be able to acknowledge that we are different and we have
different skills. That is why the elderly people had tolerance for one
another.

When we grew up, everybody was talking about going to “Thabeng ya ga-
Mogale”, others mistakenly call it Magaliesberg. When we talk about
Polokwane, we say, “Polokwane ga-Maraba!” We also say, “Tshwane-a-
Mamelodi”. Praise is our way of life. We are surprised at what people would
call these places. When they make mistakes, we just tolerate them. But
today, our tolerance must be clearly targeted.

Due to the apartheid regime, some people are unable to speak our languages.
You hear people saying “Mapumalanga” instead of “Mpumalanga”. We must
tolerate them anyhow and help them to learn these names. We must teach our
children the languages spoken in our country before we can teach them
foreign languages such as French and German. That way we can be a
progressive nation and promote our heritage in an appropriate way. Thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms D VAN DER WALT: Chairperson and colleagues, we stand here today before
this House to debate how our country can best proclaim our African
heritage.

Dit is nie ’n nuwe uitdaging nie, maar bly beslis steeds een van die
grootstes - trouens, ’n mens kan selfs argumenteer, die heel belangrikste.
Respek vir ’n ander kultuur, die aanleer om te deel, die viering en
herdenking van ander landgenote se geskiedenis is beslis die hoeksteen van
’n land wat verenig is agter ’n gemeenskaplike doel om ’n Suid-Afrika te
bou waarin elke persoon gelyk is en elke individu ’n geleentheid het om
suksesvol te wees. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[This is not a new challenge, but undoubtedly remains one of the biggest
challenges – in fact, one can even argue that it is the most important one.
Respecting another culture, learning to share, celebrating and
commemorating the history of fellow-citizens  certainly form the
foundations of a country which is united toward the common goal of building
a South Africa in which everyone is equal and every individual has the
opportunity to be successful.]

This was the central message that Albie Sachs put to the ANC in 1990. In an
in-house paper he argued that:


  Without doubt, the ANC will continue to be the principal architect of
  national unity after the foundations of apartheid have been destroyed and
  the foundations of democracy laid. Yet this does not mean ...


He continued:


  ... that the ANC is the only voice in the anti-apartheid struggle or it
  will be the only voice in postapartheid South Africa.


    We will have Zulu South Africans, Afrikaner South Africans, Indian
    South Africans, Jewish South Africans, Venda South Africans and Cape
    Muslim South Africans. Each cultural tributary continues towards and
    increases the majesty of the river of South Africanness.
Dit was die visie, die doelwit en die uitdaging wat hy in 1990 aan die ANC
gestel het. Vandag, 16 jaar later, is dié uitdaging steeds geweldig
belangrik en beslis relevant. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[This was the vision, the goal and the challenge that he put to the ANC in
1990. Today, 16 years later, this challenge is still crucial and absolutely
relevant.]

Anyone in this country who harbours any sympathy for apartheid and what
that terrible system did to the majority of people in this country has no
place in South Africa. Large sections of our history have been lost. We
must find these sections.

An enormous number of people were treated as illegitimate. We must embrace
and promote them. Many cultures were ridiculed and dismissed. We must
celebrate them. It is a very simple task in its conception but a very
complex challenge in its realisation.

Dit bly ’n uitdaging omdat ons teen ’n ANC-meerderheid staan wat nié Albie
Sachs se pleidooi ten volle aanvaar het nie en nog te gereeld hulself
voorhou as die enigste wettige stem in ons land. [The challenge remains
because we are confronted with an ANC majority that does not accept the
appeal by Albie Sachs in its entirety, and still too often perceives itself
as the only legitimate voice in our country.]
And also, it is a great challenge because we have many minorities who feel
under siege, and who feel hostile toward a government that is progressively
sidelining their concerns and culture.

It is a conflict and it is only reconcilable if both sides are willing to
make a concession. The ANC majority needs to learn that it cannot control
everything in this country and the minorities need to understand that, if
we are going to move forward, we have to share this country - our country.

In his paper Albie Sachs also says the following:


  We exercise true leadership by being nonhegemonic, by selflessly trying to
  create the widest unity of the oppressed, and to encourage all forces for
  change by showing people that we are fighting, not to impose a view upon
  them, but to give them the right to choose the kind of society they want
  and the kind of government they want.

If we are to proclaim our African heritage, then this is the sentiment all
South Africans need to embrace.

Dit is ons beroep vandag voor die Huis en die uitdaging aan alle Suid-
Afrikaners daar buite. Ek dank u. [Applous.] [Today, this is our appeal to
the House and the challenge to all South Africans out there. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

Prince N E ZULU: Hon Chair, earlier this week, this House was seized with a
statement that decried the manner in which the House of Traditional Leader
in KwaZulu-Natal was established and sworn in under a law passed just the
previous day.

Traditional leadership is one of the core institutions of our African
heritage, and the manner in which it was treated in that ceremony made us
ask whether or not our democracy does value this institution.

However, that we have Freedom Park in South Africa, the park that is an
embodiment of all sentiments of African heritage, is a giant step in the
right direction.

Our heritage is our legacy passed on from generation to generation. It is
what we are today and what we will be in the future, expressed in our
family values - in the naming of our newborn children and institutions,
mountains and rivers; the celebration of our customs and the adoration of
the name of God in different tongues. Heritage is the source of life, love
and inspiration.

Africa should be celebrating and singing ``Hallelujah’’ every day for the
fact that humanity started in Africa. African culture has a profound
identity and spirituality. It breeds a strong sense of self-worth and self-
esteem, enshrined in the philosophy of “You are what you are because of me,
and I’m what I am because of you”.
These values are intergenerational; the young take them from the old and
preserve them for their children. A major component of heritage is
traditional music and instruments which convey the most profound sense of
culture and artistic values of civilisation.

Some of the members in this House must have listened to Sibongile Khumalo
transmitting Princess Magogo ka Dinizulu’s traditional and cultural songs
into today’s music. That is culture blended with modern technology. We need
more of these creative minds. Thank you, Chair.

Mr J BICI: Chairperson, hon members, the definition of what constitutes
African identity has been in dispute for so many years. This has led to the
constant questioning and moulding of what constitutes African identity. In
itself this was not a negative or positive thing, but what happened is that
the African cultural heritage was systematically denounced, wiped out or
simply removed and exported to foreign shores by invaders and colonialists.

The quest for a free South Africa is to rediscover, re-establish and, where
relevant, regain our cultural heritage that was previously uprooted or
suppressed. In our institutions, such as this one, that is Parliament, we
need to ask ourselves why we are not doing more and spending more to regain
lost heritage and to celebrate the emerging cultural artefacts and
traditions.

Our languages also do not receive the attention and investment they
deserve, and language is a vessel that carries the values of a nation’s
heritage and history. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nkskz N D MBOMBO: Mgcinisihlalo, nani malungu ale Ndlu abekekileyo,
ndiyanibulisa egameni likaKhongolose. Mna ndiza kuthetha ngamathala
eencwadi. UMqulu wethu maMalungelo kunye nesivumelwano saseStellenbosch, i-
Stellenbosch Resolution, uthi: (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs N D MBOMBO: Chairperson, and hon members of this House, I greet you in
the name of the ANC. I am going to speak about the libraries, the Bill of
Rights as well as the Stellenbosh agreement, the Stellenbosch Resolution,
which says:]

“The doors of learning and culture shall be opened,” and so will the
library doors.
Okokuqala, la mathala kufanele ukuba agcinwe ekweyona meko iphucukileyo.
Nathi Malungu ePalamente kufanele ukuba siwajonge ngeliso lokhozi apho
akhoyo.

La mathala awanqabanga koko awakho ezilalini, emaphandleni, nasezindaweni
ezazifudula izezabantu abamnyama kuphela, ii-township ngesiNgesi. Kaloku
kwakukho umbuzo othi: Siza kufunda ntoni, senze ntoni ngemfundo ngoba siya
kuhlala sisebenza ezindlwini nasezitiyeni zabamhlophe, sinonophela
abantwana babo, oo”kleinbaas”, oo”Ounooi” noo”kleinmissus”. Siya kuhlala
singoo-Jane, ooPikinini, noo-Jim, singaziwa namagama ethu, kungenziwa
zinzame zokuba aziwe.

Siyacela ke kwiSebe lezoBugcisa neNkcubeko ukuba liwuthathele ingqalelo
umba wala mathala. La mathala ndithetha ngawo awaphethwanga kakuhle
luluntu, enziwa iindawo zeentlanganiso zikawonke-wonke.

Omnye umba ngowokuba uluntu lwenza la mathala angabukeki, angathandeki
inkangeleko yawo yangaphandle, kuba kuncanyathiselwa amaxwebhu okupapasha
iintlanganiso, yonke loo nto. Loo nto mayiphele.

La mathala awakho ezilokishini, akude. Xa ufuna incwadi kufanele uqabele
isithuthi, kwaye xa ufika kuwo ufumanisa ukuba ayikho le ncwadi ubuyifuna.
Kuthiwa thina bantu abantsundu asikuthandi ukufunda, kangangokuba kuthiwa
xa ufuna ukuba umntu ontsundu angayazi into ethile, yibhale phantsi
encwadini.

Azikho ke iincwadi ekufanele sizifunde, iincwadi ezibhalwe ngolwimi lwethu.
Kaloku nababhali abasabhali ngenxa yezizathu ezithile. Siyakuthanda
ukufunda, koko ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Firstly, these libraries should be kept in the most decent condition. We,
members of Parliament should look at these libraries with a stern eye at
those places that have them.

In the rural areas, homelands, as well as at places that used to be for
black people only, referred to as townships in English, these libraries are
not scarce, but they simply are not there. In fact, there was a question
that was asked: What are we going to learn? What will we do with education,
because we shall remain working in the houses and gardens of Whites,
looking after their children and referring to them as “kleinbaas, ounooi”,
and “kleinmiesies”? We shall remain being referred to as Jane, Pikinini,
and Jim, without them even knowing our names, and no efforts being made to
know our names.

We appeal to the Department of Arts and Culture to take note of the issue
of these libraries. These libraries I am talking about are not being looked
after properly by the communities. They are used as places to hold public
meetings.

Another issue is that the communities render the external appearance of
these libraries unattractive because they paste notices that invite people
to meetings against the walls and that should come to an end.

Another point is that the libraries in the townships are far away. If you
need a book you have to use transport. Also when arriving at these
libraries you find that the book you need is not available. It is alleged
that we African people do not like reading, as a result if you want to hide
information from an African, write it down in a book.

The books that we are supposed to read, those that are written in our own
languages, are not there. One should remember that the authors are no
longer writing due to certain reasons. We would like to read, but ...]

... our libraries are letting us down.

Ezindala ke zona iincwadi zayaphi, esasikwazi ukuzifunda kuba zazibhalwe
ngeelwimi zethu? Ndithetha ngeencwadi ezifana noKufundwa Ngamava
eyayibhalwe nguMinazana Dana; Phambi Kwezo Nkabi, eyayibhalwe nguGuybon
Sinxo; uMandisa, njalo njalo.
La mathala kufanele ukuba abe ngamafa ethu, uthi xa uthetha ngamathala
eencwadi ube kanti uthetha ngezinto eziligugu kuthi, naxa uthetha ngezinto
eziligugu kuthi ube kanti uthetha ngamathala eencwadi, njalo njalo.

Amathala eencwadi kufanele ukuba ibe ziindawo ongafunda kuzo ngemvelaphi
yethu, iindawo zolwazi olunzulu ngamaqhawe ethu nangomzabalazo wethu.
Ndithetha ngamaqhawe afana no J Dube, Albert Luthuli, Govan Mbeki noo Z K
Matthews. Kodwa ngexesha lotyelelo lokuhlola inkqubela-phambili kwiindawo
ngeendawo siyikomiti safika i-Sharpeville ... (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[What happened to the older days books that we could read, because they
were written in our languages? I refer to books like one entitled: Kufundwa
Ngamava by Minazana Dana, another one entitled: Phambi Kwezo Nkabi by Gybon
Sinxo, another one entitled uMandisa, etc.

These libraries are supposed to be our heritage. When one talks about
libraries one should be talking about things that are our pride, and when
one talks about things that are our pride one should be talking about
libraries, etc.

Libraries are supposed to be places where you can learn about our origin,
places of high knowledge, our heroes, as well as about our struggle. I am
talking about heroes like J Dube, Albert Luthuli, Govan Mbeki as well as Z
S Matthews. However, during our visits to look at the progress at different
areas we, as the committee found Sharpville ...]

... being a hub of activity, where the elderly were also involved in
dancing and telling stories to the young ones.

E-Orlando safika kukho nezixhobo zokufunda ezisetyenziswa ngabangaboniyo
ukunceda isizwe ngokubanzi ukuze wonke umntu afunde ... [... At Orlando we
even found learning material that is being used by the blind to assist the
nation in general so that every one could read.]
... and most importantly to help the state discharge its cultural mandate
and its obligations towards blind people.

Sikhe saya kwiziko i-Centre for the Book apha eKapa, siyikomiti yezobugcisa
nenkcubeko. Sathi safumana iincwadi zamabali abantwana zibhalwe ngeelwimi
zesiNtu nguSekela-Mphathiswa wezeMpilo uNozizwe Madlala-Routlege
nangohloniphekileyo uDorothy Motubatse-Hounkpatin. Sithi halala kubo.

Kodwa ke ngoku bhalani iincwadi zabantwana abaminyaka isuka kweyeshumi
elinesithandathu ukuya kwelishumi elinesibhozo. Sele bakhula kaloku abaya
babefunda eziya nizibhalileyo. Qhubani; ngubani othe yekani? (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We also visited the Centre for the Book here in Cape Town, as the
Portfolio Committee for Arts and Culture. We then discovered books of
children’s stories written in African languages by the Deputy Minister of
Health, Nozizwe Madlala Routledge, and also by the hon Dorothy Motubatse
Hounkpatin. We salute them.

But now you should write books for children from ages 16 to 18.  Those who
used to read those what you wrote are now grown-ups. Proceed! Who said you
should stop?]

Once more, we are afforded the opportunity today to pronounce ourselves on
our ANC-led government’s commitment to ensuring accelerated improvement,
reorientation and expansion of culture, arts, heritage and indigenous
knowledge systems under the cherished democratic dispensation.

One instrument that would in no small measure demonstrate our commitment to
the critical areas we have alluded to is certainly the library information
sector. Allow me to dwell on this key priority.

As we all should know, this sector of arts and culture is often given a
Cinderella status when the department unveils its strategic objectives
during Budget Vote debates, and this is also often the case with all the
provinces.

Andazi nokuba undivile na, Mgcinisihlalo, ... [I don’t know whether you
have heard me, Chairperson.]

... regarding the Cinderella status that is given to arts and culture?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Ndikuvile, Mama. [I have heard
you, madam.]

Mrs N D MBOMBO: However, we are glad to inform the nation today, that our
government, and by extension the Department of Arts and Culture, is
committing billions of rands over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
years for the funding of the transformation of community and public
libraries.

We are informed that funding is being organised to ensure efficient,
transparent and targeted work in consultation with all stakeholders and
role-players. This, indeed, is good news by any standard.

Kukho ithala leencwadi elikhulu elakhiwayo eTshwane. Sinethemba lokuba liza
kufezekisa iimfuno zethu. [There is a big library being built in Tshwane.
We hope that it will meet our needs.]

In conclusion, Chair, on the eve of the anniversary of Heritage Day, we
would like to earnestly call on all South Africans, regardless of race,
colour, creed and social background, to seize the moment on Sunday and
celebrate with us what will mark the second celebration of the second
decade of freedom.

So, while it will be time for celebrations and thanksgiving, it will also
be time for renewed commitment to the vision of a better life for all. As
President Mbeki always says: “All South Africans on the continent, reborn
in a better world.” Ndiyabulela. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Ms F BATYI: Chairperson, South Africa has a rich heritage that is made up
of many facets. Our heritage lies in Table Mountain, bobotie and pantsula.
It lies in a national anthem, “pap and vleis” and Bafana Bafana. Finally,
our heritage lies in the visions of Mandela, Gandhi, De Klerk and many
other leaders who have shaped this country into the wonderful tapestry of
cultures it is today.

The ID embraces our rich heritage and supports all initiatives that strive
to celebrate it. The celebration of our heritage plays an integral part in
the deepening of democracy. It requires us to think about our own as well
as other’s cultures and makes us unite under one South African culture. The
ID therefore requests each and every South African to take a moment to
think about where they come from and where they would like to take South
Africa in the future. Our nation has been built on such visions by great
leaders and the visions of patriotic South Africans can build an even
greater South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr W D SPIES: Voorsitter, ek is ‘n Afrikaner en Afrikaan. My voorgeslagte
bly reeds driehonderd jaar lank in Afrika. My pa was nog nooit in Europa
nie; en so ook nie my oupa, sy oupa of sy oupagrootjie nie. Nogtans besluit
die ANC om my as ‘n buitestaander en ‘n indringer te behandel. In die ANC
se studie-dokumente word my mense as ``colonialists of a special kind’’
gebrandmerk.

Wanneer my mense aan debatte deelneem, is die gereelde tussenwerpsel uit
die agterbanke: ``Go back to Europe’’. Kan ons ons erfenis so herdenk? Die
VF Plus dink nie so nie. Ons is deel van Suid-Afrika, sy geskiedenis en sy
erfenis. Lydenburg, Potchefstroom en Pretoria is net so deel daarvan as
Mthatha, Ulundi, Mafeking of Musina. Behandel ons as mense wat deel is van
Suid-Afrika. Akkommodeer ons, maar moet ons nie probeer assimileer nie.
Laat u vryheid ook vir my vryheid beteken. Respekteer my geskiedenis en ek
sal u s’n respekteer. En laat my erfenis met rus soos ek u s’n met rus
laat. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, I am an Afrikaner and an African. My ancestors
have lived in Africa for three hundred years already. My father has never
been to Europe; and also, neither have my grandfather, his grandfather nor
his great-grandfather. Nevertheless the ANC decides to treat me as an
outsider and an intruder. My people are branded as “colonialists of a
special kind” in the ANC’s study documents.

The regular interjection from the backbenches when my people participate in
debates is, “Go back to Europe”. Can we celebrate our heritage like this?
The FF Plus does not think so. We are part of South Africa, its history and
heritage. Lydenburg, Potchefstroom and Pretoria are just as much a part of
it as Mthatha, Ulundi, Mafeking and Musina. Treat us as people who are part
of South Africa. Accommodate us, but do not try to assimilate us. Let your
freedom also mean freedom for me. Respect my history and I will respect
yours. And leave my heritage in peace as I do yours. I thank you.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, today I ask: What makes us South African in a
land of such diverse and colourful people? In the apartheid regime we were
categorised as White, Black, Coloured and Indian, but it was the birth of
our democracy that brought the realisation that each and every citizen
shares a heritage that the racial divide cannot separate. We are a country
of many languages, many beautiful cultures and traditions. Our national
parks, flowers, fish, trees, flag and animals are shared by all.

Today we share a democratic South Africa that celebrates a united and equal
heritage of every aspect that makes us South African. This heritage is not
black, it is not white, neither is it coloured or Indian. It is the
collective diversity of all our citizenry that makes us South African.
Today the MF comes to the podium celebrating the contribution made by all
South Africans to our heritage.

We call on the House and the public to be wary of the heritage we are to
preserve for future South Africans and to make a proven heritage that shall
symbolise a heroic people that paved victory from the toils of democracy,
equality and unity. All our efforts to eradicate poverty and develop South
Africa, a consciousness of our democracy as well as the principles and
values of our Constitution, need to lead the way. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M H MATLALA: Chairperson, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, comrades
and friends...
... legatong la mokgatlo o mogolo wa badimo le batho, mokgatlo wa bo
Comrade O R Tambo, mokgatlo wa bo Albert Luthuli, mokgatlo wa bo Chris
Hani, mokgatlo wa bo Peter Mokaba, mokgatlo wa bo Ephraim Mogale, ke a le
dumediša ka leina la ANC! (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[... on behalf of the party of the people, the late Comrades O R Tambo,
Albert Luthuli, Chris Hani, Peter Mokaba, Ephraim  Mogale, I greet you in
the name of the ANC!]

The national statutory bodies of our country aim to bring equity to
heritage, promotion and conservation. Our heritage found great expression
in the fauna and flora of our country. We pride ourselves on our national
anthem, national flag, national coat of arms, national orders and our
national symbols. We need to invest resources to teach our committees,
communities and children particularly about our flag, symbols, anthem and
many other historical sites. The promotion and restoration of our heritage
also include preservation of our indigenous names in major cities and
towns. The South African Geographical Names Council needs to speed up the
publishing of all name changes to municipalities and important historical
sites.

Firstly, we need to change the badly written, pronounced and corrupted
names to proper African names. Makapanstad is Mokopane, Magaliesberg should
be changed to Thaba tša gaMogale, Moreleta to Moretele. Secondly, we need
to change names of places named after brutal colonial rulers who inflicted
pain and suffering on African people in and outside South Africa. It is
also correct today that we have renamed Louis Trichardt Makhado,
Pietersburg Polokwane and Potgietersrus Mokopane. We must proceed as part
of our heritage to rename the Johannesburg International Airport O R Tambo
International Airport and the city of Potchefstroom Tlokwe. We don’t
apologise!

Lastly, comrades we need to focus on the museums and libraries to have
information on the origins and meanings of these important names. In
reclaiming our heritage through music we wish to encourage many towns and
cities to start Heritage Month celebrations and cultural festivals. We need
also to encourage and congratulate municipalities that organise arts
festivals because they offer visitors the opportunity to combine their
pursuit of culture, sightseeing, wine-tasting, history and tourism in
diverse beautiful South African towns. In Oudtshoorn, there is the annual
Klein Karoo Nasionale Kunstefees for the performing arts. While it is
mainly in Afrikaans it also showcases African drama, music and crafts.

The Arts Alive International Festival in Johannesburg of music, dance,
drama and performance poetry has been hosted by the city since 1995. The
Mapungubwe Cultural Festival in Limpopo also provides a platform to
showcase the rich diverse cultures of the Bapedi, Vha Venda, Batsonga,
Batlokwa and all cultural groups in the province. This annual event is an
important element of reclaiming our heritage through music, history and
culture. Other festivals that attract visitors at both national and
international levels are Oppikoppi, Taung Calabash, the One City Festival
and Music Festival in Durban.

As we celebrate heritage day on Sunday, we always strive to bring change
and transformation to all heritage and cultural institutions. I thank you,
Comrade Chair. [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, hon members, it is encouraging to note that our
heritage institutions are developing and nurturing the nation by preserving
and honouring our past. The past is what has shaped us and has made us what
we are. We need to have access to the past in order to have a clear vision
for the future.

The UIF acknowledges that the heritage sector in this country has been over-
represented by the museums. This is our great concern, because a
significant number of museums were viewed as a social construction of
Western society.

In order to proclaim our African identity through our heritage,
institutions such as the SA Heritage Agency must be at the forefront of the
education of the nation. It is, therefore, relevant that the living
heritage unit in the heritage agency should do more to educate South
Africans, in particular with regard to symbolic restoration.

We must encourage society to empathise with the experience of others in and
out of our motherland. South Africans, despite the overwhelming evidence,
need to be told that South Africa and Africa need to be redefined and
everyone must be invited to be part of that process. I thank you.

Mna M M SWATHE: Modulasetulo, ke dumediša maloko ao a hlomphegago a
Palamente, ka leina le le botse la DA. Molaotheo wa rena o bolela gore
Afrika-Borwa ke naga ya badudi ka moka. O amogela gore batho ka moka ba a
lekana pele ga molao. O lokiša le go amogela gore batho ba ile ba
tshwenyega ka nako ya mmušo wa peleng. O amogela tokologo ya batho ka moka
ba lefase la rena. O hlompha batho ka moka bao ba lwetšego, go šomela le go
aga naga ya rena.
Ka Letšatši la Bohwa, re keteka moletlo wa gore re bomang le gore re tšwa
kae. Ke letšatši la bohwa bja rena. Ke letšatši leo le ketekwago ke batho
ka moka go laetša bokgabo, ditšo, ditumelo, mmino, meaparo, dingwalwa le
dipapadi ka go fapafapana ga tšona. Re rata gore batho ka moka ba keteke
letšatši le ka lethabo le go amogela ditšo le ditumelo tša batho ka moka.
Bohwa bja rena bo swnetše go ketekwa re le ba ditšo tšeo di fapanego, ka
lethabo le tšhomišano.

Batho ba bangwe ba hlaloša gore bohwa ke taba ya go sepela ka thlago le
matswalo goba go amogela go tšwa go batswadi bao ba phetšego pele le
maetemogelo le ditiragalo tša kgale. Go keteka Letšatši la Bohwa, e
swanetše go ba taba ya go amogela merafe ya Afrika-Borwa ka moka. Re
swanetše go hlompha le go amogela phapano ya ditumelo, ditšo, polelo, dijo
le lefase leo re dulago go lona. Bohwa bja rena ke lehumo la setšhaba ka
bophara, e sego morafe o itšego. Koša ya Setšhaba le dipolelo tša yona ka
go fapafapana di dira gore koša ye e be bose le gore e amogelege go badudi
ka moka ba Afrika-Borwa. Re swanetše go dira tšohle mo matleng a rena go
tsenya kgopolo ya go amogelana le go amogela thôtô ya setšhaba. Se se tla
dira gore bokamoso bja setšhaba sa ka moso bo phadime.

A re amogeleng ditšo tše fapanego. A re šomišeng letšatši le go thekgana,
go aga setšhaba se tee sa go phela ka khutšo le tšwelopele. Afrika-Borwa ke
ya batho ka moka le makokokoko a yona. DA e lakaletša batho bohle bao ba
tla bego ba keteka meletlo mahlatse le mahlogonolo. Gomme re le ba DA, re
re re rata go bona batho ka moka ba šomiša sebaka se go swarana ka matsogo
go tšwetša pele ditšo tša bona ka go fapafapana ka ge ka moka re la
Maafrika-Borwa. Re rata go bontšha re le ba DA gore naga ye re a e rata, ke
naga ya rena. Re rata gore batho ka moka ba kgone go bona gore naga ye ke
ya batho ba mebala ka moka. Ke a leboga. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.]
(Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, I greet the hon Members of Parliament in the
great name of the DA. Our Constitution states that South Africa belongs to
all its citizens. It acknowledges that all people are equal before the law.
It also acknowledges that people have suffered a lot under the previous
regime and seeks to redress that. It acknowledges freedom for all the
people in our country. It respects all the people who fought, worked for as
well as built our country.

On Heritage Day we celebrate who we are and where we come from. It is a day
celebrated by all the people to exhibit their art, cultures, beliefs,
music, dress, literature and the various recreational activities. We would
like everyone to celebrate this day in happiness and also embrace all other
people’s cultures and beliefs. We should happily celebrate our heritage as
people of diverse cultures co-operating with each other.

Some people define heritage as a natural or birth-related issue or to get
an ancestral understanding through past experiences and history.
Celebrating Heritage Day should be about embracing all South African races.
We have to respect and acknowledge our differences in beliefs, cultures,
languages, food and the areas in which we live. Our heritage is the whole
nation’s wealth and not for a particular race alone. The national anthem
comprises diverse languages making it enjoyable and acceptable to all the
citizens of South Africa. We must do everything in our power to encourage
people to embrace each other and embrace this as our national asset. This
will brighten the future of the forthcoming generation.

Let us embrace the different cultures. Let us take advantage of this day to
support one another and to build one peaceful and prosperous nation. South
Africa belongs to all the people and its different parties. The DA wishes
peace and prosperity to all the people who will be celebrating these
events. We would like to see all the people taking advantage of this
opportunity to hold hands and to promote their diverse cultures as we are
all South Africans. We will also like to show that we love this country. It
is our own country, after all. We want everyone to be aware that this
country belongs to people from diverse racial groups. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mnu M R SONTO: Mhlalingaphambili, malungu abekekileyo ale Ndlu yoWiso-
mthetho, mandinibhotise ngale mvakwemini. Ndiyafuna ukuyicinezela into
yokuba uKhongolozi akathatheli kuye wonke umsebenzi, koko into ayenzayo
kukukhomba indlela, nto leyo engumsebenzi wethu. Abantu mabangoyiki
ukukhonjiswa indlela.

Kambe umhla esiwubhiyozelayo ngowama-24 kule yoMsintsi kowama-2006.
Namhlanje into esiyenzayo siyanqoma, sigabula izigcawu, ukwenzela ukuba
mhla ngezipheko wonke umntu abe ewazi umcimbi. Intsusa-mabandla ke ithi
izazi zithi xa ufuna ukucima umntu kwimbali, menze atyeshele imvelaphi
yakhe, izithethe namasiko akhe kwakunye nolwimi aluthethayo.

Ilunda esinalo xa siqingqe kule ndawo namhlanje lelokuba bawa phantsi
bezama ababefuna ukuba silahle iilwimi, amasiko kunye nezithethe zethu.
Umhla weqhayiya lemveli siwuqaphela ngokuzingca kwethu ngobumbejembeje
bamasiko neenkcubeko zethu ezahlukileyo. Sahlukile nje, kodwa siyazi ukuba
singoobani yaye singamani.

Akukho namnye umntu apha kule Ndlu onokuyiphikisa into yokuba noxa sibanye
njengesizwe, sahlukene ngezithethe, inkcubeko namasiko. Inkolo yobuntu
eAfrika yeyokuba umntu ngumntu ngabantu. Mazi ummelwane wakho. Yile nto
namhlanje sinemvuselelo karhulumente ethi, Batho Pele ngesiSuthu.

Intsusa-mabandla eyintlungu yeyokuba ubuntu bethu eAfrika esezantsi
bakhukuliswa baze banyhashwa yimpatho-mbi yamaNgesi, nawayebona izithethe
namasiko aseAfrika njengasemva nangenabuntu. Ufake ityuwa enxebeni umbuso
wamaBhulu wenza abamhlophe bacinge ukuba bangabantu bodwa, batshintsha
yonke into bayithiya ngamaqhawe abo ocalucalulo, basenzela oonomgogwana,
benza ukuba sithethe iilwimi zabo kodwa bengafuni ukuzithetha ezethu.

Bathi abantu: “Kwanele!”, sawuqinisa ke ngoko umzabalazo wokulwela isidima
sabantu. Yile nto ke namhlanje sithetha ngeqhayiya lemveli.

Iqhayiya lethu lemveli elityebileyo nelahlukileyo ngokobuntu bethu,
linamandla anokwakha isizwe ukuba besinokuncedisana sisonke. Luphina
uncwadi lwethu, bantu? Yayaphi na imibongo nemibengo? Zayaphi na iintsomi?
Uphi umculo nomngqungqo wesiNtu?

Ewe, siyazi ukuba umculo wethu yintlanganisela yeentlobo ezahlukeneyo,
kwaye intlantsi ekhoyo yomculo yenkcenkceshelwe ngumonde wombuso lo
uphetheyo nowamanxila eengoma asashiyekileyo. Masiqhube ke ngoko senze
ukuba umculo wethu wonwabise, uthandeke kwaye ube nengeniso kwimilonji
nemilonjikazi.

Eli thuba lenziwe yinkqubo yokukhula ngokukhawuleza kophuhliso ekhokelwa
nguSekela-Mongameli. Le nkqubo mayisenze sakhe isizwe ngomculo.

Mhlalingaphambili, xa kuvuywa kwaNtu kuyaculwa; xa kukhonzwa kuyaculwa; xa
kufiwe kuyaculwa; xa kusiyiwa edabini kwaNtu kuyaculwa; kanti naxa
kuthandanwa kuyaculwa. Koko kucula ngolwimi lwakho ke okugqithisa umyalezo
kwabanye abantu.

Sisuka kwimbali apho amaNgesi namaBhulu ayephethe umbuso ngaphambili
ayengazifuni ezethu iingoma kuba esithi azinazo iinothi. Siyakhumbula ukuba
imarabi yeminyaka ye-1930 yile isivezele ooHugh Masekela kunye nabanye,
izikhulu zomngqungqo. Ngamaqhawe ethu ke lawo kumngqungo apha eMzantsi
Afrika. Kwaye ndinqwenela ukuba loo ntlantsi ingacimi kweli.

Iingoma zamihla ngedabi lenkululeko mazingapheli. Umculo wamaBhulu kwakunye
nombhaqanga mawuhlale uhlaziyekile kuba le yimiculo yaseAfrika, ngakumbi
ngeli xesha lale mibhiyozo. Yile miculo eyabonakalisa ukuba kwiyantlukwano
yethu simanyene kanjani sisisizwe saseMzantsi Afrika.

Xa sigxininisa kumongo wokubhiyoza kwethu othi masiphuthume imvelaphi yethu
nobuthina kunye neqhayiya lemveli, siya kube siqhawula amakhonkco
obukhoboka amiliselwa kuthi yiminyaka ngeminyaka yengcinezelo.

Phambi kokuba ndihlabe ikhwelo, ndifuna ukuthi iyavuyisa into yokuba sibe
sithetha ulwimi olunye namhlanje. Eyona nto isenza ukuba sizazi njengabantu
boMzantsi Afrika yiyantlukwano esinayo, kukumanyana sahlukene nje.
Ngelishwa, ilungu elibekekileyo uBhici alikho. Kwilungu elibekekileyo
uSpies ndingathanda ukuthi, wonke umntu walapha eMzantsi Afrika ungowalaph’
ekhaya kwaye makaziphathe njengomntu walapha. Ukuba akaziphathi njengomntu
walapha, siza kumkrokrela ukuba ngumgqakhwe.

Ukubangaba ungowaseAfrika, ziphathe njengomAfrika, siza kukuwola ngezandla
zobubele. Kodwa ukubangaba uneengqondo zaseYurophu, siza kukuthumela
eYurophu.

Ndifuna ke ngoko ukuba ndihlabe ikhwelo kuthi sonke babandakanyekayo kulo
msebenzi wokubhiyozela lo mhla weqhayiya lethu lemveli, ukuba siwupholele
umculo walapha ekhaya, noya kuthi udlalwe kule mibhiyozo.

Masenze imithetho eza kuqinisa, ikhuthaze iimvumi zomthonyama zazi ukuba
ukucula yimpangelo eyonwabisa abantu nekungqiyanywe ngayo nelilinge
lokwakha isizwe. Singazibona izakhono zoonyana neentombi zethu ezifihlwe
yintswelangqesho apha ekhaya nakwilizwe ngokubanzi. Oku sikwenzela ingomso
eliqaqambileyo, elethu kwakunye nelesizalo sethu. Masihambe ke ngoko siye
kubhiyozela umhla wethu weqhayiya lemveli. Ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr M R SONTO: Chairperson, Hon members of the National Assembly, let me
greet you this afternoon. I want to stress that the ANC is not monopolising
the work, instead it is leading, which is our duty. People must not be
afraid to be led.
In fact, we are celebrating the 24th September 2006. Today we are taking
the first taste, doing an introduction, so that when everything is ready
everybody will be aware about what is going on. The original belief of the
wise says if you want to wipe out a people’s history, make them disconnect
themselves from their roots, their customs and traditions and the language
they speak.

The pride we have when we stand here today is testimony to the fact that
those who wanted us to neglect our languages, customs and traditions have
failed. We commemorate Heritage Day by being proud of our diverse cultures.
Diverse as we are, we know who we are and what our roots are.

Nobody in this House can deny the fact that we are united as a nation but
have diverse cultures, customs and traditions. The African belief about
humanity is that a person is a person through other people. Know your
neighbour. That is why we have the government’s revival principle that says
Batho Pele, People First, in Sesotho.

A painful reason for this is that our humanity in Southern Africa was wiped
out and undermined by the ill-treatment by the British, who regarded
African customs and traditions as backward and inhuman. The Boer regime
rubbed salt into the wounds, making whites think that they were superior to
other people and they changed everything, naming things after their
apartheid heroes. They established homelands for us, forcing us to speak
their languages while they had no interest in learning ours.

People said: “Enough!” We then intensified the struggle for people’s
dignity. That is why today we talk about heritage. Our rich and diverse
heritage which reflects our society, has the power to build a nation if we
can all join hands together. People, where is our literature? Where are our
traditional praise poems and short stories? Where are the folktales? Where
is African traditional music and rhythm?

We know that our music is a mixture of different genres, the present spark
of music has been nurtured by the zeal of the state and the remaining music
lovers. Let us continue to make our music enjoyable, to be appreciated and
generate an income for our musicians.

This opportunity is created by the Asgisa programme led by Deputy
President. This programme must encourage us to build the country through
music.

Chairperson, according to African culture when we celebrate, we sing; when
we worship, we sing; when there is a funeral, we sing; when we go to war,
we sing; and even when we are in love, we sing. By singing in your own
language you convey a message to other people.

We come from the past where the Boers and British were in power, previously
they rejected our songs saying they did not have notes. We remember that
the marabi music of the 1930’s produced Hugh Masekela and others, well-
known stars of jazz music. Those are our stars of jazz music in South
Africa. I wish that spark will not die out in this country.

Songs of the days of the liberation struggle must be retained. Boeremusiek,
Afrikaans folk music, and traditional music must be revived because these
are genres of African music, especially at the time of these celebrations.
It is these music genres that have shown how united we are in our diversity
as a nation in South Africa.

When we stress the gist of our celebration which says, let us bring back
our heritage, our identity, we will be unlocking the chains of slavery
inculcated in us by the legacy of oppression.

Before I make an appeal, it is a pleasure to notice that we speak one
language. What makes us aware of our identity as people of South Africa is
our diversity; it is to be united in our diversity. Unfortunately hon Bici
is not here. To hon Spies I want to say, everybody here in South Africa
belongs here and must behave accordingly. If he does not behave as it is
required we will suspect that he is a foreigner.
If you are an African behave like an African and we will welcome you with
open arms. If you have a European mindset we will send you back to Europe.

I want to appeal to us all who are involved in this activity of celebrating
our heritage to enjoy our traditional music that will be played at the
celebrations.

Let us pass laws that will empower and encourage our traditional musicians
to realise that singing is an employment opportunity that brings pleasure
to people, on which we depend, and an initiative towards nation-building.
We can identify the talents of our sons and daughters that are hidden by
unemployment in the community and the country at large. We are doing this
for a better future for ourselves and the coming generations. Let us go and
celebrate our heritage day. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 17:18.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bills to National House of Traditional Leaders:


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Children’s Amendment Bill [B 19 – 2006]
    (National Council of Provinces – sec 76) to the National House of
    Traditional Leaders, which must, within 30 days from the date of this
    referral, make any comments it wishes to make.

2.    Translations of Bills submitted
     (1)    The Minister of Communications


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Posdienste [W 22 – 2006] (Nasionale
             Vergadering – art 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Postal
         Services Amendment Bill [B 22 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
         75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

      (1)   The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 22 September 2006, in accordance with
         Rule 234:

            (a)  Lotteries Amendment Bill (Mr L B Labuschagne)

            In accordance with Rule 235 the legislative proposal has been
         referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
         Proposals and Special Petitions.

2.    Referral of Bills to Committees

      (1)   The Civil Union Bill [B 26 – 2006], introduced on 12 September
         2006, is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs for
         consideration and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      a) The Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2006-2007
         [RP 215-2006].

     b) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 2 – Parliament for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements of Vote 2 for 2005-2006 [RP 222-2006].


     c) The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the
        National Council of Provinces, as co-chairpersons of the Joint
        Rules Committee, present the First Report of the Joint Rules
        Committee for 2006, dated 24 March 2006, as follows:

CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - insert T060921e-insert1 – PAGES 2085-2086

2.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 8 – National Treasury for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 8 for 2005-2006 [RP 128-2006].

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Service (SARS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 167-2006].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Statistics South
        Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 13 for 2005-2006 [RP 57-2006].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of Southern
        Africa Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     e) Activities Report of the Development Fund of the Development Bank
        of Southern Africa Limited for 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Transport

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National Roads
         Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
         144-2006].


      b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Rail Commuter
         Corporation Limited (SARRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
         the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
         [RP 155-2006].


      c) Report of the Regulating Committee of the Airports Company of South
         Africa and Air Navigation Services Company for 2005-2006.


      d) Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road Transport
         Agency (C-BRTA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 126-2006].


      e) Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and Navigation
         Services Company Limited (ATNS) for 2005-2006, including the Report
         of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
         2006.


      f) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Maritime
         Safety Authority (SAMSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements (including the Maritime
         Fund) for 2005-2006 [RP 110-2006].


      g) Report and Financial Statements of the Railway Safety Regulator
         (RSR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
         the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 200-2006].


      h) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Search and
         Rescue Organisation (SASAR) for 2005-2006.

4.    The Minister of Social Development

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 18 – Department of Social
         Development for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements of Vote 18 for 2005-2006 [RP
         208-2006].

5.    The Minister of Correctional Services

      a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 20 – Department of
         Correctional Services for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
         Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 20 for 2005-
         2006 [RP 206-2006].

6.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Proclamation No R.25 published in Government Gazette No 28973 dated
        27 June 2006: Commencement of the Regulation of Interception of
        Communications and Provision of Communication-related Information
        Act, 2002 (Act No 70 of 2002) Amendment and Repeal of
        Proclamations.


     b) Proclamation No R.33 published in Government Gazette No 29115 dated
        11 August 2006: Referral of Matters to Existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).

7.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs
      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products Export
         Control Board (PPECB) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
         Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Request for approval by the National Assembly of the exclusion of
        the remainder of Portion 1 of the Farm Henderson 410 from the Addo
        Elephant Park in terms of section 21(1)(a) of the National
        Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (No 57 of
        2003).


     b) Explanatory memorandum on the proposed exclusion of the remainder
        of Portion 1 of Farm Henderson 410 from the Addo Elephant Park in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
        Act, 2003 (No 57 of 2003).


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism for consideration and report.

     c) Response from Ingonyama Trust Board to the First Report of the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts on the Ingonyama Trust Board,
        as adopted by the House on 20 June 2006.

        Referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA











REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON ETHICS AND MEMBERS’ INTERESTS ON THE
INVESTIGATION REGARDING THE ALLEGED NON_DISCLOSURE BY MR DAA OLIFANT MP. 12
SEPTEMBER 2006.





Background

On the 19 July 2006, Mr LB Labuschagne MP submitted to the Chairperson of
the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members Interests a request that the
Committee investigate the alleged non-disclosure by Mr DAA Olifant of
interests in:
   a) Atlantis Education Development Trust,
   b) Quantum Leap and
   c) Global Dynamix,

In his letter he also requested that the Committee follow the Court
Proceedings with regard to MAN Ferrostaal and Mr Olifant, and pointed out
that the Committee should be mindful of the fact that Mr Olifant was facing
charges on the misuse of the travel vouchers.

Investigation.
Mr Olifant disclosed his interests in Atlantis Educational Development
Trust.  Refer to 2005 and 2006 disclosure.
Global Dynamix is not registered at CIPRO but was disclosed by Mr Olifant
in 2005, He did not disclose Quantum Leap.

In his 2006 disclosure dated 5 June 2006, Mr Olifant disclosed his
interests in Quantum Leap but not Global Dynamix.

In Mr Olifant's letter of explanation to the Registrar, he states that
Global Dynamix is the trading name of Quantum Leap. He further explains
that these companies are one entity. He also explains that Atlantis
Economic Development Trust (AEDT) was a 61% equity partner in Quantum Leap
746 trading as Global Dynamix.

In support of his response, Mr Olifant submitted correspondence from
Levandal and Associates, the Auditors for Quantum Leap, confirm Mr
Olifant’s response that Quantum Leap Investments traded as Global Dynamix.


The Auditor also submitted a copy of the company letterhead as further
proof that Quantum Leap traded as Global Dynamix,
Finding
 With regard to the allegations of non- disclosure, of

   a) Atlantis Education Development Trust,
   b) Quantum Leap and
   c) Global Dynamix,

The Committee finds that Mr Olifant has disclosed his interests in these
entities ; and therefore there is no breach of the Code.

On the matter of the court case between MAN Ferrostaal and Mr Olifant as
well as the case concerning the alleged misuse of travel vouchers, these
are outside the mandate of the Committee. As in any other case, if there is
information pertaining to any breach of the Code, the Committee will
consider it in terms of the Joint Rules of Parliament.

 The Committee also expressed concern with the tone and manner in which Mr
Labuchagne put forward his complaint.  The Committee is of the view that
while
Mr Labuschagne is within his rights to lodge a complaint, however they
believe that the tone and content of the correspondence undermines the
integrity of the Member.

The Committee suggests that Mr Labuschagne apologise to Mr Olifant .

This report is tabled for consideration.



__________________________              ___________________
Chairperson of Joint Committee               12 September 2006
on Ethics and Members’ Interests.

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6B - 2006] (National Assembly – sec
    75), dated 20 September 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
    subject of the Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [6B – 2006] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the JTM as a
    section 75 Bill, reports that it has passed the Bill with amendments [B
    6C – 2006].


2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the Filling of
    Vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
    South Africa, dated 21 September 2006.

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
    recommendation by the Minister of Communications to appoint the
    following persons to serve on the Council in terms of section 5 of the
    Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Act, 2000 (Act No
    13 of 2000, as amended), recommends that the National Assembly approves
    the appointment of the following candidates to the Council:

    Dr AJ Barendse, Ms M Mohlala, Mr R Nkuna, Ms B Ntombela and Prof JC
    Rooyen.
    Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Housing on the Annual Report of
    the Department of Housing and its entities 2004/2005, dated 20
    September 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Housing, having considered and examined
    the Annual Reports of the Department of Housing and Thubelisha
    Homes, Social Housing Foundation (SHF), Peoples Housing Partnership
    Trust (PHPT), Rural Housing Loan Fund (RHLF), and the National
    Urban Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) as well as
    Financial Statements, referred to it, reports that it has concluded
    its deliberations thereon.


    Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
    Tourism on International Study Tour to Brazillia and Sao-Paulo dated 19
    September 2006:

1.    Introduction and background

The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism having
undertaken an International Study to Brazil and Sao Paulo from 14 to 25
April 2006, reports to Parliament as follows:

On the 15 November 2005, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
and Tourism, under the Chairpersonship of Mr L Zita, took a decision to
undertake an international study tour to Brazil during the first term of
parliamentary period to learn about the aspects of Brazil’s environmental
issues that are most relevant to the South African context and oversight
function of Brazilian Parliament. Because of the preparation for local
government election, the study tour was undertaken during the constituency
period from the 14 –25 April 2006.

2.    Objectives

The main objectives of the visit were to learn about the following issues:

1. Environmental and biodiversity programmes;
2. Management of marine and coastal development;
3. Mechanisms and strategies on climate change and air pollution
   prevention;
4. Implementation of Kyoto Protocol;
5. Implementation of waste management policy and programmes, Eco-tourism
   and sustainable development; and
6. Oversight role of the Brazilian Parliament on matters related to
   environment and tourism.

3.    Delegation

A multi- party delegation of the Portfolio Committee under the leadership
of Chairperson, Mr L Zita, (ANC) included Mr DAA Olifant (ANC); Ms R
Ndzanga (ANC);  Mr M Swart  (DA); and  Ms C Zikalala (IFP). The delegation
was accompanied by the support staff, Mr T M Manele (Committee Secretary)
and Dr F Khan (Committee Researcher).

4.    Overview of the study tour

The delegation had formal meetings with the Acting Head of the Mission,
Executive Secretary of Ministry of Environment and visits to National
Parks, Institute of Environmental and Renewal Natural Research, Natural
Center for Prevention and Fight against Forest Fires, Center of Remote
Sensoring, Natural Center of Research, Protect and Handling of Carves,
National Parks and tours to the city and in informal settlement.

The interaction with the Ministry and departments provided a platform for
exploring how Brazil was affected by air pollution, strategies put in place
to minimize air pollution and climate change, promotion of forest
protection, renewable energy technology, state of aqua- culture and mari-
culture, domestic marine poaching problems and challenges related to
coastal development, urbanization and congestion.

5.    Meeting with Executive Secretary to the Ministry of Environment

The Secretary informed the delegation that Brazilian environmental policy
has been undergoing development for over three decades. Its first
institutional landmark occurred in 1973, when Brazil created its first
Environmental Management Body, within the Presidency of the Republic.

After a period marked by government command and control actions and by
initiatives of the fledging organized civil society, in 1981 the National
Environment Policy and system were established, together with the National
Environmental Council to seek the participation of civil society entities.

As a way to boost the sustainable use of forests and combat public land
deforestation, the delegation was informed that the Ministry of Environment
has drafted a Bill for Public Forest Management sanctioned by the President
on March 3rd 2006. This law establishes the rules for the sustainable use
of public forests and it also created the Brazilian forest service and the
national fund for forest development.

This new legislation defines three forms of public forest management for
sustainable production:

   a) the creation of protected areas for sustainable use, such as national
      forest;
   b) destination for community use such as extractive reserves; and
   c) forest concession contracts based on public bid processes and with
      payment for the exploration of forest products and services.

The progress made in respect of biodiversity, the delegation was further
informed that the Minister of Environment in partnership with the Ministry
of Agrarian Development have implemented 11 Centers for Agro-biodiversity
management which included the benefits of 5 thousand family farmers settled
by the land reform, training of farmers and technicians on sustainable use
of agro-biodiversity. The concern about the release of genetically modified
organisms to the environment has led the Ministry of Environment to hold
four capacity building workshops on GMO bio safety, involving approximately
200 inspectors, researchers, teachers and farmers.

Some of the major biodiversity programmes reported during the briefing
included the review of official list and launching of a book of endangered
Brazilian Fauna, listing 663 species, organization of symposium on alien
invasive species which had participation of seven countries in order to
improve the management of the use of aquatic biodiversity, development of
the project on integrated management of aquatic biodiversity, collection of
data on current status on biomes and, the launching of first edition of the
Atlas on Coral Reefs in Brazilian Protected Areas.

In order to lower the biodiversity loss, the Ministry of Environment has
established national plan for protected areas. The main objectives of this
plan is to establish by 2015 a broad system of protected areas which are
ecologically representative and effectively managed in order to ensure
access as well as fair and equitable sharing of costs and benefits stemming
from conservation measures. Its main goal is to maintain a focus on the
national system of protected areas, indigenous lands and lands of the
descendents of former slaves and the creation and consolidation of areas
with international recognition such as the Biosphere Reserves and the
Natural World Heritage Sites.

Some of the policy development reported to date relate to the drafting of
policy on protection, conservation, recovery and sustainable use of
biodiversity in indigenous lands by the inter-ministerial group comprised
of representatives from the Ministry of Environment, members from Institute
of Environment and Renewable Natural Research and, indigenous
organizations.

On the projects that are currently in place, the delegation was further
informed that efforts to improve the quality of water, particularly in the
Brazilian semi-arid region, have resulted in the development of projects
such as combating deforestation, freshwater, and the program to cleanup
river basins. Throughout the country, the government is protecting more
than 15 million hectares of public lands by establishing protected areas.
The government has also invested in number of projects such as clean up
technology, deforestation, marine and coastal management, biodiversity
conservation and management, environmental quality and territorial
management. Though coordination is at the National Congress and Water
Resource Council, the Government has over the past three years approved a
set of rules, resolutions and laws that established new regulatory
framework and procedures to regulate the activities that endanger the
environment.

In the international arena, the actions of the Ministry of Environment to
implement multilateral environmental agreements have been noteworthy,
particularly with reference to the biological diversity, climate change and
desertification conventions, the commission on sustainable development, the
United Nations forum on forests and agreements relating to chemical safety.


6.    National Parks

The delegation undertook the on-site visit to Chapada Dos Veadeiros
National Park located 260 km far from Brasilia.  The delegation learnt that
partnership with communities adjacent to the park has been established to
promote job creation through the training of locals as tour guides.  The
other lesson the delegation learnt was the promotion of local communities
to become entrepreneurs in tourisms restaurants, crafts and curios.

The second on-site visit was conducted at Brazil’s National Park. This
National Park was created on November 29, 1961 by federal decree 241, and
its purpose is the protection of wild areas of biological, scenic,
cultural, educational and recreational relevance.  In spite of being an
urban park and being subject to severe pressure by human action on its 117
km perimeter and on its interior, the park houses animals and plants
typical of the Brazilian savannah.

The park houses a great variety of animal life such as anteaters, tapirs,
manned wolves, foxes, wild cats and jaguars. In addition to the animals,
some birds such as woodpeckers, Brazilian sparrows and hawks are also kept.
Reptiles such as lizards, alligators, rattlesnakes and coral snakes are
also present, as well as amphibians. The Park has also created an
environmental education programme that provides activities to cater for the
public in general and for the park’s personnel. The courses offered to
teachers and the community, are based on the theoretical information and
interdisciplinary practices. The park possesses a state –of the art
management plan and is the heart of the subject for research on various
fields of environmental studies.

7.    Overview of the Institute of Environmental and Renewable Natural
    Research

This Brazilian Institute of Environmental and Renewable Natural Research is
responsible for the licensing of large polluting potential projects,
nuclear activities and the exploration of deep-water petroleum and gas.
Through its scientific and technological innovations, the institute has
developed and updated a system for reading geo-referenced data on the
Amazons forest. This technological innovation and adoption has enabled the
institute to delimit with precision deforested areas and to assess the
incidence of fire, deforestation, irregular mining activities and
invasions.

The institute has established twenty- one specialized centres to carry out
studies, technical and scientific research and to provide information on
public policies. During the visit, the delegation had an opportunity to
visit specialized centres in the areas of environmental information, marine
and estuarine fishing, forest management, remote sensing, prevention and
control of forest fires that rely on scientific efforts of nationally and
internationally renowned researchers. In addition to the above specialized
centres, other centres visited included national centre for the prevention
and fight against forest fires, centre for orchids, ornamental, medicinal
and aromatic plants, national center of research, protection and handling
of caves and, laboratory of forest products.

Some of the environmental management lessons learnt during the visit on
specialized centres of the above-mentioned Brazilian Institute of
Environmental and Renewable Natural Research included; the use of research
findings to develop strategies related to forest fire fighting and control,
development of guide for environmental licensing of petroleum exploration
activities, environmental impact studies of the infrastructure projects,
development of information system on environmental licensing which works
through the internet warranting better organization of the internal
administrative routines and higher transparency of the process.

8.    City Tour in Sao Paulo

On the 24 of April 2006, the delegation had a city tour in Sao Paulo, one
of the third largest city in the world with 16 million inhabitants. The
main objectives of the city tour were to expose the delegation the dynamics
of urbanization, informal settlement and traffic congestion and control.
The delegation also had an opportunity to visit and observe tourists
attraction places such as municipal market, theatre, and metropolitan
cathedral and mark zero.

The tour included driving through the poor and under-developed areas and
outskirts of Sao Paulo. The delegation also travelled along the Avenida
Paulista, the heart of the city and experiencing traffic congestion and
also touches the industrial area of Santo Amaro during peak hours.

9.    Conclusion

No draft programme was received in advance of the study tour. The programme
was only received when the delegation arrived in Brasilia. As a result, no
additions or changes could be made to the programme, such as a meeting with
Members of Congress (the Brazilian Parliament).

The programme only covered three days due to the difficulty of arranging
appointments during a week cut short by Easter Monday and a Brazilian
national holiday on Friday (21 April).

However, since this information was imparted to the delegation only on
arrival and the first formal meeting at the South African Embassy was only
held on Tuesday (18 April), this was the earliest opportunity to make
changes to the programme. Since it did not appear possible to extend the
programme in Brasilia, it was decided to continue the tour in Sao Paulo on
21 April, after the conclusion of the programme in Brasilia.

Due to the short notice, Embassy officials in Sao Paulo were unable to
arrange appointments with local or State (provincial) officials. Instead,
two tours (led by tour guides) focusing on the problems posed by
urbanization, industrialization and coastal development were arranged.
While these tours were interesting and certainly served to highlight some
of the developmental challenges faced by Brazil, the value of the tours was
limited since no officials were available to answer questions or offer
additional information.

10.   Recommendations

Having undertaken an international study tour to Brazil, the Committee
recommends as follows:

   a) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must during the
      2006 third term of parliamentary period come and brief the committee
      on India- Brazil and South Africa Agreement and progress made in
      respect of project on environment and tourism;


   b) The Department of Foreign Affairs must in future ensure that proper
      systems are put in place to facilitate coordination of international
      visits in accordance with the objectives of the parliamentary
      committee; and

   c) In future, the Office of the Mission, should have veto right to advice
      the Parliamentary Committees not to proceed with envisage study tour
      if all logistical arrangements in terms of the objectives are not
      properly arranged.

Report to be considered.

