---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-24
---

WEDNESDAY, 24 MAY 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS –see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 28 — Housing:

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Madam Speaker, I have never had the honour before
of standing here to address the kind of distinguished visitors that we have
today, ranging from the Deputy President of the country to the president of
Shack Dwellers International, from the bold 702 to the beautiful Miss South
Africa, from CEOs of banks to those who owe banks such as ourselves here
which, of course, include my colleagues as well. I feel extremely
privileged to stand here.

Madam Speaker, hon Members of Parliament, invited guests, ladies and
gentlemen, and so we come to the beginning of the autumn of our lives - the
season of mellow fruitfulness, full of promise, full of hope, conspiring
with the sun on how to load and bless. We have come full circle, and as we
stand here we can account for a remarkable year, one in which we were able
to get to this point tested to the limit.

For the past two to three days, the media has carried gruesome stories of
the plight of those who would otherwise be dependent on us for shelter. As
the mercury plummets, we know fires follow shortly thereafter, and tragedy
once again plays itself out on the front pages of our media, on our
screens, and, as though by some evil vengeance, the gods have decided to
open up the skies in the North West and in the Eastern Cape. And, again, it
is the poorest of us in the informal settlements who bears the brunt of
this.

We don’t need these tragedies to emphasise the urgency of the challenge we
face. In a country such as ours, it should not be like this. It is at times
like this that I’m convinced that we took the right decision to set a
target to rid ourselves of homelessness to ensure that it will not always
be like this in the future.

We gather here knowing that, owing to policies that this government is
implementing, we are experiencing the country’s longest period of expansion
and growth, enabling us to respond to increasing urbanisation and
increasing homelessness. Through the amount of resources the government has
been appropriating and spending, and ably guided by the Deputy President
through Asgisa, we hope that this Vote will represent a landmark.

Our expenditure has doubled from R4,2 billion in 2003 to R9,5 billion in
the 2008 financial year. This increase is remarkable indeed, but the
enormity of the challenge depicted by the backlog in annual household
growth still remains large and daunting, requiring from us to reach out
constantly and find ways of working with the private sector and with our
communities to ensure that we can shoulder this problem together. For,
while we are mobilising state resources to undertake the task of providing
shelter, we also have to mobilise the rest of society vigorously and
constantly to take its part.

It was with a sense of real achievement and pride that we co-hosted a very
successful Slum/Shack Dwellers International conference that ended at the
weekend here in Cape Town, and at which we were able to forge a formal
relationship with those communities whose daily lives are plagued by the
elements, by insecurity and poverty.

Together we forged a new way of doing things, and we have formed a
partnership built on an understanding that we, each one of us, have a
responsibility towards changing the fortunes of the poor. It was a high
point of our time in Housing. And the message is out there: We are in this
together. We have pledged a sum of R185 million, which represents 5 000
subsidies, to the SA Federation of the Homeless.

These people have decided that they are going to call themselves Fedup –
the Federation of the Urban Poor. I indicated to them that after pledging
R185 million, they could not continue to call themselves Fedup. [Laughter.]
We have found an ally in them that will help mobilise our beneficiary
communities to understand that they have a responsibility; that they can
take up arms against poverty and join the government in this crusade; and
that it is, in fact, in their interest to do so. Together we can do this
much faster. At the bottom we need to create and emphasise a culture of
joint responsibility and, equally importantly, inculcate a culture of
saving.

The conference was held close on the heels of the consummation of yet
another exhilarating partnership with 702. This courtship between two
unlikely partners, ourselves as government and the media, has been “going
on for some time” as you would say in common parlance. We have just
successfully launched a pioneering project that was a response to our
challenge to build 702 houses. Between now and December, together with
First National Bank, they will have built 702 houses. [Applause.]

We are an amazing nation. [Applause.] I have no doubt about that. I
rediscover this fact time and again each time I experience this kind of
gesture. It reaffirms my confidence in us as a people, with incredible
commitment to others. Talk Radio 702 with its sister station, Cape Talk,
has been extra ordinarily supportive. And the cherry on top – not
literally, of course – is the support they have brought along in the form
of Miss South Africa herself, a student of urban planning.

In the Budget Vote last year we indicated that we would seek to mobilise
all sectors of our society around a social contract that would serve as a
basis for our collective efforts. We hosted an exhilarating housing indaba
held in Cape Town in September. Government and civil society – including
banks and property developers – agreed to work in concert to accelerate
housing delivery in order to address the housing backlog. A significant
outcome of this indaba was the engagement with private developers on a quid
pro quo basis for an inclusionary housing framework.

Following the indaba and in the spirit of engaging government’s delivery
concerns, Sapoa; the SA Property Owners Association; the Chamber of Mines;
the Banking Association of SA and the construction sector entered into
negotiations with the Department of Housing, combining the goals of
delivery and inclusionary housing as the ultimate aims.

This newly formed collaboration resulted in the signatories of the Social
Housing Contract for Rapid Housing Delivery agreeing “to ensure that
commercially driven housing development above an X amount” – the amount to
be determined later – will spend Y percentage – a percentage yet to be
determined – of the total project value in the housing subsidy category,
details of which were to be further explored with the sectors concerned,
taking cognisance of international best practice.”

We can now happily announce that we have committed ourselves to a pilot
project with a private developer who, together with the bank, is willing to
test this model for us in KwaZulu-Natal. This is a very important pilot
project for us, because we are convinced it will show any sceptic out there
that this is possible. It will also show us the limits and possibilities of
what can be done. We might also use this pilot project to determine the X
and Y variables.

In our interactions during the social contract conference, it became clear
to us that, from the perspective of developers, we, as the government, are
a major stumbling block in accelerated delivery. We have taken note of this
and, together with my colleagues - the main culprit, of course, being poor
Minister Van Schalkwyk - we are working on this. Minister Van Schalkwyk has
recently reviewed the EIA regulations to ensure that the process can be
expedited.

For our part in Housing, we have established a special chief directorate
whose responsibility it is to provide support to the sector to ensure that
blockages, such as those currently experienced, are unblocked. This is the
extent of our commitment, because we firmly believe that we can save the
private sector a great deal of the money currently lost in waiting for
approval.

We hope that they, in turn, will use this percentage of the saving by
ploughing it back into a mutual social responsibility, which is housing. We
are hopeful that by the first quarter of next year we will be able to
introduce a Bill that will be based on this social contract and the
experience of inclusionary housing in other countries. In the meantime, we
are open to the private sector to come on board as we determine the values
of X and Y.

Having concluded our policies, we have dedicated our energies to mobilising
support around ourselves. We have made significant progress in our work on
this front, and we hope that for this coming year we will consolidate the
relationship with two other important stakeholders – the religious sector
and the NGOs which have been very supportive of our initiatives. We would
like them to form a firm partnership with us with measurable goals,
especially around social housing.

The other very significant sector is traditional leaders who are an
essential partner for us, especially as we seek to revisit and consolidate
our rural housing policy. The provision of rural housing is an important
housing delivery process, and, in order to increase the scale of delivery
in this sector, a review of the current subsidy mechanism has been
undertaken in an attempt to establish a relevant and appropriate subsidy
mechanism that will align the housing programme with the Communal Land
Rights Bill.

It would be necessary to review the current rural environment and the
current delivery mechanism together with various other stakeholders. We
therefore seek the support of our traditional leaders in this. In this
quest, we will be holding a rural housing indaba with them by the third
quarter of this year. We sincerely hope they will respond positively to our
overtures.

On the small, but long overdue, matter of the origination of the
R52 billion, Madam Deputy President, I am happy to announce that we, the
banks, and the Financial Services Council have finally reached an agreement
in terms of the Memorandum of Understanding that I concluded with the banks
last year. [Applause.] We are on track. The only problem we have with the
Banking Association is that they’re convinced I can’t count. They seem to
think that at the last count it was R40 billion; I’m very happy to settle
for R40 billion. But we are on track. I called it a “small matter” because
the banks and ourselves have agreed that in line with the Financial Sector
Charter, we will now proceed to the second phase.

The Banking Association has committed to a substantial increase for this
phase, which amount will still be determined in due course. And, of course,
true to their nature, this time the banks are sticking on a number of
issues and we are working on these. Finally, we have summited; we have
summited the hurdle.

So what does this mean for ordinary South Africans listening out there?
“What’s in this for us?” they may ask. It means that if you earn a
household income of between R1 500 and R7 000 per month, you qualify for
the joint assistance of the banks and ourselves, subject of course to
whether your credit rating allows for that.

The department has embarked on a venture to educate the public on how they
can assess whether they may qualify and, further having done that, how they
may access this. I am reliably informed, in fact, that the banks have
already loaned out an impressive amount. As you can imagine, this is a huge
relief for me. Access to housing finance has been a huge impediment.
[Applause.]

Today housing delivery is occurring in a context of an economy whose
fundamentals are acclaimed to be well grounded. The “age of hope” the
President speaks of is beginning to be felt in the residential market, as a
result of the contribution we are all seeking to make. The inflation
outlook is projected to be fairly positive, the interest rates have been
sustained at low levels, the economy has begun to absorb more entrants in
the labour market, with the rand-dollar exchange rate being stabilised for
a long time — factors that significantly impact on the spending of some of
the critical commodities constituting input cost to the basic needs of
households we seek to assist.

All these factors have contributed to increased disposable household income
and increased the affordability levels for access to housing for
individuals. This positive economic outlook should and is being utilised by
all role-players in the housing sector. I’m very happy to be informed that
we have Pam Golding with us here who is also one of the people on my panel
of advisers.

However, whilst beneficial to some, this environment has had the adverse
effect of raising the house prices beyond the reach of low to medium-income
households. So the upward trend one finds in the higher end of the market
has not been reflected in the lower end of the property market in which
prices, in the main, remain stagnant.

Now, what we have resolved to do to bridge this gap is ensure that we can
get housing finance at scale. This will lead to wealth creation through an
appreciation and unlocking of the lead capital for entrepreneurial
purposes.

It is for this reason that is gives me great pleasure, again, to inform
you, members, that the National Housing Finance Corporation has transformed
itself to be able to finance homes for low to medium-income earners. A
process has been initiated to restructure and transform the NHFC to
accommodate this new mandate. The outcome of this should provide the NHFC
with an implementation framework and systems that not only serve to support
project finance and facilitation, but also enable the NHFC to serve low to
middle-income customers in a housing bank.

In an attempt to stay abreast of technological advancements and to maximise
our ability to deliver sustainable housing solutions, which deliver houses
within the shortest space of time, I indicated last year to members here
that we intended to establish an innovation hub for housing products. With
the assistance of the National Home Builders Registration Council, the
Gauteng department of housing and the City of Tshwane, which made a number
of serviced stands available, this has been possible. Housing product
innovators and developers were invited to demonstrate their innovative
products as part of a housing product competition. This product generated
considerable interest and some 20 innovative houses, incorporating
alternative technologies, have been built to date.

These houses cover a broad spectrum in terms of size and cost – ranging
from small units compatible with our housing subsidy to bondable houses in
the larger and more expensive category. To ensure that the products are
thoroughly evaluated and to test the products against housing needs, the
public was invited to express its views in written surveys. Absa has
offered the prize of R250 000 for the winner of this. His Royal Highness
Kgosi Leruo Moletlegi, an architect by profession, served as the
chairperson of our adjudication panel.

We will announce the winner of this competition at a ceremony arranged for
this occasion this evening. We hope that this concept will generate and
sustain innovation in the housing field. This is an exciting project, even
if I have to say so myself, which will aim to bring in better quality
products and a wider range of housing consumers. I invite any of you who
might be driving around in Pretoria and have a spare moment to visit this
in Soshanguve. [Applause.] You will see that we are poised for exciting
times in this country.

My department remains committed to accelerating the delivery of quality
houses and an efficient service through the National Housing Consumer
Education and Training Programme. This programme was piloted in four
provinces – KwaZulu-Natal, the Western Cape, Gauteng and the Free State –
with more than 7 700 beneficiaries undergoing the training. I’m happy to
report that we are now ready to implement the programme throughout South
Africa.

On the topical issue of the N2 Gateway Project, the first phase of the
project will be completed by the end of this month. As you are aware, there
have been a number of delays in the completion of the project due to
challenges in construction complexities of building such a huge project.
The allocation of the N2 Gateway Project’s pilot units is the
responsibility, in line with the memorandum of understanding we have
signed, of the provincial housing department. This will be done in line
with a database provided by the auditors, Nkonki PriceWaterhouse.

The allocation principle will be line with the pilot business plan that
will accommodate beneficiaries, i.e. 30% backyarders from neighbouring
communities, and 70% from the people of the area of that particular Joe
Slovo settlement.

The province, and nobody else, will determine the date of occupation
without any pressure from either the media or anyone else. Discussions are
currently underway with the communities to work on the modalities of
occupation, starting in June.

Minmec has decided that the second phase of the project will now be managed
entirely by Thubelisha Homes, which will operate on the private sector
lines, and report directly to Minmec.

Finally, I am satisfied that, despite the hiccups, the N2 Gateway Project
is a success on a scale that has never been attempted in the history of
housing construction in this country. [Applause.] It was commenced with
ambitious timeframes, with an objective to accelerate service delivery on
housing. It gave us an opportunity to implement the Breaking New Ground
Policy and as a pilot project has been, for me, hugely successful.

I want to thank the people of Langa for their patience and understanding.
They will not regret having allowed us to use them for the pilot project.
[Applause.]

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the National Home Builders Registration
Council currently provides a warranty on government-subsidised houses for a
period of five years. This warranty, however, only applies to structural
defects of houses due, for instance, to poor building practice. Many, if
not the majority, of our housing beneficiaries are however poor, and not
able to afford insurance on their houses. This is made very evident at
times like this when we have floods. It has been identified as a critical
shortcoming in our quest to promote housing as an asset.

As a result, I have instructed that this matter be investigated, including
whether private sector insurers are able to develop to assist particular
lower-income earners in the affordable housing market so that the next time
we have floods, we do know that most of these houses are insured.

Now, we come to that other critical requirement of housing, that is, land.
I am very glad that we have with us here the former Minister of Agriculture
and Land Affairs, who has been very instrumental in helping us get to where
we are now. [Interjections.] Former, present, or current? I am not sure,
Deputy President. [Interjections.] It’s the transitional Minister of
Agriculture and Land Affairs.

The need for a land acquisition programme for housing arises from the
context that land is a finite resource. It is further acknowledged that
current inner city redevelopment programmes will not, on their own, cater
for the demand for housing in well-located urban areas. It has been
acknowledged by the public and private sectors that the current form of
acquiring suitably located land has had an adverse effect on delivering
integrated sustainable human settlements.

In view of the fact that the strategy for acquiring land has not achieved
expected results, my department, working in collaboration with the
Department of Land Affairs, has put together a framework for a special
purpose vehicle for land as a new strategy to facilitate the speedy release
of sustainable land for housing purposes.

As indicated in my budget speech last year, Servcon has completed its
mandate. We will be approaching Cabinet with a request to transform it into
this special purpose vehicle for the purpose of acquiring land.

The public will have been informed that Cabinet, a few weeks ago, had given
its consent to the disposal of land by state-owned enterprises under the
Department of Public Enterprises. I can now inform you that Housing is the
major beneficiary of this move. For this I am extremely grateful to the
Minister of Public Enterprises. [Applause.]

We are now acquiring suitable state land in the hands of the Department of
Public Works. The late Minister Stella Sigcau worked tirelessly in her last
month in office to ensure that such land as we identified as suitable can
be transferred to Housing through the special purpose vehicle, and for this
I am extremely grateful to Minister Stella Sigcau. [Applause.]

During 2005, we held an intergovernmental meeting with the SA Local
Government Association, and reached an agreement that municipalities would
be required to adopt a moratorium on the sale of state-owned land. Through
this moratorium, we will ensure that we delay the alienation of municipal-
owned land assets with a view to meet the sustainability requirements of
integrated development.

We note and congratulate the many municipalities that have passed council
resolutions to freeze the sale of municipal-owned land. We must appeal to
the remainder of municipalities to act responsibly by delaying the sale of
land assets, and prioritise housing development that supports our vision of
a truly integrated human settlement around this country.

The MECs will ensure further consideration of the moratorium on the sale of
land by municipalities and, together with the Premiers, I am hoping that
they will keep a close brief on this.

The Department of Housing has undertaken a number of initiatives to provide
support to small housing enterprises. Madam Deputy President, you will be
pleased to hear that we have a framework for emerging contractor support
that has been developed after extensive consultation. Flowing from this
framework of support, we have put aside an amount of R10 million through
the NHBRC to develop a pool of housing entrepreneurs who will enhance the
delivery of low-cost housing. The initial fund of R10 million has been
approved and tenders for the Construction Education and Training Authority
accredited service have been put out.

Furthermore, the NHBRC has committed R7 million to the training of the
National Youth Service Project. The project aims to support nation-building
through involving young people in the delivery of crucial government
services such as housing.

To improve the access of women contractors to housing, the Department of
Housing has ring-fenced 30% of its allocation to provinces to ensure that
this is given to projects that are undertaken by female contractors. During
2005, provincial government departments allocated a total of R1,9 billion
countrywide to emerging female contractors in this sector.

Finally, having been rushed for time, I would like to say that the present
has the responsibility to fulfil the promise of fundamental palpable change
in our lifetime. I believe we can achieve this. When the history of this
period is written, this government and its achievements will be writ large.
By then, most of us here perhaps will have retired, giving us the advantage
of distance and will, I hope, be graceful enough to acknowledge that we did
indeed record remarkable achievements.

We have committed ourselves to removing all those blockages that impede
progress, most of them sadly our own creation. We are building communities.
I cannot imagine that anyone would have chosen for themselves a more
onerous challenge. But, it’s a challenge which, if we succeed, will lead to
the society we dream of, with a new culture forged out of shared
experiences. Perhaps one day, perhaps one day, we can talk of a national
community, which as you all know, does not exist presently. We have the
opportunity, through human settlements integrated in the way that we plan
to, to create this national community.

What greater transformation can we hope for of our society? I challenge you
to find a greater way in which we could transform our society than to
create a truly national community.

Each one of us must be willing to actively participate in this. I believe
the rich have a responsibility and I have consistently called out to them
to come and assist. However, very importantly, the poor have a
responsibility too. If each were to give, our national community is at
hand.

The challenge has invigorated me because I have been called upon to rise to
the challenge. The challenge is upon us, and we are all called upon to rise
to that. I believe we are poised to rise to the challenge, because it is a
challenge that we can meet. I thank you all. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Before I call upon the next speaker, it has been
brought to my attention that we have visitors on the gallery in the form of
a delegation from the parliament of Sweden. [Applause.] It looks like they
might have left the gallery. I hope the message will reach them that the
House did welcome the delegation. We hope they will have a meaningful time
in South Africa.

Mrs Z A KOTA: Madam Speaker, Acting President, Ministers, comrades,
colleagues and honoured guests, I greet you during this Housing debate.
Allow me to congratulate Minister Lulu Xingwana on her appointment as
Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs. [Applause.] We welcome you to
Housing and Land Affairs and we thank the outgoing Minister for the support
we as the portfolio committee have received.

Allow me, in this 30th anniversary year of 16 June 1976, to dedicate my
speech to the class of 1976 and to those who fell during Umbumbumbu. Among
these is Xolile Mosie, a Form 2 student at Langa High and boxer from Harlem
Boys, who fell on 11 August 1976. He was the first victim of the 1976
uprising in the Western Cape. I thank our parents, our teachers and
community leaders who were a source of support and inspiration during those
difficult days. It in indeed those sacrifices, among others, that made
South Africa what it is today.

Somlomo, ndivumele ndigabule izigcawu, ndikhumbule amatshantliziyo ezo mini
afana noNoshumi Mbeyiya, oo’ta Zakes nabanye abalandulelayo eli. [Speaker,
let me make an introductory note and remind you about heroes and heroines
of those days like Noshumi Mbeyiya, Mr Zakes and those who passed away.]

In their memory we shall strive to ensure that there are houses, security
and comfort.

At this point I want to welcome the new Director-General of Housing, Mr
William Kotsoane, and his team. We are looking forward to working with you,
sir.

Minister, many good things have happened since you brought positive energy
to the housing market, building on the firm foundation laid by your
predecessors. Your turnaround strategy is beginning to bear fruit.

More and more people have the opportunity to improve their lives, to become
educated and acquire skills, and to help build better quality houses, as
demonstrated at N2 Gateway and the Innovation Hub by the National Home
Builders Registration Council and Absa, through your leadership.

During the public hearings it became clear to us that the Department of
Housing has managed to do away with underspending, with only one province,
the Free State, spending only 75% of its budget. We urge you, Minister, to
prioritise this province. It does need attention. The director-general has
agreed to engage with the province and the MEC is aware of this.

The Portfolio Committee on Housing made an evaluation of what has been done
by the committee to achieve our goals. Our role as a committee is to
monitor and evaluate whether the government gets value for money during the
implementation of government policies by the executive, for example that
94% of the Housing budget is transferred to provinces as conditional
grants.

At this point, I want to thank the MECs who came to the public hearings.
They are hon members Nomvula Mokonyane from Gauteng, Boeboe van Wyk from
the Northern Cape, Sam Kwelita from the Eastern Cape, Joe Mafereka from the
Free State and Maite Nkoane-Shabane from Limpopo. They have helped the
committee to understand the success stories and challenges faced by the
provinces.

Conditional grants are aimed at improving the lives of our people in the
provinces. Do they lead to the desired results and do they add value to
millions who are in dire need of housing, especially those who qualify for
the full government subsidy? What is the quality of housing units provided?
Do they adhere to norms and standards? Does it lead to a better life for
beneficiaries as required by ANC government policies? These are some of the
questions the Portfolio Committee on Housing examined when it had a
strategy session at Club Mykonos in April this year. We did our examination
guided by the President’s state of the nation address, the Breaking New
Ground strategy of the Minister of Housing and the key performance
indicators of the department.

Let me remind this House what the Breaking New Ground strategy seeks to
achieve. The strategy is aimed at integrating and building secure
communities. It has done so by closing three subsidy bands into the
following: Firstly, the hard-core poor earning between zero and R1 500; and
secondly, the poor earning between R1 500 and R3 500. Both these categories
are entitled to full subsidies, the only difference being that the first is
not expected to contribute while the second is expected to contribute at
least R2 479, but sweat equity is taken into account for those who cannot
afford to give money, and women-headed households and people with
disabilities are not expected to contribute. A new subsidy band has been
created targeting the middle-income level, those earning between R3 500 and
R7 000, whom the government will assist to obtain mortgage finance.

I have just heard the Minister saying that those who are blacklisted or not
creditworthy will not be part of this process. We have discussed this with
the Chief Whip. We believe that these are the people who need it most. You
must remember many of the people who are in that category are the people
who are hard hit, particularly by micro finance, because the interest rate
is very high. So it is critical. Let us work with the banks and see to what
extent we can assist this category of our people, taking into account that
the principle is that people must pay. It is critical that we push that
kind of aspect, but at the same time let us assist our people who find
themselves in those difficult conditions.

The government will help in terms of credit-linked subsidies.
Municipalities have nothing to do with this, Minister. Will you please ask
Mayor Helen Zille of Cape Town to stay away from this? Housing is a
concurrent function between national and provincial government.
[Interjections.] Bonded houses are a national issue. [Applause.] Helen
Zille is a Jane-come-lately. She does not understand the issues, has no
authority and no mandate; she just wants attention. [Interjections.]
[Applause.] Credit-linked subsidies have to be worked out with provinces,
and the Banking Council must really explain what is happening, Minister.
[Interjections.] Just keep quiet.

One other element of the Breaking New Ground strategy is that of redefining
the role of government in the housing market to broaden its mandate to
include all residential property. Hence, we welcome what the state of the
nation address alluded to on this matter:

  ... that the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs will, during this
  period, 2006, review the willing-buyer, willing-seller policy, and review
  the land acquisition models and possible manipulation of land prices, and
  regulate conditions under which foreigners buy land. This will be done in
  line with international best practices.

I know Lulu will do this.

The President went further to say that:

  During the course of this year, in addition to accelerating the expansion
  of housing stock to address the needs of the homeless, we will take
  concrete steps to ensure that housing development contributes to
  eliminating the duality of living spaces inherited from apartheid.
  [Interjections.]

  Already the Ministry of Housing and Local Government have reached an
  agreement on the sale of land for housing. Through this agreement,
  municipalities will allocate land close to the economic centres for
  housing development for middle and lower-income people.

  In addition, as part of the effort to help the poor to access housing
  finance, the National Housing Finance Corporation will be transformed into
  a housing corporation that will provide finance to the poor and middle-
  income groups.

  In this context we expect our Minister of Housing ...

This has been done, Minister. You have already said this and I won’t go
back to it.

  This is central to the attainment of a society free of shack settlements
  in which all our people enjoy decent housing. In this context I should
  also mention that government has decided that we must completely eradicate
  “bucket toilets” from established settlements by the end of 2007.

It is critical that the Department of Housing, therefore, works with the
Department of Water Affairs on this project. Hence, I also welcome the
Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, Comrade Lindiwe Hendricks. We are
going to work with you in Housing.

This is clear testimony that the provision of housing has a positive spin-
off, especially when stakeholders stick to the agreement and perform as
expected, and deliver on time on their mandates. Each house built brings
about a better life to the beneficiary. It brings about running water and
sanitation, leads to the elimination of the bucket system, brings
electricity and, in many instances, creates jobs.

Izindlu xa zisakhiwa ngolu hlobo urhulumente olawulwa nguKhongolozi afuna
ngalo, zenza umahluko omkhulu eluntwini, kwaye zenza impilo yabantu ibe
ngcono kakhulu. Zikhona nangoku izindlu ezisemgangathweni ofunwa ngulo
rhulumente we-ANC, esinethemba lokuba abaphathiswa bamaphondo, oosodolophu
namagosa aphetheyo kwisebe lezezindlu aya kuzama ngako konke anako ukwenza
ukuba sifike kweli nqanaba lokwakhela abantu izindlu ezisemgangathweni.

Kufuneka sikhumbule kananjalo ukuba ulwakhiwo lwezindlu lugweba indlala,
ludala amathuba emisebenzi, luzisa amanzi, izindlu zangasese kwanazo zonke
ezinye izinto, ibe luchulumanco kwabo bafumana izitshixo zokuvula izindlu.
Urhulumente kaKhongolozi ufezekise amaphupha aphaya kuMqulu Wenkululeko.
Inye ke into lo rhulumente ayicelayo, kukuba wonke ubani asebenzisane
nabahlali, oosomashishini kunye norhulumente, ukwenzela ukuba impilo
yabantu basekhaya ibe ngcono. Masibhinqe omfutshane sixele oomama bowe-1956
 ePitoli, ababesiya kuStrydom.

Niya kundixolela ngoba andifuni kuba yinxalenye yoomama abathi inkululeko
yaqala e-Beijing. Inkululeko yaqala kudala, ayiqalanga nangowe 1956; iqale
phaya — niyayazi kaloku — kwiminyaka yowe-1913.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[When houses are built, they are built according to the ANC-led
government’s plans. These houses will make a difference to the people by
making their lives better. These are high-standard houses planned by the
ANC-led government, and we hope that the provincial ministers together with
mayors and officials in the Department of Housing will make it possible to
achieve the aim.

We must bear in mind that the building of houses will reduce poverty,
create employment, provide water, sanitary facilities and the like, and
make those who receive keys for the houses joyous. The ANC-led government
has fulfilled the dreams embraced in the Freedom Charter.

There is only one appeal from government, that there must be co-operation
between communities, business people and government for a better life for
our people. Let us work together effortlessly like the women who marched to
Pretoria in 1956 to meet Strydom.

You will pardon me, as I do not want to be one of those women who think
that freedom started in Beijing. Freedom started long ago before 1956, it
started around 1913, and you know that.]

For the Department of Housing to deliver much faster on its mandate, it
needs the co-operation of other departments. The Minister has alluded to
the issue of environmental impact analyses, which are a stumbling block on
the value chain in terms of the delivery of housing. I am glad that you
have interacted with Minister Van Schalkwyk on this matter to fast-track
housing delivery.

Abantu abebekhona emngcwabeni kamama uStella Sigcau, inkosazana, baya
kumkhumbula ngexa uTat’ uFeni wayesithi inkqubo yoHlolo lweFuthe loPhuhliso
kwiNdalo, i-Environmental Impact Assessment, ithatha iminyaka eli-15,
zilibazisa. Siyalubona ubaxo apho, kodwa umyalezo uvakele wona, wokuba i-
EIA ngokwenene ziya lubambezela uphuhliso, ngoba ukuze iprojeki nganye
iphunyezwe kufuneka kuphunyezwe i-EIA kuqala. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[People who were present at hon Stella Sigcau’s funeral, the princess, will
remember what Mr Feni said about the delays created by environmental impact
assessments that can take 15 years.  There is an exaggeration on that
point, but the message that was sent out is that there is a delay in
development because projects depend on the report from the EIA first.]

For any project to be approved, an EIA must first be approved.

Secondly, the availability of land is a challenge, particularly well-
located land. People who moved from Langa to Delft are still waiting for
houses. This is the task of Helen Zille, to really get the land for these
people in Delft, so that houses can be built for people. [Applause.]

Nanko ke umsebenzi wakhe. [This is your job.]

I want to commend the Minister for her work within the UN Habitat agenda.
Your leadership in the African Ministerial Conference on Housing and Urban
Development and co-hosting of the Slum/Shack Dwellers International
Conference at the Cape Town International Convention Centre is highly
commended. In particular, your pledge of R185 million for the People’s
Housing Process is highly commendable. [Applause.]

It is important to note that South Africa is not far from meeting the
Millennium Development Goals, which target a halving of key indicators by
2015. The capital injection of R40 billion by the banks and the labour-
intensive method in housing show that housing is a major contributor to
economic growth in this country.

I want to thank the National Home Builders Registration Council for hosting
the portfolio committee on Monday. We have learnt a lot from the Innovative
Hub. We are excited about these innovations. They add value to the housing
market, particularly as far as the size of the Breaking New Ground houses
is concerned. We have now moved away from 30 square meters to 45 square
meters. In other provinces they do even more than 45 square meters.
[Applause.]

I would like to thank the Acting Mayor of Modimole and members of the
Department of Housing for hosting us. There is visible progress on the
ground. There are women contractors who are building both low-cost and
middle-income houses. Some of them have entered the competition – Frances
Albert is one of them.

Let us celebrate these achievements in housing and look forward to managing
the challenges, but it is clear that there is work done and that there is
work in progress. I thank members of the portfolio committee for the
teamwork they have shown in taking up housing issues. Together we can make
things happen. Today is indeed better than yesterday, and tomorrow will be
better than today. I support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A C STEYN: Madam Speaker, hon Minister, hon members and distinguished
guests, to live without adequate housing, or shelter or without a home, is
to exist without security and a sense of pride.

The number of people without housing, the destitute, is growing
exponentially each year and yet, each year, this Ministry is delivering
less than the previous year. The very reason this department exists is to
assist the poorest of the poor, who will never, by and of themselves,
obtain adequate shelter.

The Minister spoke at length about the opportunities for access to finance
for those who have an income, but said very little about those who do not
have an income and depend on this Ministry for housing.

It is because of their situation that they are unable to exercise the most
basic freedoms, including choice, and it is on their behalf that I stand
before this House today.

Since the dawn of our democracy some 12 years ago, the world at large
looked at South Africa in awe. We set the benchmark in many ways and other
developing countries looked to us to see how it was done. With exceptions,
and there are many, we have done things differently, and still achieved the
required results.

However, when one looks back over the last three to five years, one has to
ask oneself the following questions: Has the miracle disappeared? Has the
glitter faded?

I ask myself these questions because, while the Department of Housing’s
website proudly announces that 1,8 million houses have been built since
1994, the Minister is on record as having acknowledged that there are
numerous blocked projects across the country, dating back to 1995 or 1996.

Therefore, there must be hundreds, if not thousands, of houses linked to
these incomplete projects that are counted in the 1,8 million houses
delivered. Presumably also, these hundreds, if not thousands, of incomplete
houses have been paid for along the way. We will only know the true miracle
of housing the nation when the audit that the Minister launched in this
regard has been completed. Perhaps, if more mayors like Mayor Zille take
more of an active part, this picture will change. [Interjections.]

While most of the developing world now appears to be achieving more with
less, we are once again bucking the trend. We are achieving less with more.
The national housing budget has constantly increased over the last number
of years, whilst the number of units delivered has declined.

Last year, the Finance Minister indicated that the housing budget would
increase by more than R2,5 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period starting in 2005. True to his word, this current year’s
budget has increased by a massive 30% over the 2005-06 budget in nominal
terms. Since the 2004-05 financial year, the department has had an increase
from R4,5 billion to the current budget of R6,8 billion and the housing
budget, as the Minister said, is expected to increase to almost R9,5
billion by 2008-09.

Last year, I also expressed my concern that while the budget increases
significantly, the lack of capacity so readily used as an excuse for
nondelivery has yet to be addressed in a significant and meaningful way.
One year later, although there has been a steady increase in funds for the
capacity-building subprogramme which is set to rise from R51 million in
2005-06 to R95 million in 2008-09, it is my humble opinion that this
situation still exists.

Looking at the subprogrammes in this department, I am pleased to see that
the unusually high increases experienced in the 2004-05 financial year has
not been repeated. Expenditure on the housing development funding programme
dominates this budget, which the department administers through the
payments of conditional grants to provinces according to a fixed formula,
and that constitutes 94% of the entire budget.

It is therefore appropriate that the increased funds are primarily
allocated to that programme. However, the Financial and Fiscal Commission
has identified a number of shortcomings in the current housing formula used
to divide the funds between the provinces. For example, the formula is
negatively biased against rural provinces, as it does not include
traditional housing in the calculation of provincial backlogs. The number
of homeless people is not an officially published statistic. Some of the
variables used are very volatile in nature. For example, in the North-West
Province, shacks in backyards varied by 233% between 1996 and 2001. Tents
and caravans are another element used in the formula, varying by 184% in
Gauteng, and homeless people varied by 785% in the Western Cape. I
therefore urge both the National Treasury and the Minister to consider the
recommendations proposed by the FFC in this regard for the 2007-08
appropriations.

It is probably safe to say that the increased budget is the result of the
Minister’s new housing policy announced in 2004. This new policy, which
seeks to address the continuously escalating backlog, while also tackling
apartheid spatial planning, which inadvertently has been replicated when
new RDP houses were built on cheap land, far from jobs and recreational and
community facilities, also has the upgrading of informal settlements as a
major focus. That is not only a mouthful, but also a huge task for the
department. While there have been some gains, there have also been many
disappointments.
The department has four priorities in the new comprehensive plan referred
to as “Breaking New Ground” and three strategic drivers to achieve this. I
want to touch briefly on some of these drivers. Firstly, one of the drivers
is to improve the national housing subsidy scheme. The Minister has been
relatively successful with this. She has introduced an inflation-related
annual increase to the subsidies, collapsed the subsidy bands into
different income groups, and added a subsidy for the income group between
R3 501 and R7 000.

In this regard, the Minister entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
with the banking sector last March. However, until recently, this agreement
was at a stand-off due to differences over guarantees to be supplied by
government. I trust that the launch of the 702-FNB project in Cosmo City
last week for this income group means that stalemate between government and
the banks has now been resolved, and the Minster touched on that.

By the way, Minister, in your speech at this particular launch, you
acknowledged the contribution made by Radio 702, and you did so again
today, when they built three houses in Ivory Park, and again five more in
Protea South in Gauteng through Habitat for Humanity last year.

When you spoke about the Kenneth Kaunda Work Project in Mamelodi some time
ago, you challenged every South African to come forward and help build
homes for our people. As you are aware, the standing committee accepted the
challenge and participated in that project.

What you may not be aware of, because I have never heard you acknowledge
it, is that the DA also rose to the challenge last year. A house, through
Habitat for Humanity, was built in one week by the DA caucus of the
Johannesburg Metropolitan City Council for a recipient identified by
Habitat in Ivory Park, Midrand. The DA councillors were ably assisted by
Members of Parliament and members of the provincial legislature from
Gauteng. We are indeed in this together. Unfortunately, I have yet to hear
an acknowledgement from the hon Minister for this contribution.

However, while a lot of work has been done to streamline the housing
subsidy scheme, there are numerous shortcomings in so far as the approval
and allocation of housing subsidies at provincial housing departments are
concerned. The Minister is no doubt familiar with the Auditor-General’s
finding of a performance audit, which found that over 5 000 subsidies were
awarded to applicants who died before the applications were approved. Over
1 600 instances were identified where more than one subsidy was approved
for the same applicant, and over 14 000 subsidies were approved for which
there are no beneficiary details on the National Housing Subsidy Database,
amongst others.

It is reported some R300 million may be involved in these fraudulent
subsidy allocations. Are these amongst the 1,8 million houses delivered to
date?

Let me quickly touch on the N2 Gateway Project. The hon Minister is on
record as saying:


  The main difference with the past approach will be tested in the N2
  Gateway Project, which seeks to transform several large informal
  settlements along Cape Town’s N2 highway into new integrated settlements.


When the project was launched last year, it was said that 24 000 units
would be ready for occupation by June 2005. In one week’s time, it will be
June 2006, and one beneficiary is yet to find shelter from the bitter cold
at the N2 Gateway Project. [Interjections.]

I fear, hon Minister, that the test has failed. These people are once again
left with nothing else but hope. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Hon Speaker, hon Minister and colleagues, section 26(1) of
the Constitution of South Africa of 1996 states very boldly that “Everyone
has the right to have access to adequate housing.” The Constitution goes
on, in subsection 2 charging the state with the responsibility to
progressively realise this goal.
We have to ask ourselves whether the Housing budget before us today does,
in fact, enable the state to make progress towards the goal of housing for
all. It is known that between 1994 and 2005, 1,8 million subsidised houses
were delivered by the state. That was a remarkable achievement, but it
falls far short of what is required. The backlog of houses currently stands
at 2,4 million units. What is of the gravest concern is the fact that this
backlog will, in 10 years from now, still exist until government funding
increases dramatically.

It is also known that 11,3% of households in South Africa are informal
dwellings, in other words, shacks, and that informal settlements have grown
by more than 100% between 1995 and 2004. These figures paint a depressing
picture of a country that is striving to improve the lives of its people,
yet finds that one step forward mostly means two or three steps backward.

It is for this reason that the IFP, hon Minister, fully supports the
comprehensive housing plan for the development of integrated, sustainable
settlements. The Department of Housing received some R6,8 billion for this
financial year. That is about 30% more than last year. The increased
allocation will be taken up mostly by funding for the integrated housing
and human settlement development conditional grant given to provinces and
by some R600 million for the introduction of credit-linked housing.

Our concern is that there is a lack of capacity, Minister, in some
provinces and local government to deliver, in other words to build enough
new houses to make meaningful progress in eradicating the backlog. Clearly,
the issue here is not funding but the ability to spend allocations on new
projects.

The IFP is very concerned that 12 years into our democracy the Department
of Housing has not established a clear funding policy for hostel
development. The Public Sector Hostels Redevelopment Programme has failed –
Xhamela to develop a policy that will create humane living conditions and
provide affordable and sustainable housing either on a rental or ownership
basis.

There are about one million people in three provinces, that is Gauteng,
KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape, who live in rundown hostels in squalid
conditions. Surely, the time has come for the Department of Housing to
provide clear guidelines for funding to change these hostels into livable
decent accommodation. They remain monuments of apartheid.

The IFP’s third concern relates to the provision of rental housing stock.
Rental housing stock should fill the gap between those that are financially
able to buy a house and those that are not. However, the current situation
is that the available rental stock is so expensive to rent that the
intended beneficiaries are completely unable to afford it.
What the local authorities seem to have forgotten is that it is the poor
people in the second economy who are looking to rent houses, simply because
they are too poor to afford to buy a house and not because they are
interested in owning property in the city. If rental houses are priced out
of the reach of these people, what are they supposed to do? Eventually,
they are forced to settle in informal areas, which partly explains the
growth of informal settlements. Rental stock should be made more affordable
so that the intended beneficiaries can actually benefit.

The IFP, in raising these concerns, does not mean that it is blind to the
great achievement of this department in trying to fulfil its constitutional
mandate of reducing poverty and improving the quality of people’s lives.

The IFP calls on the hon Minister and the department to take note of our
concerns and to do more in the coming year to address the shortcomings,
weaknesses and backlogs in the system so that access to housing and secure
accommodation, as an integral part of government’s commitment to reducing
poverty and improving the quality of lives, can be achieved. The IFP
supports the Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members and distinguished guests, ...

... mzi wakwaNtu, nakuwe eMbo, urhulumente okhokelwa nguKhongolose, phantsi
kwesandla sohloniphekileyo uMongameli Thabo Mbeki, uthi beka ithemba
ngaphambili. Sibonile kwantlandlolo ukuba bekungamampunge ukufumana
urhulumente obonakalisa inkathalo kwisizwe ngokubanzi. Ibivamile into
yokuba ibe liqaqobana nje elifumana ukuhoywa.

Kuthe nje ncakasana sizuza inkululeko, ngo-1994, urhulumente wabantu
wakhankanya ukuba uza kwakhela abantu abangathathi ntweni izindlu mahala.
Bathi oogqadambekweni, “nguNongqawuse lowo”. Bambi bathi yintsomi, siza
kuphuma iimpondo. Bambi bade bathi ilanga lingawa phantsi licholwe
ziintaka.

Sithini namhlanje? Sithi urhulumente wakha amakhaya, alandelise ngokwakha
isizwe ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... people of the nation and the opposition, the ANC-led government under
the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki is pleading with you to have hope.
In the past it was not easy to find a government that cared about the
people. It was common practice for the government to care about the
minorities.

When we achieved freedom in 1994, our government announced that it would
provide free houses for the people in need. Those who like to involve
themselves in issues that do not concern them said that this would never
happen. Some said, “That is a myth and we will bear the consequences.”
Others said that the sun would fall from the sky and be pecked on by birds.

What are we saying today? We say government is building homes and will be
building a nation soon ...]

... in order to facilitate the quality of life. In propelling such a very
critical task, the state entered into a partnership with various role-
players, including the housing support institutions that play a major role
in the implementation of housing development.

This partnership is also guided by a series of legislative systems and
policy frameworks. These agencies are managed by independent boards of
directors or councils. However, they report directly to the Minister who,
from time to time, reviews their mandates to ensure optimum delivery that
is aligned with a new plan.

I want to discuss some of the institutions. The National Urban
Reconstruction and Housing Agency, known as Nurcha, is a public entity
established to become a major construction finance institution. Nurcha’s
mandate is to ensure the availability of bridging finance to emerging
contractors and developers undertaking contracts for development of
housing, community facilities and related infrastructure within the context
of promoting an integrated and sustainable human settlement. This will also
include credit-linked and rental houses.
The mandate of the Rural Housing Loan Fund, RHLF, is specifically to
mobilise rural finance for housing from sources outside the state for lower-
income families to build or improve their houses. It targets people earning
between R600 and R7 500. The programme also accommodates farmers,
farmworkers and emerging contractors.

National Housing Finance Corporation was established as a wholesale lender
to broaden access to affordable housing finance for the lower and middle-
income earners at affordable interest rates. We welcome the fact that in
each revised mandate the NHFC has been awarded to be a housing bank.

Siyabulela kuwe, nkosazana, ngalo msebenzi othe wawenza. [We thank you, hon
Minister, for the work well done.]

The National Home Builders Registration Council, known as NHBRC, has a
motto that says: Quality control is a government priority. This institution
was established in terms of the Housing Consumer Protection Measures Act of
1998. The council has to, mainly, protect the interests of housing
consumers, in respect of the failure of home builders to comply with their
obligations. In terms of the Act, it has to further regulate the home
building industry and promote ethical and technical standards in the
industry.

The national housing department has extended the NHBRC warrant to the
housing subsidy sector as well. It is important to note that we are excited
about the innovation hub at Soshanguve that shows that brick and mortar
alone cannot build houses, but there are other ways to kill a fat cat.

National youth training programmes have been observed in Limpopo and the
Eastern Cape. They are running very well.

Ndicela ukuba sichazele nabanye ngento entle esiyibone eMpuma Koloni, xa
besithe sandwendwela khona siyikomiti yemicimbi yesebe. Safumanisa ukuba le
nkqubo bayiqhuba ngeyona ndlela yanelisayo, apho ulutsha lufumene umsebenzi
wokwakha izindlu ezingama-500.

I-National Home Builders Registration Council, iSebe lezeMisebenzi yoLuntu
neSebe lezaBasebenzi liyancedisa kakhulu ekubeni olu lutsha luqeqeshwe
ukususela kwinqanaba lokuqala ukuya kwelesihlanu. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[When we visited the Eastern Cape as a committee from this department, we
saw a beautiful sight that I should think we should mention. We established
that this programme is run in a fulfilling manner where youth has a
responsibility of building 500 houses.

The National Home Builders Registration Council, the Department of Public
Works and the Department of Labour together helped in developing skills for
youth in the field of construction from level one to level five.
[Applause.]]
Servcon Housing Solutions was established to assist a ring-fenced portfolio
of properties and to normalise to liquidity nonperforming properties that
were in a state of redundancy. As mentioned before, the Minister is in the
process of reviewing the Servcon mandate so that it can be aligned with the
Breaking New Ground strategy.

Thubelisha Homes is a section 21 company established as a special-purpose
financial vehicle to create the right stock for Servcon’s rightsizing
programme. A new mandate was received in February 2006 to undertake the
construction of affordable housing projects and for the installation of
engineering services. Thubelisha has also been appointed by the Department
of Housing to complete the N2 Gateway Project in a period of two years.

Lastly, the Social Housing Foundation, SHF, was established to develop and
build capacity, broadly for social institutions that manage social housing
stock. Like other institutions, the mandate of SHF is under review by the
Minister in order to bring it in line with the current plan. Further, the
committee believes that the Minister will take a considered decision that
will do away with the current low morale of SHF staff. Hence, there is no
reason for that low morale as there is no threat to the staff as well as
the institution itself.

The committee further notes that the Social Housing Foundation, the
national Department of Housing and National Housing Finance Corporation
accompanied the Portfolio Committee on Housing on its visit to Norway and
the Netherlands to learn about how social housing is implemented. These
countries have expertise in the social housing field, and we hope that we
will be able to participate positively in the formulation of the
forthcoming Bill on social housing.

In conclusion, the committee has observed that there is a strong need for
these government agencies to embark on a massive marketing strategy so that
people should access opportunities provided for their development.

Kuluntu sithi: Amasi abekw’ elangeni. Huntshu ANC! Tshotsh’ ubekho! [We say
to the nation: The ball is in your court. Congratulations, ANC! Your
accessibility is appreciated!]

The ANC supports the Bill.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members,
distinguished guests, the budget before us reflects a Department of Housing
far different from the department that it used to be a number of years ago.
We should give credit where credit is due.

The Department of Housing today is functioning in the way that we would
have wanted it to do from the outset 11 years ago. Under the leadership of
the department, hundreds of thousands of housing subsidies have been
approved and hundreds of thousands of housing units have been built in the
past year.

In addition, and perhaps even more significant, is the success achieved in
getting the provinces to spend their budgets. The positive spending rate
removes one of the most frustrating aspects of service delivery in which,
in the past, massive budgets did not translate into massive service
delivery, but were rolled over to the following years.

These successes can be attributed to proper management and to intensive
investment by the department in capacity-building. Here
we have a department that has invested in capacity-building, and the fruits
of its labour are there for all to see.

Having said all that, we cannot shy away from the fact that massive housing
challenges remain with us. Perhaps the two biggest challenges relate to the
quality of housing and the demand for formal housing.

As far as the former is concerned, the UDM must once again raise the matter
of shoddy work and low quality in the many housing developments subsidised
and implemented by the government. Perhaps this is an outcome of the
extreme pressure that all tiers of government are under to provide housing
quickly, but it remains nonetheless unacceptable that some of these
buildings are of such a shockingly low quality.

The second major challenge relating to housing is the fact that the demand
for formal housing continues to outstrip the supply. In this regard, we
support initiatives aimed at addressing this such as simplifying the
administration of the housing subsidy.

We await the results of the new social housing policy and the outcome of
subsidised social and rental housing. We also hope that the department’s
efforts at capacity-building and at removing blockages at municipal level
will be as successful as its provincial efforts.

Finally, the corruption involved in subsidised housing remains an issue. We
continue to hear in our constituencies of ever-changing housing waiting
lists, or of councillors promising houses to friends and family, and of
dodgy tender processes when housing construction contracts are awarded. We
suggest that a single national task force is mandated to investigate all
allegations across all tiers of government. Perhaps if we have a unit that
specialises ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The UDM supports the Budget
Vote. [Applause.]

Mr D C MABENA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, MECs
present, hon members, comrades and friends ...

Baba u Steyn uyadondisa, bewuye e Comores sicabange ukuthi nawubuyako
uzasitjela ukuthi I I-Comores ... [Mr Steyn, you are indolent. When you
went to the Comores, we thought that when you came back you would tell us
that the Comores ...]

The Comores is the poorest country compared to South Africa. We are doing
bad here in South Africa ...

Ufika la uphikisa urhulumende osebenzako uyadondisa ndoda thjuguluka.
Ngithokoza ukuba yingcenye yeenkhulumi kule-budget vote  eqakatheke khulu
ebantwini bakhethu abatlhagiswa bebagandelelwa umbuso omumbi webandlululo.
Ababe nganamalungelo wokuba nendawo kanye namaphepha aqinisa ukuthi umhlaba
kanye nezindlu ngezabo. Ngabe ngenza ipazamo ekulu ukungakhumbuli itja
eyalwisa umbuso webandlululo ngonyaka ka 1976. Siyanikhumbula Solomon
Kalusha Mahlangu, Johannes Maisha Stanza Bopape, abanengi abasaphilako
nalabo abadlulako emhlabeni ngingakhohlwa nemindenabo. Somlomo siyasekela
futhi sikholwa ukuthi ihlelo likangqongqotjhe wezindlu u Dr Lindiwe Sisulu
lokuqeda imikhukhu eSewula Afrika ngo 2014 lizakuba yipumelelo.
Ngikutjho lokhu ngoba I-housing policy yenza isisekelo esiqinileko
sokwakhiwa kwezindlu. I-housing budget kuyo yoke leminyaka umbuso we ANC
udosa phambili yaqiniseka ukuthi kurhatjwe ngehlelo lokulwisana nomtlhago
nendlala, befuthi yatjheja ukuthi ekuthuthukisweni komnotho khulukhulu
ekuphakamiseni ubujamo bokwazi nokuphila, ebantwini ebebagandelelwe umbuso
webandlululo. Lombono kangqongqotjhe ungahle ufezeke kungakafiki unyaka ka
2014 ngoba amaphesente wabantu abahlala emikhukhwini akakanyuki kangako
kusukela ngo 1996, inobangela walokhu kukwakhiwa kwezindlu ezinga phezu
kuka 1,8 million ngurhulumende ophetheko kwanjesi. (Translation of
isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[You come here and you criticise the government that is working. You are an
indolent man who has to transform.

I am happy to be a speaker taking part in this Budget Vote, which is so
important to our people who suffered under and were oppressed by the bad
apartheid government. People had no rights to own land and title deeds that
ensured land and houses belonged to them. I would be making a big mistake
if I do not remember the youth who fought against the apartheid government
in 1976. We remember you Solomon Kalusha Mahlangu, Johannes Maisha, Stanza
Bopape, as well as those who are still alive and not forgetting the
families of the ones who have passed away. Madam Speaker, we support the
Vote, and we also believe that the programme by the Minister of Housing, Dr
Lindiwe Sisulu, to eradicate shacks in South Africa by 2014 will be
successful.

I’m saying this because the housing policy is laying a strong foundation
for the building of houses. Through all these years by means of the housing
budget, the ANC government could ensure that the programme of fighting
poverty is implemented and that economic development takes place mostly by
raising the level of knowledge and the standard of living of the people who
were oppressed by the apartheid government. This vision by the Minister
might be realised before 2014, because the percentage of people who live in
shacks has not increased that much from 1996. The reason for this is the
building of more than 1,8 million houses by the ruling government.]

With respect to improving gender equality in housing ownership, more than
49% of all the subsidies approved were granted to women.

The 2004 State of Cities Report shows that in South Africa’s nine largest
cities, there has been a dramatic improvement in the level of service
delivery, particularly in waste management, electrification and water
provision.

Nami ngizoqinisela la ... [And I too will hold on here ...]

This is where Mayor Helen Zille should focus - service delivery,
particularly to the previously disadvantaged and marginalised communities.
She should desist from encroaching on the wrong terrains. [Applause.]

Abokhumbula ukuthi abantu bethu basenemivimbo yokubethwa nokugandelelwa
abakakhohlwa imicabangwakhe etjhigamileko yebandlululo bayiqale ngamehlo
abukhali ngiyamyelelisa kobana aziphathe kuhle akhambe buthaka angarhabi.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[She must remember that our people still have the scars from the beatings
and oppression they suffered. They haven’t forgotten. Her thinking is
skewed by discrimination. They are keeping an eye and I’m warning her to
behave well; she must walk slowly not faster.]

Alternatively, she should swallow her pride and request a special workshop
from Dr Sisulu.

To those on waiting lists and in dire need of housing, including those who
intend renting, provinces such as Gauteng have ensured that abandoned and
old buildings are bought and the department, through the blessing of the
ever-energetic MEC Nomvula Mokonyane, refurbished 44 buildings in
Johannesburg Central, Germiston and Tshwane. Thus far, 16 000 people have
benefited and others will be attended to sooner, halving the waiting lists.

Hostels that were a creation of mines to accommodate migrant labour, and
where most criminal activities took place, are part of the Minister’s
Breaking New Ground initiative. They have since been renewed as affordable
rental accommodation. Our people’s dignity, which was deliberately demeaned
by the erstwhile order, is gradually being restored, as these structures
are now decent family units. In the Western Cape there are examples of
these structures in Gugulethu, KwaKhikhi and Nyanga and there are examples
in Mamelodi, Atteridgeville, Soshanguve and Ekurhuleni, which formed a
partnership with Cities Alliance for better designs and international
support.

Baba uDlamini, kufanele sisebenzisane uyazi ukuthi abomalume abakatjhenjthi
siyokhuluma nabo laba abangafuni ukwenza ama-single hostels ... [Mr
Dlamini, we must work together. You know that the uncles haven’t changed.
We’ll talk to those who don’t want to make single hostels ...]

These are a few examples one has seen, but the Hostel Redevelopment
Programme is all over South Africa. Another intervention called Community-
Builder Programme, which is in line with the Expanded Public Works
Programme, is doing exceptionally well.

Ngingakhohlwa itjhebiswano elihle elenziwa yi-habitat for humanity
ihlangano ezijameleko esiza abantu abanganamakhaya ngemizi, ibhalise
imindeni etlhaga ekutholeni amakhaya, lelihlelo lithola iinthoro ngokufuna
irhelebho into ekarisako ngehlelweli kukuthi likhuthaza amavolontiya
khulukhulu abomma ekwakheni izindlu, 15 yezindlu zakhiwa e Soweto
ngamalanga amahlanu, 28 eMamelodi East nezinenganyana e Protea South ...
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[I must not forget the good co-operation of Habitat for Humanity, an
independent organisation, which assists people who don’t have homes, and
they also register families who struggle to get homes. This programme gets
funding by seeking assistance, and the good thing about this programme is
that it encourages voluntary services mostly from women for building
houses. Fifteen houses were built in Soweto in five days, twenty-eight in
Mamelodi East and a bit more in Protea South ...]

Hence, as I said at the beginning, an urban crisis can be averted and the
eradication of informal settlements is a possibility before 2014 if we all
genuinely put our shoulders to the wheel.

It is too early to live with joy, because only two of the seven learners
have completed their studies and are placed with the National Department of
Housing. Let’s hope that the 12 new scholarships awarded to candidates
across the province will bear fruit.

We also urge other institutions to follow in the footsteps taken by the
national Department of Housing in capacitating our youth, the girl-child in
particular.

Why women and housing? Apartheid laws disproportionately affected women’s
access to housing. Women’s labour in urban areas was largely limited to
domestic work. Explicit laws and policies to control the mobility of
African women were enacted from the 1930s. The overall result has been that
many women have been denied housing rights. Where they have been able to
find housing, they have been relegated to the outskirts of the economic
centres and have been disadvantaged by the poor quality of their housing.

Strangely enough, their somehow inferior traditional or indigenous homes
could contain, in some instances, severe weather conditions. Hence, we
appeal to the Department of Housing to look into new and improved different
housing typologies, and we are all proud to say that this dream has been
developed.

Bomma kade niqalelwa phasi ... [Women, it’s long that you’ve been looked
down upon ...]

You have been unsung engineers and home-builders for years whilst our
fathers were labouring in big cities for a pittance, out of those mud
houses, you sang the songs of our forebears, praising the Almighty to give
you strength and perseverance to bear some of the great leaders who might
be in this hon House and other professions in and outside the country. In
short, that mud house you used to build has been improved upon into an
affordable, beautiful home that can be viewed at the Innovation Hub in
Soshanguve, Tshwane.

On Women’s Day in August, President Mbeki called on the women to use
Women’s Month to expedite the process of empowering women and assess
whether we are doing what we should to advance the objectives of the
emancipation of women. He called on all South Africans to continue looking
for effective ways to accelerate the empowerment of women. The construction
sector is really just beginning this process. Vision and determination play
a powerful role in driving change.
Nami ngizoqinisela la ...

Akhesithi ngabe kwenzeka ukubanyana iSewula Afrika bekulilizwe
elinganambono namkha ibhudango ngo 1994 ngabesikuphi namhlanjesi na?
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraphs follows.)

[And me too will hold on here ...

Let us say that if South Africa was a country without a vision or a dream
in 1994, where would we be now?]

This vision propelled the then 31-year-old Uitenhage-born Nosiseko Kunge to
fight her way through. She understood the late Oliver Tambo’s adage, “There
is no way an oppressor can liberate the oppressed.” She started her own
company, N & N Construction for the Coega construction village. Other women
in the industry are Ponds Mdaka who has built 150 houses in the Free State,
Francis Alberts, Irene Mahlangu, Noluthando Luzipho of Motherwell and
Lindiwe Stephina Moloko from Soshanguve, to mention a few.

Ngingakhohlwa ... [I must not forget ...]

... Women for Housing, an organisation that trains women to become builders
and to run their own construction companies.

Our Minister of Housing said a 30% stake would be set aside for women in
whatever contracts government entered into with construction companies.
This needs aggressive monitoring as most women are deliberately sidelined
and some banks think that black women have no money, cannot efficiently
perform and thus will not be financed.

In conclusion, the construction industry has to heed the President’s call:
Work with women in creating an environment that promotes the inclusion and
advancement of women in the construction field.

Kibomma abagidinga iminyaka ematjhumamahlanu balwela amalungelwabo, ngithi
asikafiki lapho siya khona ngibawa ukuthi sirorobhe imikhono kungenwe
eemforweni kubhicwe idaka sakhe iSewula Afrika ne Afrika enqono kwanjesi
kunqono kunayizolo, kusasa kuzakuba nqono kunanamhlanje. I ANC iyayisapota
I-Budget Vote le ngiyathokoza. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiNdebele
paragraph follows.)

[To all women who are celebrating 50 years of fighting for their rights. I
say we have not arrived where we are heading to. I request we roll up our
sleeves and start to work to build a better South Africa that is better
than yesterday, and tomorrow it will be better than today. The ANC supports
this Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, hon Minister, I think one should caution the
ANC, especially for the manner in which you attacked the Mayor of Cape
Town. [Interjections.] You’re fighting the wrong person from this podium. I
want to caution you, because you are on your way to lose the province too.
[Interjections.] So make your plans and be careful! [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please, hon members! Order!

Mr H B CUPIDO: Hon Minister, the provision of proper and decent housing for
the homeless, those living in informal settlements as well as backyard
dwellers, has become one of our most urgent priorities, and it can no
longer be ignored or swept aside. To provide housing is like trying to push
the ocean back; the more you deliver, the greater the need will become.
The ACDP welcomes the initiatives by government, private individuals and
public-private partnerships to address the housing crisis in the country.
An initiative by the hon Minister to bring South African banks to play a
much stronger role in the provision of low-cost, quality housing is further
greatly welcomed and supported by the ACDP. [Interjections.] Don’t worry,
we support the budget!

It is our belief that each family in South Africa must be housed in a
manner that will restore the dignity of our people and contribute towards
keeping families united and happy in a home that they can be proud to call
their own. As much as the ACDP supports the call for all to work together
to achieve the goal of 2,4 million dwellings by 2010, and as much as we
exercise our faith that this goal is possible, we nevertheless ask that
renewed attention be paid to the quality of houses that are built.

The ACDP calls upon the Minister and the Department of Housing to ensure
that a monitoring system is put in place in order to secure people in their
new houses for a lifetime. Houses built 30 and 40 years ago in townships
are still standing with little or no defects. Houses built approximately
five years ago in areas such as Vrygrond on the Cape Flats are falling
apart. We would further like to emphasise the need for bedroomed houses in
order to ensure privacy, both for adults and children.

Dit wil voorkom asof die kontrakteurs en hulle vakmanne... [Tyd verstreke.]
[It seems as if the contractors and their artisans ... [Time expired.]]

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, hon Minister, fellow members ...

Nabayeni abakhona la ... [... and guests who are here ...]

The Department of Housing has two problems: Firstly, it is failing to
deliver the necessary quantity of houses to our country’s poor, and,
secondly, where it has built houses it has failed to ensure that they are
of the necessary quality.

According to the latest Institute of Race Relations survey, the number of
houses completed or under construction by the department has systematically
fallen over the past three years from 203 000 in 2002-03 to 193 000 in 2003-
04, and then to just 129 000 in 2004-05. The question is, where was Helen
Zille in those five years? She’s in office just two months.
[Interjections.]

Komunye nomunye unyaka urhulumende wakha izindlu ezinganeliko ze RDP. [Each
year the government builds insufficient RDP houses.]

During the same period the number of people without proper housing has
increased. The same survey states that from 2002 to 2003 there was a 29%
increase in the number of people residing in informal settlements from
1,6 million people in 2002 to 2,1 million in 2003. In spite of the
1,8 million houses the government has built since 1994, the number of
informal settlements has increased by 119% over the same period.

Ngamanye amezwi njengobana inani labantu abafuna izindlu likhula nje
kodwana ukwakhiwa kwezindlu kilomnyango kuyehla. [In other words as the
number of people who want houses increases, the building of houses in this
department decreases.]

Further, as the government continues to fall behind its targets, and the
demand for more housing increases, it is also failing to provide quality
houses for South Africa’s poor. Every year the Department of Housing
transfers millions of rands to the provinces for the building of RDP
houses, but there is a critical difference between the actual amount
transferred and the value of the final product. Increasingly, ordinary
South Africans are being presented with houses that simply do not last.

I-DA ngaso soke asikhathi ithola iinghonghoyilo ezivela emphakathini
mayelana nezindlu ezisebujameni obungakarisiko ezakhiwa ngurhulumende,
begodu abosonkontraka basaragela phambili ngomsebenzi ongathabisiko.
(Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[The DA receives complaints all the time from communities with regard to
houses that are not in good condition. The government continues to build
houses of poor quality.]

As some of the projects consultants and contractors don’t submit house
plans to the local municipality, no inspections are done by either the
local inspectors or the National Home Builders’ Registration Council
inspectors. In fact, the NHBRC has confirmed to me that they are not
informed about some of the projects that are taking place in some of our
country’s municipalities.

If the NHBRC doesn’t even know about the department’s plans, how on earth
can the department maintain effective quality control and oversight? More
to the point, how can ordinary South Africans expect a house that meets the
most basic criteria? Government is not worried about what is happening at
building sites on the ground. It has removed itself from the process. It is
out of touch.

Lezi ngezinye zezinto ezibanga ubukhohlakali. [These are some of the things
that causes corruption.]

The Department of Housing needs to come up with an effective monitoring
system to ensure that we don’t repeat the same mistakes in future. Millions
of South Africans need houses, but it is not good enough to simply provide
a number of walls which will fall down in two years’ time. That does no-one
any good. It does not ensure that it provides both quality and quantity,
and it needs to do so as a matter of urgency.

Ngiyathokoza. [Thank you.]

Nksz N J NGELE: Mhlalingaphambili, Baphathiswa abakhoyo, Malungu ePalamente
nabo bonke abaze kusizimasa, molweni. Makhe ndilungise nje indawana encinci
endikhathazayo. Uyazi, asiyonyani into yokuba abantu abangafumani mvuzo
ofanelekileyo abakhathalelwanga. Asiyonyani loo nto. Umntu asuke kwindawo
yakhe aze kuphosisela abantu abaninzi kangaka. Ndiza kuyichaza loo nto
kwangoku.

Siyambulela uMphathiswa wezeZindlu ngommangaliso nomzekelo awenzileyo,
wokwakhela abantu bonke izindlu. Kwabanye abantu, umntu akazange alufumane
ulonwabo lokuphatha isitshixo sendlu yakhe ngesandla, aqonde ukuba kutshixa
yena; kuvula mna. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Namhlanje izitshixo zezindlu zisezifubeni zethu.

Izindlu ebezisakhiwa ngurhulumente wakuqala - uyazi, bayandimangaza aba
bantu, inene kaMdali, xa begxeka izindlu zangoku - bezifana zonke, ungazazi
nokuba useFreyistata okanye use-Transkei, njengoko yayibizwa njalo
ngaphambili. Inye nje into, uza kuthi xa ufika kwezi zindlu, uphuma okanye
ungena edolophini, ubone nje ukuba kuhlala abantu abamnyama apha. Luhlobo
lwezindlu esasilwakhelwa ngootshomi bam aba. Namhlanje -ndiphendula lo
ebesithi abantu abakhathelelwanga - uyazikhethela indlu oyifunayo
ngokomvuzo wakho. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
Zikhona izindlu zabantu abanomvuzo ophantsi, zikhona ezabanomvuzo
ophakathi, zikwakho nezabaya. Wonke umntu ufumana indlu ngelungelo lakhe.
Siyambulela urhulumente we-ANC ngoba siyazikhethela izindlu esifuna
ukuhlala kuzo.

Ndikhumbula la ndlu sasiyakhelwe kudala. Thina singabantwana
sasingazithandi iindwendwe, ngoba zakufika sasidinga indawo yokulala, ze
silaliswe ngaphantsi kweetafile. Zizidlu ke ezo abazibona ukuba zingcono
kunezi esizakhayo thina singuKhongolozi.

Uthi uMgaqo-siseko weli lizwe: “Umntu ngamnye unelungelo lokuba nendlu
efanelekileyo.” Uthi wona uMqulu waMalungelo: “Kuya kubakho izindlu,
ukhuseleko, nobuntofontofo.” Uthatho-nxaxheba luluntu lubaluleke kakhulu,
ngakumbi koorhulumente bezekhaya. Kodwa ngenxa yeendlela zonxibelelwano
kwakunye neendlela zokuhambisa ulwazi, iindaba zophuhliso lwezindlu
nokuziswa kweenkonzo eluntwini okuye kwenzeka ukuba lungafikeleli eluntwini
Yiyo loo nto abantu abaphikisayo besoloko bengaboni ukuba kwenzeka ntoni.
Ndixelele, xa unengqondo engaboniyo, uza kubona njani ngamehlo?
[Kwahlekwa.]

Enye into, kuyafuneka ukuba oomasipala babe neliso elibukhali lokujonga
indlela eziphethwe ngayo ezi zindlu. Makucoceke, kulinywe imifuno, zinto
ezo eziya kuba luncedo nasempilweni yomntu.

NgoMvulo lo ubuyizolo, ndikhe ndatyelela eModimolle. Sifike izindlu
zisemgangathweni wokuhlala. Into endiyibonileyo, nendiyithethileyo
kumnikazi mzi, kukuba yena esitiyeni sakhe utyale nje umbona. Ndithe kuye:
Ewe umbona ulungile, kodwa wuxube nemifuno: izinto ezifana namakhaphetshu
nezipinashi, ongazisebenzisa xa kunzima, nenyama ingekho.

Xa ufika kwidolophu entle gqitha yaseTshwane, siza kukuthatha sikuse
kwindawo apho abantu bathi bafumana umhlaba wokulima, apho bathi batyale
zonke iintlobo-ntlobo zemifuno namachiza, konke nje. [Uwele-wele.] Umntu
owaqala loo nto ukhona apha ePalamente. Siyamcela ke urhulumente ukuba
asiphe imihlatyana enjalo, ngoba iluncedo kakhulu ebantwini.

Abanye oomasipala bakunika indawo yokwakha indlu, kungakhange kwakhiwe
iziseko zoluntu, apho kufuneka uqale ngokugawula imithi phambi kokuba
wakhe. Akukho zindlela, kungekho nazindlu zangasese.

Intombazana ethile ithe yafumana ukuphazanyiswa iye ngasese. Kaloku
endaweni enjalo awuyi ngasese emini, uya ukutshona kwelanga. Ithe ke xa
isiya, yafika sele kukho abantu abayilindileyo, yaba nokuphazamiseka ke
ngolo hlobo. Yiyo ke loo nto sicela urhulumente ukuba asilungiselele
imihlaba phambi kokuba sakhe. Andisathethi ke ngamanzi kwiindawo ezi njalo,
ngoba akude kakhulu.

Siyamcela ngoko umasipala ukuba aziqwalasele ezo ndawo. Kodwa ke, sikhona
isibhambathiso esithe satyikitywa ngooceba bonke, apho bazibophelela
ekubeni baza kudibana noluntu rhoqo ukuze bakwazi ukuluchazela ngezigqibo
ezichaphazela ezezindlu ezithatyathwe libhunga. Sinethemba ke lokuba ngoku
sifumene ooceba abakhuthalele abantu. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms N J NGELE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members and hon guests, I
greet you. I would, from the outset, like to correct a disconcerting
misconception. It is not true that we do not care about people who earn low
salaries. It is important that people know that that is not true. No one
should come here and lie to so many people.

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Housing for building houses
for everybody. Some people never experienced the joy of holding a key in
their hands. Today we keep the keys to our own houses in our bosoms.
[Applause.]

I am always surprised at the people who criticise the houses that the
current government builds. The previous government built houses that looked
the same whether in the Free State or the former Transkei. One would take a
drive around town and see the difference between those for black people and
the ones for white people. Today people choose their houses according to
what they can afford and according to their salaries.

There is housing for low-income, middle-income and high-income earners.
That is my response to the member who said that we do not care about
people. We appreciate it that the ANC-led government has afforded us such
an opportunity, that of being able to make a choice about what kind of
housing we want to live in. [Applause.]

I cannot forget the house we lived in when we were still young. There
wasn’t enough space for all of us and we would therefore be forced to sleep
under the tables when we had visitors at home. So, naturally we did not
welcome visitors. Can those be better houses than the ones the ANC is
building?

It is enshrined in the Constitution of this country that everyone has the
right to have access to adequate housing. The Freedom Charter says that
there shall be houses, security and comfort. People’s participation is very
important, especially in local government. However, because of poor systems
of communication, news about housing development and service delivery does
not reach some people. That may be the reason the opposition does not seem
to know what is happening. How, do you think, can you see with your eyes if
your mind is blocked? [Laughter.]

Furthermore, municipalities need to establish monitoring systems to ensure
acceptable living standards in these settlements. Inhabitants should be
encouraged to keep them clean and cultivate vegetable gardens, because
cleanliness and good food are good for one’s health.

On Monday I visited a place called Modimolle. Houses there are in good
condition. I told the owners to plough maize. I also said that maize is
good but it should be combined with other vegetables, like cabbage and
spinach, that one could use during difficult times and when there is no
meat available.

When you get to the beautiful city of Tshwane, we will take you to see
areas where people who have received farming land produce different kinds
of vegetables and herbs. The person who initiated that project is present
here today. We would like to ask the government to provide us with more
pieces of land because they always prove useful to people.

Other municipalities give out unserviced pieces of land and one would first
have to cut down trees before starting to build. There is no
infrastructure. There are no roads nor is there a sewerage system.

One day a certain girl found herself in trouble when she was attacked and
raped while she had gone to relieve herself. It was at an open space and
one can visit such a place only in the evening. It is for this reason that
we ask the government to service our land before any building can occur.
Access to water is another requirement that is a necessity and should be
taken care of as matter of urgency in such areas.

We appeal to municipalities to consider these areas of concern seriously.
We know about the commitment they made to constantly meet with their
constituencies and inform them about decisions that are taken by councils
regarding housing. We trust that we have found the kind of people who are
dedicated to work for the upliftment of communities.]

The implementation of the housing sector plans in the local housing
department through the IDP process and an effective public participation
faces a problem due to the need to develop capacity in housing delivery
programmes or to outsource development in an effective manner and monitor
results.

Bureaucratic levels mainly perpetuate the challenges of public
participation at both provincial and national levels. These negatively
affect the administration of the development processes at the levels of
government, especially the local government departments. The recommended
strategy is to derive the mechanisms that will enable the omnipresence of
the provincial departments to both the national and local governments. This
can be improved by bringing about co-ordination and transparency among
these three government spheres.

Lastly, public participation has emerged as a fundamental tenant in the
promotion of local governance in fast tracking service delivery.

Since the demise of the apartheid regime in 1994, South Africa has put in
place various mechanisms to ensure that the broader population is an active
participant in the governance of the affairs of the country. Within the
country’s evolving democratic culture, there are still challenges that are
hampering the effectiveness of the country’s measure to foster public
participation, including poor communication, lack of information and
complicated bureaucratic processes. The ANC supports the vote. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Madam Deputy Speaker, as we debate this budget vote today,
millions of Africans live in squatter settlements, have no roofs over their
heads and the chilling winter is penetrating deep into their mortal beings.

These are the challenges facing this department.

The PAC has observed that the more houses are built, the more the housing
backlog increases. It will be a miracle to meet the objectives of the
Millennium Goals of ending the shacks by 2014 when analysing the conditions
of housing on the ground.

The PAC wishes to show appreciation, though, for more than a million houses
built for the poorest of the Africans who if there were no government
interventions, could never have realised the dream of owning a house in
their life time.

The PAC further wishes to congratulate women contractors who have taken it
upon themselves to get involved in housing projects in our country. We
encourage all women and the youth to increase their involvement in housing
construction.

The Ministry should further look into building houses in exclusively white
areas and bring people nearer to their places of employment.

The department should further look into purchasing buildings or flats in
towns and cities to house people as a form of diverting them from creating
informal settlements in dangerous areas such as Diepsloot and others. The
private sector and financial institutions must be encouraged to come to the
party and invest in these types of housing schemes.

The Ministry’s initiative of human settlement against scattered and
sprawling houses all over the country is most welcome.

The Breaking New Ground Programme and pilot projects such as the N2 Gateway
should be supported. But government must plan ahead who the beneficiary of
such projects are to prevent unnecessary delays and suspicions created
thereof.

The PAC supports the Vote [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, having read the report, the MF
acknowledges the major challenges the department is experiencing in
provinces in housing delivery. Housing is experiencing a major backlog with
demand and supply far from reaching the targets. The fact that, as reported
by our hon Minister of Housing, informal settlers has increased from 1,4
million to 2,4 million expresses the volume of this challenge.

The MF does point out that low-cost houses are being erected but not enough
or fast enough to meet the amount needed. However, we do acknowledge the
department’s endeavours and efforts to deliver and its delivery in this
regard. We do, however, feel that intensifying private-sector investment
and joint endeavours with government to increase the volume of quality
houses erected will greatly serve to address the challenge.

The MF applauds Talk Radio 702, First National Bank and government’s recent
joint ventures in housing projects. We feel that such collective efforts
need to be extended to all provinces. Properties are ridiculously
expensive, making it virtually impossible for middle-income persons to
afford their own homes. We are pleased that FNB is paving the way for
private home ownership by making bonds available to lower and middle-income
earners.

In the hon President’s state of the nation address, a clear indication to
address the housing situation was made with the firm intention to eradicate
the bucket system by 2007. The time has arrived to address all the
shortfalls and to increase delivery, and that delivery needs to be of
housing that is safe and meets standards as conditions for accommodating
our homeless.

Further, housing needs to be allocated to local residents who have been
victim of informal settlements from the apartheid era; and, secondly,
housing allocations must be made to the backyard dwellers. We seldom hear
of them but their need for proper housing is by no means less.

Furthermore, the MF is disheartened by the situation in KwaZulu-Natal. KZN
is one of our most populous areas of mostly black, unemployed, informal
settlers. The delivery of houses has been too slow and, when looking at the
province report, concern is expressed as to why we have such a poor
representation of women SMMEs trained in housing delivery. Further, at the
current rate of delivery, the fear sets in that informal settlements will
still be home to many 10 years from now. However, the MF chooses to pin its
faith in the department to turn around the housing situation.

We further call on the private sector to assist with the situation and,
while patience is difficult to ask of these informal settlers, we say,
intensify transparency in the department and make public the efforts to
deliver and the commitment to doing so, so that our people may know. The MF
supports the budget. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Hon Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, hon members, comrades, ladies and gentlemen, fellow South
Africans, “There shall be houses, security and comfort.” This was the
demand of the people as far back as 1955 when the Freedom Charter was
adopted. The people’s document commits us to the ideal of a society without
slums or shacks, a society living in new suburbs where all have transport,
roads, social centres, etc.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme document endorses the
principle that all South Africans have the right to a secure place in which
to live in peace and dignity. Housing is a human right and a basic need. In
line with the Freedom Charter and the RDP document, our Constitution states
that everyone has the right to have access to adequate housing. Together
with all South Africans, we have a responsibility to create a society that
allows each person the opportunity to realise their fullest potential.

The People’s Housing Process, the PHP, is one other project that promotes
the participation of beneficiaries in the building of their houses. The
beneficiaries are assisted in accessing land and services, housing
subsidies, establishment and facilitation grants and technical and
logistical assistance. The benefit of a programme such as the People’s
Housing Process includes the promotion of a culture of Vukuzenzele, which
is about public active participation and the discouragement of complete
dependency on government.

It also promotes the cost-effective utilisation of resources, such as
building materials, and human, time and even finance resources. The
programme creates employment opportunities and facilitates access to
subsidies and support grants. The outcomes of PHP are that when
beneficiaries are given a chance either to build houses or to organise the
building of their houses, they build bigger and good quality houses for
less money as they save a lot from labour. [Applause.]

We have witnessed in Mpumalanga the building of houses of up to 60 square
metres by means of beneficiary contributions in the form of labour and
material. Talk of people-centred development is the PHP, that is, the
People’s Housing Process.

Kungenxa yazo zonke lezi zinto ezibaliwe nge-PHP ezenza ukuthi iPhalamende
labantu lithi lomsebenzi kufanele uqhubeke. Siyavuma futhi ukuthi imele,
njengezinqumgomo zonke, inqubomgomo ye-PHP ibukezwe njengoba umnyango wenza
ukuze izosebenza kangcono. Yingakho futhi leli Phalamende lavuma ukuba kube
khona uhlelo lwe-People’s Housing Partnership Trust, i-PHPT. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[It is as a result of the above-mentioned reasons regarding PHP that the
People’s Parliament says that this work must continue. We agree that like
other policies, the PHP policy must be reviewed, as the department is
doing, so that it will function better. That is why this Parliament agreed
on the People’s Housing Partnership Trust, the PHPT.]

... the aim of which is to create a critical mass of support and promote
public awareness of the PHP by establishing a viable and sustainable
framework of support for the People’s Housing Process at all levels.

Nokho akujabulisi ukusebenza kwalolu hlelo. Lokhu kufakazelwa yisivinini
esingesihle ekwakhiweni kwezindlu ze-PHP. [However, we are not happy with
the way this project is functioning. The slow pace at which PHP houses are
being built justifies this.]

We appreciate the fact that the People’s Housing Partnership Trust, PHPT,
is now being restructured, and we do expect great improvement in the
delivery of PHP houses.

We understand and appreciate the fact that the issue of housing worldwide
is not an easy one. Even developed states such as the US are still battling
with it today, but generally there is observable lack of enthusiasm and
commitment to the PHP project.

Whilst we acknowledge challenges such as the unavailability of building
materials sometimes, land acquisition, infrastructure, title deeds, lack of
competent support organisations, etc, we think that there is a lack of
wanting to make it happen not by all but by some officials.

We, nevertheless, are of the view that the monitoring of provinces by the
national office is imperative and will have a positive impact. We think
that government has to speedily fight against nonperformance by officials,
which is caused by negligence or an “I don’t care” attitude.

As Parliament, we will be more vigorous in exercising our oversight
function. It can’t be business as usual. We cannot lack the courage to put
to practical test ideals that, in our view, carry the greatest probability
of advancing our people, especially the most disadvantaged section of
society. For, we must constantly wonder what will happen to them if we do
not act in their interests or favour.

The building of houses is labour-intensive. It combines short-term measures
that provide a degree of immediate relief through employment opportunities
and long-term interventions through training and skills development aimed
at sustainable job creation. Housing also provides expanded social
infrastructure and critical service delivery to poor communities. We all
know that infrastructure lays a solid foundation for sustainable economic
growth.

We seek, basically, to transform unequal power relations in society and
create the conditions in which the majority of our people have skills,
access and the means to control their own lives. The potential of all South
Africans will be fully realised through redistributing resources, investing
in infrastructure and in our people as a key resource of the reconstruction
and development of our society.

Mr Lucky Dube, the deputy director in charge of the PHP in Gert Sibande
District in Mpumalanga, says that for him the success of the PHP in the
main has been the maximum transfer of skills by means of beneficiary
training in different building skills, which they do in collaboration with
other departments such as the Department of Labour. Surely, such outcomes
are exciting and encouraging? They confirm the age of hope the President
referred to in his state of the nation address in February this year.

We also appreciate the fact that the department is granting bursaries for
housing-related courses at universities and technikons to our children. We
would like to urge the department to continue with such gestures and to
consider increasing the bursaries so that more learners can benefit. I will
further insist that such bursaries be biased towards the rural and poor
children.
Music artists of our times sang as follows: Zingaba buhlungu zonke izinto
emhlabeni kodwa hhayi njengokwesela indawo yokulala. [Everything can be
painful, but there is nothing more painful than being homeless.] You can
then guess my age.

Umbuzo okumele siwuphendule kulesi sikhathi uthi ... [The question that we
must answer at this juncture is ...]

To what extent has housing advanced our fight to push back the frontiers of
poverty? In trying to answer this, I’m arguing that the relevant policies
are in place and the political will to achieve a better life for all is
beyond doubt. For the majority of South Africans, the future looks bright.
Our definition of hope is based on the concrete realities of the present,
as reflected in the real houses we see right round the country.

I-ANC ayenzi nje izethembiso ngezindlu ngoba isidingo sezindlu ngeke
saphunyeliswa izethembiso kuphela ... [The ANC does not only make promises
about houses, because housing needs won’t be fulfilled by promises ...]

... but actual delivery of houses.

In conclusion, we are a nation at work. We hold the view that South
Africans have a desire to strive toward and arrive at a shared destiny. We
have a vision; we have a purpose; we are engaged; we have passion and
commitment; we have love for the people of South Africa; and we are on
course. The citizens of this country will play their role as part of a
contract they have with the ANC. Together we will make it.

Amandla awethu! [Ihlombe.] [Power to the people! ][Applause.]]

Ms N M MDAKA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Ministers, hon members, housing
development has not yet contributed positively towards the realisation of
better housing for all. We are all aware that in some parts of our
communities houses are being built and left unfinished. In other areas,
where they are finished, they are not allocated due to political bungling.
If houses are built but unallocated, people will be impatient as has been
the case with the N2 Gateway and with the Joe Slovo residents. People will
be tempted to disregard protocol if government is not moving as fast as
expected.

Drawing on the lessons provided in the past 11 years, we cannot disregard
that corruption is the number one enemy in housing delivery. We expect the
Ministry to take the lead until people are allocated, and not to leave
everything to the local councillors as they use this opportunity to further
their political scores. The UIF supports the Budget Vote. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Madam Deputy Speaker, Comrade Minister, comrades and hon
members, the Housing Budget Vote, which we are discussing today, will
impact on the living conditions of thousands of South Africans in the
coming year. It is the third budget vote debate since the 2004 national and
provincial elections and the first since the local government elections of
this year.

This budget builds on the commitments which the ANC made in both the 2004
and 2006 elections. In 2004, the ANC committed itself to building more
subsidised housing and introducing medium-density housing closer to places
of work and to provide those who have as yet not received such housing with
serviced stands for a more decent living.

In the 2006 local government election, the ANC committed itself to
improving the way government provides housing to ensure better quality
houses closer to economic opportunities and combating corruption in the
administration of waiting lists. The Freedom Charter says, and I quote:


   Slums shall be demolished, and new suburbs built where all have
   transport, roads, lighting, playing fields, crèches and social centres.

The programme of the National Department of Housing is delivering on all of
these commitments. The President indicated in the state of the nation
address on 3 February this year that, and I quote:


   The Ministry of Housing and the SA Local Government Association have
   reached an agreement on the sale of land for housing development. Through
   this agreement, municipalities will allocate land closer to economic
   centres for housing development for middle and lower income people.


The programmes of the National Department of Housing also focuses on the
upgrading of informal settlements and the creation of new human settlements
with the necessary infrastructure that enables people to bring up their
families in comfort and security. This clearly demonstrates that the ANC
delivers on the commitments it makes.

Over the past 12 years, over 1,9 million housing subsidies have been
granted - impacting on the living conditions of well over six million South
Africans. It is therefore important that all those who are involved in the
housing delivery programme, whether they are in national, provincial or
local spheres of government or whether they are developers, contractors,
plumbers or electricians, are dedicated and committed to provide quality
housing. This includes ensuring that housing projects are not delayed,
contractors are paid on time, quality homes are built and that all
available funds are used within a given financial year.

The increase in the allocations to Vote 28, Housing, over the past few
years has seen an improvement in both the size and quality of the housing
units being delivered. It also provides hope to the people of our country
that they will be housed in adequate shelter.

In September 2004, the Comprehensive Plan for the Development of Integrated
Sustainable Human Settlements was announced. A part of the strategy was
aimed at changing special settlement patterns through the building of
multicultural communities representing a truly nonracial society. Included
in this new strategy was the upgrading of informal settlements and the
development of new human settlements.

It was announced by Minister Sisulu at the time that each province would
identify an informal settlement upgrade pilot project and a human
settlement pilot project. Included among these pilot projects was the N2
Gateway Project here in Cape Town and Cosmo City in Gauteng.

Considerable progress has been made in Cosmo City, with some 400 hundred
families having already moved into newly constructed subsidised homes. Bank
financed homes are also being constructed.
Cosmo City represents a shift away from just rows of houses to the creation
of vibrant and sustainable communities. As we participate in this debate,
tarred roads are in place, streetlights have been erected, schools are
being built and parks have been established.

I have had the opportunity to speak to many of the new residents of Cosmo
City, who previously lived in Zevenfontein and Riverbend. All of them,
without exception, have indicated their happiness and satisfaction with
their new homes and the infrastructure being provided. [Applause.]

The N2 Gateway Project here in Cape Town has made considerable progress. We
need to remind ourselves where we are in terms of this project. It was
announced last year in February. Just over a year later, units are complete
and visible for all to see. As the Minister has announced in her speech
earlier on, people will start to be allocated in the next month.

According to a presentation, which the Banking Association of South Africa
made to the portfolio committee on 10 May this year, the township
development process, starting from the procurement of land to the
installation and hand over of services, normally takes between 30 and 59
months.

The N 2 Gateway Project has taken just 15 months to get to where it is
today. [Applause.]

Deputy Speaker, through you to the Minister and her team of MECs and all
other members of the Minister’s team, we have to say: Well done on the job
done so far. [Applause.]

This is the very reason why pilot projects are being undertaken in all the
provinces. Lessons are being learned, procedures are being re-looked at,
all of which will help to reduce delays and save costs in the long run.

We would also want to encourage those provinces where the pilot projects
are progressing more slowly to take the necessary measures to increase the
speed of the implementation of their respective pilot projects.

When the portfolio committee interacted with provinces on the
implementation of these pilot projects, we were told that there had been
considerable improvements in the interdepartmental planning and
communication, but that there was still room for improved co-ordination and
budgeting. We trust that the Minister, with her MECs, will ensure that
measures are taken to these processes.

We want to express our concern, however, at the deliberate attempts being
undertaken by the Mayor of Cape Town, Hellen Zille, to destabilise the N2
Gateway Project. Already, she has redirected
R18 million away from the N2 Gateway Project. These actions clearly
indicate where the priorities of the DA are, and they are certainly not
directed at the poor and most vulnerable of our society.

I would like to thank the Minister, through you Deputy Speaker, for making
clear the role-players in the N2 Gateway, and we hope that the Mayor of
Cape Town would have heard what you would have said. Hopefully, those
opposition parties who have decided to get into bed with the DA will wake
up and realise that their partner is nothing more than a wolf in sheep’s
clothing. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

In last year’s Budget Vote on Housing, the Minister announced that the
NHBRC would be tasked with the setting up of the Housing Innovation Hub, to
which individuals and organisations would be invited to demonstrate
innovative methods of house construction.

This past Monday members of the portfolio committee visited the Innovation
Hub situated at Soshanguve in Tshwane. We were greeted by a whole range of
homes having been built using innovative and different methods of
construction.

Particularly impressive was that a 45m square home with a full bathroom and
ceilings has been constructed utilising the current subsidy allocation.
Selected entrants will be given the opportunity to build homes using their
innovative methods in a pilot to be launched in Soshanguve.

We also visited Modimolle in the Limpopo Province where the NHBRC showcased
homes of 50 square meters. These are in line with the mandate that they
were given by the Minister to produce house designs and castings, which
could be used in the housing delivery programme as a standard in the new
human settlements.
We look forward to see the positive impact which both of these initiatives
will have on the housing programme. The products on view, will ensure that
our people do not just receive houses but rather that they receive homes.

We must congratulate the NHBRC for having implemented the mandate they were
given and look forward to see new human settlements showcasing homes of
different designs. [Applause.]

We are looking forward to the implementation of the memorandum of
understanding between the Minister of Housing and the financial
institutions for the utilisation of the R42 billion set aside by the
financial institutions for housing development for income earners earning
between R1 500 and R7000 per month. This will enable this category of
income earners to access housing loans and enter the housing market and
become homeowners in a sector to which they were previously denied.

We welcome the announcement that the Minister has made today that
agreements have been concluded with the financial sector, but we also trust
that she will keep the pressure on, and won’t let the pressure off the
financial sector.

I would like to quote from an article written by Mr. Yusaf Abramjee, Group
Head of News and Talk Programming for Primedia Broadcasting, which was
published in the Pretoria News on 16 May of this year, and I quote:


   Whilst it certainly is the responsibility of the government to provide
   housing, this does not mean that the rest of us can just sit back and
   wait for government to deliver. The private sector has a major role to
   play and it is time for its contribution to increase so that government’s
   initiatives can be maximised. It is our right to demand, to criticise and
   to praise, but we also need to put our money where our mouths are. As a
   nation we all have a housing shortage to alleviate.

We need to applaud the 702 FNB Housing Initiative in association with the
Department of Housing, which was launched at Cosmo City on Thursday 18 May.
We hope that this move will inspire both the financial and private sectors
to play their part in building a better South Africa that would benefit
future generations to come.

In last year’s budget speech, Minister Sisulu announced the social contract
with the private sector, which would include the allocation of 20% of all
developments to affordable housing. We are anxiously waiting the
implementation of this social contract and would call on the property
developers to voluntarily participate and support this initiative and not
wait for legislation to enforce participation. We would also like to
welcome the announcement that the Minister has made about the pilot project
in Kwazulu–Natal and I am sure, as a portfolio committee, we will be
watching this very closely.

As I come to conclusion, I would like to comment on two particular points
that were raised in this debate. Firstly, the hon Mr Steyn of the DA
claims, and has made the claims standing here, that he stands here on
behalf of the poor, yet, the track record that he has so proudly spoken
about here in this House today, certainly, wouldn’t indicate that. That he
really think that by building one house in 12 years that the poor and most
vulnerable in South Africa would look to him and the DA? Most certainly
not! [Applause.] [Interjections.] The election results prove that.

Then I would like to just address an issue that both the UDM and the ACPD
have raised, and I would like to suggest to them that whilst they might be
small parties, they should at least take time to attend the portfolio
committee meetings because maybe they don’t understand that government has
taken major steps to ensure that the quality of housing is improved.
Perhaps they might even be able to join us as we go out on visits to
provinces, where they would actually see that quality of houses has
improved over the last few years, and not come here and make statements
that the quality of housing is poor and that houses are falling down.
[Applause.] Government has taken steps to rectify that. [Interjections.]

Also, just for the ACDP’s information, the houses that government is
currently building include internal walls and separate rooms. We in the
ANC, as I conclude, are confident that our housing policy is on the right
road. We are equally confident that there shall be housing, security and
comfort for all.

The ANC will support this budget vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker. I must
take this opportunity to welcome my new DG, Mr Benny Kotsoane, who has been
in the job now for two weeks. [Applause.] He is the former MEC of Housing
and before that he was the MEC for Safety and Security in the Free State.
[Applause.]

I also want to take this opportunity to welcome today my girl child whom I
have taken to work - I don’t know where she is, Ms Sindile Thabethe. She
hopes that one day she will join the ranks of this House. [Applause.]

I would also like to thank the president of Shack Dwellers International. I
see that he has brought along with him a whole lot of people, who, as the
Deputy President has indicated, are clad in the same colours as myself – it
is pure co-incidence - it was not planned at all. [Laughter.] I thank you
all for your unimaginable support.

I want to thank my MECs who are also present here. My MECs, without you, I
would not be where I am today. I thank you for bearing with me and for the
energy that you have put into Housing. It makes me so much prouder, thank
you. [Applause.]

I want to thank the portfolio committee for their support at all times. I
want to say to Zoliswa Kota, the MECs and myself are very conscious of the
support that you have given us. We thank you and the portfolio committee
very much for that. [Applause.]

I would also like to thank the banks that are amongst my best friends and
have taken a long time to get to this point with me. I would like to thank
them very much for the space we have covered together and the agreements we
have reached. It has made it so much more possible for me to deliver on
what needs to be done. [Applause.]

I would like to thank the partners for housing who have believed in me all
the time. I would like to thank all those who have committed themselves to
the social contracts, Shack Dwellers International, and Federation of the
Urban Poor Association, which we have here with us. [Applause.]

I would like to thank, in particular, Rose Molokoane the star of our own
FEDUP association and an award-winning activist. [Applause.] Thank you very
much, Rose and Patrick Magebhula for all your support.

I would like to thank Talk Radio 702 and in particular the use of Abram T,
who is now turned a fervent housing activist – it has worked in my favour.
Thank you very much. I would like to thank Habitat for Humanity for the
incredible support and co-operation they have given me.

Thank you also to Kgosi Leruo Moletlegi for his support in the vision that
I have for housing. I would like to thank my panel of advisors and special
advisors we’ve come a very long way and I would not be here without them. I
would like to thank Niall Mellon for his extraordinary generosity.

I would also like to thank my department, especially the housing
institutions who are always ready to go the extra mile; Phetola, Samson,
Manye, Cedric and Velem. I would like to welcome the DG to the hot seat and
thank you very much for the extraordinary support you have given me over
the past two weeks and to the DDG Dlabantu who held the fort. To my own
office, I don’t know what I would have been without you.

Madam Deputy Speaker, after concerns that were raised here last year by hon
members about the credibility of the housing list across the country I
resolved to ensure that the matter was attended to. As reported late last
year, an audit company was appointed in this regard. The first phase of the
task of auditing the list has now been concluded and I can proudly announce
that the waiting list for the Cape Town metropolitan area has been
completed. Using the lessons learned in this pilot project we are ready to
commence with other municipalities.

We have set up criteria with the communities and the website for this is up
and running. You, as MPs are requested and called upon to help in your
constituencies to ensure that your members check and verify their names on
the website.

Concerning the most laughable claim, I would like to concur with Craig
here, was made by the DA that they speak on behalf of those who cannot
afford their own houses. [Interjections.] The hon member does not even know
where these people live. [Interjections.] He doesn’t. I have consistently
asked him to come along with me to see how the other side lives.
[Interjections.] Come along with me, Butch Steyn. Come along with me and
see a world completely closed to you and you know that I mean it. Come
along with me and you will see how we live. [Interjections.]

I am very glad that the DA’s conscience has been pricked and has risen to
the challenge of building a single house. But gauging from the amount of
noise generated by the opposition, you would have expected that they would
have done much more. I now challenge you, Butch Steyn to outdo yourself. I
am sure it cannot be difficult to outdo yourself on one house. Let us see
if in fact it is possible for you to outdo that record.

I also take note of the IFP’s concerns around the condition of hostels. I
have witnessed these conditions myself and I can only assure you that we
are dealing with the matter. It is true that the member has consistently
raised this issue with me. The Ekurhuleni Municipality is piloting new ways
in which we can deal with this hostel situation.

I would like to say to the, hon Shenge, that sometimes we find ourselves in
a difficult position here, because we as the government would like to see
these hostels change possibly into family units.

I am informed, Shenge, that the men who live in these hostels do not want
family units. They would much rather that these are single men’s hostels.
We will take that into consideration and ensure that we give them where
there could be single men’s affordable rentals.

I wish to inform hon Rajbally that our policy does cater for backyard
dwellers. Perhaps we will forward to you all the information on the
policies so that you have it all, knowing that you are a sole member of the
MF. [Interjections.] Oh, it has now grown to two members, congratulations.

Finally, it does appear to me that we are all at the same level about the
urgency around housing. There can be no doubt about that. Let us therefore
go out there and make a difference in the lives of our people. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Madam Speaker, local
government MECs, traditional leaders of our people, mayors and councillors
present in the gallery and hon members, this budget vote comes before the
House a little over two months after the local government elections which
took place on 1 March 2006. Our people’s participation in those elections
was premised on the legitimate expectation that it would help hasten the
dawn of a new age, an age characterised by the end of the use of the
abominable bucket system as a means of sanitation, universal access to
clean water, decent sanitation and electricity as well as the existence of
economic and social infrastructure which is of a quantity and condition
that guarantees sustainable economic development and social provisioning.
Indeed, together with our people, we understood that critical to the
realisation of these objectives is a plan to make our municipal system of
government work better.

As hon members are aware, in 2004 we carried out a diagnostic study of the
local government sphere. This was subsequently followed by a comprehensive
qualitative assessment, which was done in 2005. These undertakings brought
to light two deficiencies, which are desperately in need of urgent
attention. The first is the challenge of weak institutional capacity and
the second is the problem of inadequate systems of accountability.

National and provincial governments have gained an even much better feel of
the situation as we interacted through the Presidential and Ministerial
Izimbizo Programme of 2005 with 106 municipalities across all nine
provinces. Steps were taken to ensure that none of our municipalities
remains stuck in the unpromising corner where poor performance and the
attendant problem of service delivery backlogs are the order of the day.

A hands-on programme of support, known as Project Consolidate, was rolled
out. As at April 2006 a total of 112 experts, 18 graduates and 80
engineering students had been mobilised and deployed in a total of 69
Project Consolidate municipalities. The scale of coverage of the deployment
by municipal type spent 52 local municipalities and 17 municipal district
municipalities.

I will be remiss if I do not pause here to thank the following partners for
a heart-warming demonstration of solidarity. The Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry, the Local Government Seta, the Engineering Council of
South Africa, the Afrikaanse Handelsinstituut, National Treasury, the SA
Black Technical Careers Organisation, the SA Association of Civil
Engineers, the Department for International Development and the Institute
of Municipal Finance Officers.

Through the support of service delivery facilitators who came from these
organisations, Project Consolidate proved to be a milestone development
representing an important material sign of what could be achieved through a
co-operative system of governance. Various municipalities can now point to
the positive ways in which the lives of their residents were touched by the
interventions of the service delivery facilitators.

The Greater Kokstad Municipal Council, assisted by deployed service
delivery facilitators, was able to electrify 556 households and it remains
on course to complete the electrification of 1 000 households in the Horse-
Shoe informal settlement. The settlement is in the process of being
converted into a formal residential area.

Whereas the payment level of services rendered to the community of S J
Moroka stood at 11% as at July 2005, service delivery facilitators’
intervention helped the municipality to target major debtors and by January
2006 the payment level had increased to 45%. Similarly, in the municipality
of Machabeng the payment level increased from 51% in July 2005 to 62% by
February 2006. This and other examples too numerous to mention serve to
underscore the point that Project Consolidate is a prelude to the ushering
in of a season in which we shall have a local government system which has
the requisite capacity to discharge its mandate.

It is our intention to scale up and mainstream the hands-on support that we
are currently providing to targeted municipalities. Within this context of
intensified support for local government, priority attention shall be paid
to former cross-boundary municipalities as well as to the urban and rural
nodal municipalities.
As we continue to organise presidential and ministerial izimbizo, follow-up
actions shall be undertaken in order to ensure that our entire system of
government is indeed seen to be responsive to the priority needs of the
people. This explains why we are continuing to mobilise our country’s
knowledge base and to harness it to the task of improving the functional
effectiveness of our governance system.

As we speak, the Development Bank of Southern Africa, through an initiative
called Siyenza Manje, is in the process of recruiting 144 experts and 30
young graduates for deployment to priority municipalities over the next
three years. Ninety experts and graduates will be placed in the priority
municipalities by December 2006. These experts will provide support in the
areas of engineering, project management, financial management and town
planning.

The Department for Provincial and Local Government and the Department of
Public Service and Administration are also finalising the conceptualisation
of a contribution to be made by Project Khayetu towards enhancing national
and provincial government’s support for priority municipalities.

I must hasten to point out that welcome as this assistance is, it however
carries strong risks of deepening the pathology of local government
reliance on external sources of growth and development. In order to
forestall this ghastly prospect, we are taking steps to help strengthen the
political strategic capacity of the municipalities themselves.

In addition to the councillor induction programme directed at the over
9 000 newly elected councillors, we are also looking at the technical side
of local government’s functional status. In two day’s time, the department
will publish municipal performance management regulations for public
comment. This will enable us to finalise and issue generic performance
contracts. This will place municipalities in a position to have performance
agreements and contracts with senior managers that are linked to the
political mandate of elected representatives. Ultimately, this initiative
will help us put in place one of the crucial elements of sustainability.

The deployment of professionals to targeted municipalities will be
complemented by a range of parallel interventions aimed at augmenting the
fiscal resource base of municipalities. It is for this reason that out of
the R82,9 billion allocated to municipalities over the next three years,
the regional services council levy replacement provision to the tune of R24
billion has been made.

This replacement provision will compensate district and metropolitan
municipalities for lost revenue as a result of the abolition of the
Regional Services Council levies, which comes into effect from 1 July 2006.

An additional component of the local government equitable share for 2006-07
relates to the new framework for the remuneration of councillors. This
effectively means that subsidised funding is being made available from the
national fiscus.

An amount of R584 million will be transferred to support councillor
remuneration over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.
Furthermore, additional funding to the amount of R550 million will be made
available to district municipalities in order to assist them to carry out
the municipal health service functions.

The Municipal Property Rates Act will be implemented in a phased manner. By
the end of 2005 at least 17 municipalities considered themselves ready to
comply with the requirement of implementing the Act from 1 July.  We are
currently finalising the crafting of the relevant regulations and this will
soon be gazetted. The implementation of the Act will immensely strengthen
the financial and resource base of our municipalities.

One of our strategic areas of focus in the next five years will be to
improve our capacity to plan, manage and monitor infrastructure investment
and the provision of municipal services.

In 2005-06 government set aside R5,4 billion for the Municipal
Infrastructure Grant. By the end of March 2006 the entire amount had been
transferred to municipalities but actual expenditure stood at R3,9 billion.
In other words, the rate of spending on municipal infrastructure already
stands at 72%.

Increased spending levels in this regard had enabled us by the end of
December 2005 to provide 179 000 households with access to sanitation and
to provide to over 412 000 households access to potable water.

Even with respect to Municipal Infrastructure Grant expenditure, our
approach to monitoring is one, which consists of progress as an outcome of
joint efforts. It is a partnership, which transcends the monitor and the
monitored distinction. It is only in this way that we have been able to get
better insights into the impediments which impair the capacity of
municipalities to effectively manage projects.
We are now better placed to manage blockages in the MIG projects
registration process, strengthen existing and established additional
project management units in municipalities and to develop national
infrastructure master sector plans to guide infrastructure planning and
implementation at local level.

We are therefore confident that the R21,4 billion allocated to MIG over the
next three years will yield an optimal return.

Whereas the integrated development plans of municipalities were originally
conceived as strategic plans specific to the municipalities concerned, we
have come to regard the IDP as a potential fulcrum for raising issues to be
attended to by all the spheres of government. Clearly, therefore, all three
the stages of the Integrated Development Plan process starting from
conceptualisation through to formulation and ultimately to execution
require joint and co-ordinated inputs.

We are happy to report that, by March 2006, 80% of all municipalities in
the country had draft IDPs that benefited from intergovernmental
collaboration and support.

We are on course to ensure that by the end of June 2006, national and
provincial government will have convened intensive interactive sessions in
each province in order to assess the quality of every single draft IDP in
the country. This means that, for the first time in the history of our
country, by July 2006 we shall see a generation of municipal development
plans that is reflective of all the key priorities of national, provincial
and local government.

It is through this process that we are beginning to forge a better
alignment between the national spatial development perspective, the
provincial growth and development strategies, and the municipal IDPs.

In addition to institutionalising government’s commitment to discharge its
obligations to the people via the IDPs, attention shall also be paid to the
task of strengthening the intergovernmental co-ordination and
implementation mechanisms.

In this regard, the efficient operation of intergovernmental relations
system is essential for sustainable development and service provision.

At national level, the President’s co-ordinating council is fully
operational and all provinces have established province-wide
intergovernmental structures, as set out in the legislation.

The process of establishing district intergovernmental structures is also
continuing apace, throughout all 46 district municipalities in the country.
Within the next three months, we will finalise a practitioner’s guide on
intergovernmental relations. This will be an important resource for
practitioners across our three spheres of government. It will go a long way
towards forging complementarities regarding resources and capabilities of
each sphere of government.

Continuing attention is also being paid to the task of strengthening ward
committees. These ward committees represent a new relationship between
civil society and the rearticulated South African state. Participation in
this, coupled with the invaluable contribution of community development
workers, gives civil society the possibility to influence the direction of
state practice in a manner that changes the lives of our people for the
better.

Through the izimbizo programme of 2005, we had a more structured
interaction with ward committee members. We have since launched a handbook
for ward committees and the ward committee resource book. This was done on
10 February this year. In addition to this, we are working on a national
framework on public participation on local government and we are also
finalising a submission to the SA Qualifications Authority for an
accredited training course for ward committee members.

We are also determined to ensure that all the necessary development-
oriented partnerships are forged, especially at local level. To that end,
growth and development summits will be convened in all metropolitan and
district municipalities. These summits will provide the opportunity to
further confirm and refine the priorities identified in the IDPs. They will
also help facilitate the process of stakeholder mobilisation.

We have set our sights firmly on the goal of ensuring that, come the end of
local government’s current term, our people’s best hope for a better life
shall not be disappointed. Success in this regard will depend especially on
the skilful performance of our duties as public representatives in the
legislative bodies and the executive structures of the state at national,
provincial and local levels.

I want to assure this House that we in the Ministry and the Department for
Provincial and Local Government are determined to work untiringly for the
realisation of this goal. With your co-operation, success is certain. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Madam Chair, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, the former
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir, in his defence of their defiance of
the IMF for reintroducing exchange controls to stem the financial crisis
the region was facing, said in their culture when you are lost, you retrace
your steps, because at the beginning you are certainly likely to see where
you took a wrong turn.

That this budget vote takes place in May 2006, offers us an opportunity to
retrace our steps to look back at the Constitution - ten years this month -
which gave birth to or to put it differently, which became the compass
pointing out the path we needed to follow if we are to deal successfully
with the apartheid legacy.

Guided by this Constitution, we drew up the White Paper on Local Government
in a consultative manner, politically and administratively. This policy
paper in turn gave rise to six critical pieces of legislation that guide
all of us involved in local government. Also, these were drawn up in a
participatory manner.

When we look back over time, retracing our steps back like Mahathir did
with his collective, we in the ANC and our allies broadly judged also by
the people in the past elections in 2004 and 2006, are on course and the
path we are following is headed in the right direction.

Therefore, after examining the resources allocated to this department to
fulfil their constitutional mandate through various programmes designed to
address their vision of developing and promoting integrated governance, we
are quite happy to say we support this vote.

Your department, Comrade Minister, along with the Department of Public
Service and Administration is at the cutting edge to shape a coherent story
of what we mean by a developmental state, in theory and in practice.
It is important to point to everybody that we are not just regurgitating
what others would have us believe is old-style revolutionary terminology.
Many of them do so and say so because of their fear of our determination to
deepen transformation, bring about profound changes in the way the state
acts and behave in the interest of the majority who are poor. After all,
the poor in their numbers gave us pride of place and space in this Chamber.
So, what the state prioritises, acts on and how it does so must return its
appreciation of who gave it birth. [Applause.]

This department and your Ministry is also at the cutting edge of support to
all three spheres in amongst other ways through the Intergovernmental
Relations Act to co-operate in letter and spirit of the Constitution, whose
ten years we celebrate this year.

The IDPs you referred to is dynamically informed through ward committees
about people’s needs, prioritised into annual plans, are crucial for the
accuracy with which they truly reflect people’s needs. The announced focus
on community participation and empowerment this year will make a huge
difference if we mobilise additional resources to those that we approve
today to deepen the quality of capacity building that is necessary to make
this sustainable.

We also raised questions reflecting on the magnitude of the tasks your
department faces this year about the capacity of the department itself to
carry out this. Being proud of the supportive and the quality of the people
in your department already, we wondered whether you still do not need
additional people of the right calibre in terms of the skills they possess
employed in the right places and in appropriate numbers. Are you satisfied
Comrade Minister that the services the department procures externally
cannot be done internally? The complexity of governance, notwithstanding,
should we not be recruiting rigorously and retaining multi-skilled people
if only to retain the public service ethos that need to be pervasive
throughout this sector to be able to carry out the tasks which we hear loud
and clearly from your department need to be taken, especially also given
the line of march as articulated by the President in the state of the
nation address?

The responsibility of this department to work with the Presidency to
oversee implementation of the National Special Development Framework to
inform our provincial development strategies and IDPs is huge and requires
effective communication all round. We came to this conclusion in our
interaction with your department and Presidency on realising that often
people who should know about this and work with these linkages, including
allocating resources, do not know and are not fully aware of these
necessary linkages. This is indeed critical if the medium and long-term
expenditure strategies are truly to manifest harmony and alignment as the
President called for in the state of the nation address. The results of
this harmony and alignment will be in the higher and higher quality of
services that are delivered and reflected in citizen satisfaction.

While we must also see protests as have taken place in our country last
year, they reflect the true state of health of our democracy. They are as
much triggered by service delivery problems as they are of simple poor
communication. So, supporting provinces and municipalities to prioritise
this work will be a subject of our monitoring this coming year.

The then chairperson of the White Paper Political Committee, Pravin Gordhan
predicted correctly in 1998 that:


  Actually implementing the policies contained in this Paper will take a
  supreme effort, tremendous resilience and constructive participation of
  all role-players. It will require our participation and rolling up of
  sleeves, our acting like citizens, as opposed to mere atomised consumers
  of municipal services. It will require very specific commitment and
  effort from national and provincial government and not in the least, from
  councillors and administrators within local government.

This observation is as true when he made it in 1998 as it is today. The
point we are making about this, Comrade Minister, is that it would really
be worthwhile to reproduce the summary of this White Paper to provide a
compass to the legislation that it was to - the big picture we are working
with. It explains the problems and provides the suggested solutions we want
to work with as a theory. Like a torch, it throws light on the path, the
obstacles, the direction to follow. Like a blind person’s white stick, it
helps us navigate our way in potentially dangerous path. How can we be
actors in the local scene if we have not read the White Paper?

Regarding this moment and opportunity as a reorientation of ourselves
because we are entering a new term of office of local government but also
taking advantage of the fact that this is a celebration of 10 years of our
Constitution which guided us in the kind of local government we need to do,
reading that White Paper is a critical part of our re-induction and
reorientation.

One of the observations that it makes, for example, about the promotion of
sustainable development, which is the line of march of all of government,
is that sustainable government that is within the fiscal, institutional and
administrative means of the country, establishes viable communities,
protects the environment, meets the basic needs of all citizens in an
affordable way, ensures the safe use of land.

The support to municipalities must ensure the fulfilment of these goals of
local government to promote and bring about sustainable development.

Comrade Minister, my colleagues will speak on the various parts of the
programmes, we need to give disaster management a higher profile. The gains
we have made that we identify in our assessment, including in our
manifesto, are significant. However, these can be reversed by floods and
fires. Let’s give it a higher profile - it will be spoken on at length.
Internationally a book 746 pages long has already been written on the
history of Katrina in New Orleans. One of the observations that are made in
that book is the degree and the extent to which some things could have been
done that were not done, the extent to which national and other players did
not play or played their role. I think that lesson is very significant for
us. We do restate that what we need this year to build our serious new
cadres is to bring about sustainable development through democratic local
government.

I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mnr W P DOMAN: Voorsitter, die verkiesing van nuwe munisipale rade vanjaar
bring hoop dat verbetering in dienslewering sal geskied. Dit sal alleen
moontlik wees as munisipaliteite die foute van die afgelope vyf jaar vermy.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, the election of the new municipal councils this
year brings the hope that there will be an improvement in service delivery.
This will only be possible if municipalities avoid making the mistakes of
the past five years.]

Firstly, many municipalities that now have the opportunity to appoint a new
municipal manager and senior managers will have to appoint people with the
relevant skills and expertise. I think it is common cause that the ANC-
controlled municipalities all over the country, in the past five years, did
not strive to strike a justifiable balance between affirmative action, on
the one hand, and skills and expertise on the other. [Interjections.] No
wonder that this department’s own report on skills found that employment
equity and transformation were the main reasons for the lack of skills in
municipalities.

Last year, in reply to a question that I put to the Minister about the
qualifications of the 47 district municipal managers, at least 20 did not
appear to have the right qualifications. Some only had short courses in
local government, while others have little more than matric.

The DA believes that the municipal managers and senior staff appointed with
the correct qualifications should be paid market-related salaries and
rewarded according to their performance. The fact that 55 local
municipalities, which are under Project Consolidate, awarded their
municipal managers performance bonuses, does beg the question whether these
managers really deserve these bonuses.

The DA therefore welcomes the Minister’s announcement today that
performance contracts for municipal managers are now available; they will
at least give municipalities a clear indication what they should hold
municipal managers accountable for.

We also need guidelines about salaries and bonuses. The Minister should
have taken the SA Local Government Association to task long ago to assist
towards standardisation. Furthermore, there is an apparent general skill
shortage. The Minister and the Cabinet promised a skills audit but nothing
is forthcoming. How far are you with that?

The Minister is also quiet about the dismal performance of the local
government Seta. If the appropriate skilled people are not appointed in
this new term, local government will not deliver.

Secondly, we need open governance. Last year I quoted a report of the Cape
Times about complaints about the ANC mayoral committee of Cape Town that
governed behind close doors, and from whose meetings the media, let alone
the public, got no information. I stated that it was a recipe for
mismanagement. Now, one after another, the scandals unfold about the
decisions taken behind closed doors in Cape Town. [Interjections.]
It is inconceivable that the ANC, which claims to be so transparent, can
allow this system to continue because of a loophole in the law. The best
proof for the necessity of open mayoral committees is provided by the DA-
led coalition government in Cape Town. The mayor immediately opened up the
mayoral committee and, for example, the 2010 football stadium matters were
discussed in the open. Every stakeholder could react, even overreact, as
the ANC in the Western Cape did, but steps were taken towards a solution,
and everyone is happy now.

In the rest of the country, one can only wonder how much mismanagement and
corrupt deals take place behind the closed doors of mayoral committees.
[Interjections.] At the local government level, there is no separation
between the legislative and the executive, and therefore, mayoral
committees that have so many delegated powers and where most of the
decisions are taken must be open.

Minister, after five years, it must be clear that legislative changes like
the above are needed, and you and your department must take the initiative.

Thirdly, the legitimacy of municipalities, which was undermined by the
corruption, fraud, nepotism, self-enrichment and lavish privileges of
councillors and senior officials, must be restored. We have seen that all
over the country ordinary people are turning against their councillors and
they wonder: Was the liberation struggle about the enrichment of a few?
[Interjections.]

The extension of the contract of the municipal manager, Dr Wallace Mgoqi,
in Cape Town is a case in a point. On 18 February 2006, I warned in a
member’s statement in this House that the extension of his contract by the
ANC Mayor Mfeketo was illegal, in light of an earlier court ruling.

Deputy Minister Hangana replied, and I quote from Hansard:


  There is nothing wrong in the reappointment of the city manager. It is a
  prerogative of the Unicity mayor to reappoint a manager. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, please members. Order, please!

Mr W P DOMAN: Now the court has ruled her wrong. She should be more careful
and guard against showing ignorance of the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act, and condoning actions of enrichment.

Nou kom die sekretaris-generaal van die ANC in die Wes-Kaap, die agb
Skwatsha en sy Wes-Kaapse leier en hulle het die vermetelheid om te sê dat
die ANC hof toe moet gaan om die verkiesing van die uitvoerende
burgemeester Zille onwettig te verklaar, weens die onwettige kontrak en
optrede van die munisipale bestuurder. Die ANC moet eerder op sy knieë gaan
en die mense van Kaapstad om verskoning vra, want hulle het die hele gemors
veroorsaak. [Tussenwerpsels.]

In antwoord op ’n vraag van my dat politieke partye verantwoordelikheid
moet neem vir die dissiplinering van hulle raadslede, het die agb President
hier van hierdie podium af gesê dat hy dit in sy dagboek sal aanteken, dat
dit die dag is waarop hy met die DA saamgestem het. En die agb President
het woord gehou. Miskien het hy op daardie stadium iets geweet wat ons nie
weet nie, maar die ANC het ten minste 50% van sy raadslede nie laat
terugkeer na die stadsrade toe nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Now the secretary-general of the ANC in the Western Cape, the hon Skwatsha
and his Western Cape leader come and they have the audacity to say that the
ANC must go to court to declare the election of executive mayor Zille
illegal, owing to the illegal contract and the conduct of the municipal
manager. The ANC should rather go on its knees and apologise to the people
of Cape Town, because they caused the whole mess-up. [Interjections.]

In reply to a question of mine that political parties should take
responsibility for the discipline of their councillors, the hon President
said from this podium here that he would note it in his diary, and that
this was the day on which he had agreed with the DA. And the hon President
was true to his word. Perhaps at that stage he knew something of which we
are unaware, but the ANC saw to it that at least 50% of its councillors did
not return to the town councils.]

The DA, therefore, also welcomes ...

... dat die agb President so sterk standpunt in ANC Today in Maart ingeneem
het oor die nuutverkose ANC-burgermeesters en-raadslede wat nie aan die
verwagtinge voldoen nie, dat hulle verwyder sal word.

Hierdie Minister moet die President se leiding volg. Hy moet sy departement
se anti-korrupsieveldtog na alle munisipaliteite uitbrei. Hy moet self meer
sigbaar wees teen korrupsie en bedrog, indien ons ’n sukses in hierdie
termyn wil maak. Ons wil graag sien dat hy hom uitspreek teen byvoorbeeld
gevalle soos die Suidelike Distrik Munisipaliteit wat nou die dag by hulle
inhuldigingsgeleentheid van die burgemeester, R300 000 uitgegee het,
waarvan R71 000 alleen aan drank gespandeer is. [Tussenwerpsels.] Waarlik,
daar op Orkney snork hulle nie; hulle eet en drink. [Gelag.] Dit nadat die
vorige burgemeester ’n bottel whiskey van R1 400 vir sy kas aangekoop het
en ’n Jeep Cherokee in vier jaar se tyd klaar gery het, sodat dit nou
voetstoots verkoop moes word en daar is nou ’n nuwe tender uit vir ’n
ampsmotor van R700 000, wat navigasie moet hê. Hierdie burgemeester is
definitief bekommerd dat hy gaan verdwaal. Hy het alreeds verdwaal.
Vierdens, vir sukses in die nuwe termyn sal die ondersteuning aan
sukkelende munisipaliteite op ’n meer vaste basis as Projek Konsolideer
moet geskied. Alhoewel ons baie bly is vir die ingrype en wat die Minister
ookal vandag hier gedoen en wat al bereik is. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[... and that the hon President took such a strong stand in ANC Today  in
March regarding the newly elected ANC mayors and councillors who were not
meeting the expectations, that they would be removed.

This Minister must follow the President’s example. He must extend his
department’s anti-corruption campaign to all municipalities. He himself
must be more visible regarding matters such as corruption and fraud, if we
wish to make a success in this term. We would like to see him express
himself against, for example, cases such as the Southern District
Municipality which recently spent R300 000 during the inauguration ceremony
of the mayor, R71 000 of which was spent only on liquor. [Interjections.]
Truly, there at Orkney they do not snore; they eat and drink. [Laughter.]
And that after the previous mayor bought a bottle of whiskey to the value
of R1 400 for his drinks cabinet and had to write off a Jeep Cherokee after
four years, so that it had to be sold voetstoots, and there is now a new
tender for an official vehicle to the value of R700 000, which has to have
navigation. This mayor is definitely worried that he is going to get lost.
He is lost already.
Fourthly, for the new term to be successful there will have to be support
for struggling municipalities on a more permanent basis than Project
Consolidate. Although we appreciate the interventions and whatever the
Minister is doing here today and what has been achieved ...]

In this regard, Salga, whose aim, according to its website, is to be on the
cutting edge of quality and sustainable services, has received a damning
report from the Auditor-General. [Interjections.] If Salga is to play its
part in supporting municipalities, it should quickly be turned around and
the Minister should consider withholding funding until everything is
accounted for.

Maar ek wil ook verder oor Projek Konsolideer sê, dat mnr Mike Seloane,
Voorsitter van Gauteng se openbare rekeningkomitee, gesê het dat die
finansiële bestuur van munisipaliteite in Gauteng die afgelope drie jaar
versleg het, ten spyte van Projek Konsolideer. Slegs drie uit 15
munisipaliteite het ’n ongekwalifiseerde ouditeursverslag ontvang. Die
vrugte van Projek Konsolideer sal volgens hom waarskynlik eers oor twee
jaar gevoel word. Dit klink nie asof Projek Konsolideer, wat die einde van
hierdie jaar ten einde loop, die gewenste omkeer op korttermyn, waarop dit
gemik is, sal bring nie.

Die DA het van die begin af gewaarsku dat ’n tref-en-trapbenadering nie sal
werk nie. En dit is ’n ope vraag of die R73 miljoen wat daarop gespandeer
is waarde vir geld vir die belastingbetaler oplewer. Geen wonder nie dat
ons portefeuljekomitee gesê dat ons meer inligting soek, want ons weet nie
wat hier aangaan nie. [Tyd verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Regarding Project Consolidate I also wish to say further that Mr Mike
Seloane, Chairman of Gauteng’s public accounts committee, said that the
financial management of municipalities in Gauteng had deteriorated over the
past three years, in spite of Project Consolidate. Only three out of 15
municipalities received an unqualified auditor’s report.  According to him
the benefits of Project Consolidate will probably only be felt in two
years’ time. It does not sound as if Project Consolidate, which comes to an
end at the end of this year, will bring the desired change in the short
term at which it is aimed.

The DA warned from the start that a hit-and-run approach would not work.
And it is an open question whether the R73 million that has been spent on
it will give the taxpayers their money’s worth. No wonder our portfolio
committee said that we were looking for more information, because at
present we do not know what is going on here. [Time expired.]]

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, Deputy President, Minister and colleagues, the
municipal system that we are entering now is one of a period of
consolidation after an era characterised by highly uneven leadership and
uneven performance, ranging from excellent through to very poor indeed.

Now we all accept that the immediate 2000 period was highly challenging,
and there is no harm in reminding ourselves of some of the problematic
issues which, by no means, have disappeared, even today. These include
serious capacity constraints; inadequate delivery; poor implementation of
financial management systems; corruption; inadequate levels of national and
provincial support to municipalities; issues of excessive remuneration and
non- implementation of performance contracts; the chaos associated with the
redemarcation process last year, as well as - and I say this  last but by
no means least - the government’s totally dishonest dealings with
traditional leaders on their role in the new South Africa over the last
five years.

However, equally, we should not lose sight of the fact that there have also
been many successes and we toast these, and we trust that there will be
many more as the years go on.

In general, in reviewing the performance of the department over the last 5
years as it relates to local government specifically, we would say it has
performed adequately rather than exceptionally as far as most matters are
concerned, and that it has performed extremely poorly in as far as
traditional leadership issues are concerned.
However, in the last year or two, the department has definitely become more
focused and it is our opinion now that its performance is improving.

There are some issues, however, that I would like to refer to which are
pertinent still for the next 5 years. The first one is remuneration: We
believe that this free-for-all system governing the manner in which
municipal managers and senior staff have been remunerated over the past
five years was very distasteful in many instances. The notion that managers
should be remunerated as per the responsibilities is all very well, but the
execution of this has, in many instances, been very problematic.

The situation is worsened by the fact that, in too many instances, the
bloated remuneration has been boosted by so-called performance payments
which in fact are not linked to any performance at all. In fact, sometimes
poor performance seems to be rewarded. And it does not help, either, that
many councils in fact failed to finalise their performance contracts. In
this regard, Minister, we are very pleased that you announced these pro
forma contracts to be made available in the next fortnight.

So, all of these issues need to be tightened up, and we are generally
pleased that government has recognised the problem and that it is doing
something about it. We also accept the government’s position on the
remuneration of councillors being improved, and we think this is very
necessary.

In respect of finances, we have a number of concerns. Again, we are pleased
that the local government sphere has continued to receive an increasing
share of national revenue and also that the recently reviewed equitable
share formula is being implemented. However, we are a bit disappointed that
the development component of the formula is not being implemented and,
also, we believe that the current estimated costs of basic services should
be raised as per the Financial and Fiscal Commission’s recommendations.

We are also concerned about the uncertainty surrounding the electricity
restructuring because this has major implications for municipal finances,
and the issue is simply taking too long and is still not finalised. We are
also worried about municipal debt, which is now in the order of R32
billion, which is an astronomical figure.

So, all in all, we think that there is a need to strengthen the municipal
regulatory and fiscal environment, and we do recognise however that the
department itself has acknowledged a need for this.

In respect of service delivery, we are more than prepared to recognise that
much has been achieved by government in respect of basic services and
especially free basic services. But it is equally true that much more
should have been achieved in the period behind us. And, as the civil unrest
last year demonstrated, many communities are very unhappy with what they
have received to date. It is easy to blame this on capacity, but in fact we
also need to acknowledge there is also a failure of political leadership.

We expect much more of the councils in the second term. We all need to know
that government targets are high, and require hard work across the board.

The IFP councils are certainly more than prepared to play their part in
accelerating delivery. In fact, we have a number of IFP mayors up there;
they’re wonderful people who will do their bit to improve delivery.

In respect of a key issue, which is support for local government, this has
been a bit of a problem. Although the Constitution obliges the national and
provincial governments to support municipalities, in fact, if you look at
the initial period, at least this is observed more in the breach than in
the execution. We believe Project Consolidate, for example, is an excellent
idea but it started very late, and we support it strongly now.

We also urge that support programmes be rolled-out on a far longer-term
basis, and we accept your proviso that we don’t want a dependency syndrome.
However, nonetheless, it is important that one strengthens the capacity of
municipalities to deliver.
This is linked to human capacity constraints. We all know that this is
perhaps the most serious constraint facing municipalities. I think,
Minister, you made reference here to for example project management
bottlenecks, which is just one example of many instances of capacity
problems.

Now I think that if you look at the last five years, government has taken
too long to respond appropriately to the need. It hasn’t helped matters
either in respect of this human capacity problem that the sector authority
has failed, to date, on its mandate.

However, we are pleased in general that government has placed far more
stress on this matter recently, and that it appears to be addressing the
matter more decisively. So, that’s the great thing.

Project Consolidate is one example and the opening of the Learnership
Academy is another. There are others. We approve of this and we support
them. It’s a key challenge, perhaps the key challenge of all, facing us.

In conclusion, there are many maps that we could refer to, but time doesn’t
allow it. I just want to bring to your attention a survey or remind you of
a survey conducted a couple of years ago, which showed that the citizenry’s
mistrust of government was worst at local government level. National level
was at the top, then provincial and then local. People had a high level of
distrust and were not satisfied with their local government.

We believe that this has to be turned around. We hope it is changing. We
think it is changing slowly. We need to identify the difficulties that have
been there for the last 5 years. We need to remedy them; we need to focus
on continual incremental improvements so that, should such a survey be
conducted in future, the response of the general populace would be
completely different to that in the past. To secure this outcome, we really
expect more of the department, and we hope that it rises to the challenge.

The IFP will support the Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Nkosi M NONKONYANA: Mgcinisihlalo, malungu ale Ndlu abekekileyo,
ngokwamawonga nezihlalo zawo, mawethu nonke, iinkosi zam zonke mazizole
isicaka sithambile. Mandibambe ngazibini, Mgcinisihlalo, ngokunditefisa
undinike eli thuba lokuba nam ndaleke umsundulo kumaqabane athe avakalisa
inkxaso engagungqiyo kuHlalo lwabiwo-mali lweli sebe. Ndiyabulela kumbutho
wesizwe i-ANC ngokundinika iwonga elilodwa lokuba ndiphefumle ngolu Hlalo
lwabiwo-mali phantsi kwezi ngongoma zilandelayo: Okokuqala, ukomeleza
nokuphucula ulawulo lwamaphondo esizwe; okwesibini, iNdlu yeeNkokeli
zeMveli kaZwelonke; okwesithathu, iKomishoni yokuKhuthazwa nokuKhuselwa
kwaMalungelo abaNtu ngokwaMasiko neziThethe zabo, neyezeeNkolo nezeelwimi.

Phambi kokuba ndenze njalo, kuza kufuneka ukuba ndikhe ndikhuphe esi
sigqwathi, ndilungise umhlobo wam, ilungu elibekekileyo, umfo kaDoman,
ukuze andive xa ndisithi: (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Chief M Nonkonyana: Chairperson, hon members of this House, all protocol
observed, to all my fellow people, I humble myself before you. I would like
to thank you, Chairperson, for being kind and allowing me to add to the
strong support shown by my comrades for the Budget Vote of the department.
I thank the national organisation of the ANC for granting me an exclusive
privilege to express my views on this Budget Vote with regard to the
following subjects: To strengthen and improve the administration of the
national provinces; the National House of Traditional Leaders and the
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
Religious and Linguistic Communities.

Before I do that, I have to clarify this first, and correct my friend, hon
Mr Doman, so that he can hear me when I say:]

Hon Doman, my colleague, the rabble-rousing argument, at the end of the
day, does not impress anybody but only a rabble. [Interjections.] I am
saying this because you know that, owing to the accident of history – which
I have no doubt the people of Cape Town are going to reverse – the DA
happens to lead our city here. They have attempted, for instance, to chase
away the hosting of the World Cup in 2010 and when we engaged them they
failed. [Interjections.]

You are now also attempting to engage us on a rabble-rousing argument. Let
me tell you, first of all, what is iustus [just] to one judge may not be
iustus [just] to the full Bench and a provisional decision may also be
reversed by the Appeal Court. [Interjections.] So, I want to advise you and
your myopic howlers behind you that, in the near future you will realise
that the ANC is going to take over this city because of the manner in which
you actually administer it. [Laughter.] [Applause.] [Interjections.]
Because, for instance, many senior managers, unfortunately ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha:) Member on the podium, one moment
please. Hon members, please don’t react at the level that I can’t hear the
person speaking. Thank you.

Chief M NONKONYANA: Thank you very much. I just want to indicate to you,
for instance, that not only Mr Mgoqi, an experienced administrator, has
left this city, but many others have left it. At the end of the day, I can
tell you, the people who are going to suffer are those from Khayelitsha and
Mitchells Plain, the poorest of the poor. I hope that they will realise
that they need to actually vote for the ANC so that they can reverse this
accident of history. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

I now proceed. I now wish to deal with the issue of strengthening
provincial government and accountability. President Mbeki, in the state of
the nation address this year, urged us all to place emphasis on building
capacity in the local government sphere, which will be a catalyst for local
economic development in the next decade.

The constitutional obligations of the national and provincial government
are critical. Hon minister, indeed, the performance of both provincial and
local government continue to reflect great unevenness in 2005, with grave
challenges facing some provinces and municipalities, in terms of
operational efficiency and effectiveness. These internal challenges are
coupled with historical legacies such as service delivery backlogs, aging
or non-existent infrastructure and poor own revenue capabilities.

There is a real lack of technical and managerial skills in many
municipalities and institutional capacity to manage resources. The
Constitution of the Republic refers to various obligations that will
determine the relations between provinces and municipalities. These
obligations are monitoring, support, regulation and supervision by
provinces or municipalities.

We have noted that during this financial year, the department shows a
growth of 23% in nominal terms from the past financial year. We are happy
to note that the department is to develop and promote a national system of
integrated and co-operative governance, which will include the
strengthening of provincial government and accountability. Provincial
administrations, however, are not super homelands and, as such, a sphere of
government that needs to fulfil its constitutional mandate within each
province.

In order to give effect to this mandate, more funding and capacity-building
initiatives should target provinces. The necessary intervention by national
sphere of government is really appreciated. Be that as it may, integrating
planning across three spheres, including the guiding of municipal
integrated development plans, enhancing local economic development plans,
enhancing local economic development and the implementation of the
Intergovernmental Relations Fiscal Act of 2001 are key features of the ANC
government programme of action.

An amount of R94 million has been set aside for the MTEF period. During
budget hearings we were given measurable objectives and key performance
indicators. We will closely monitor progress, because the ANC is determined
to deliver towards bringing a better life to all South Africans, including
those that are living in Cape Town.

I now proceed to the National House of Traditional Leaders. This honourable
house is, no doubt, aware that the ANC government has provided for the role
of the institution of traditional leaders at all spheres of government. A
total amount of R68,2 million over the MTEF period has been set aside as a
contribution to the promotion of the institution of traditional leadership
in South Africa. Of this amount, a sum of R26 million has been set aside to
fund the programmes of the national house.

We are aware of challenges that face the institution of traditional
leadership. However, we are happy that many traditional leaders have now
accepted that the transformation of the institution of traditional
leadership is imperative to reinstate the pride and the dignity of the
institution.

We look forward to the establishment of the traditional councils and local
houses by June this year and the needed co-operation between some
municipalities and traditional councils. This must pave a way for
beneficial co-operation between ward councillors and ward committees on the
one hand, and the traditional leaders and traditional councils on the
other. We are concerned that in many provinces, if not all, there is no
budget in this financial year for the building of traditional councils and
local houses, their administration and necessary capacity-building for
their councillors and staff.

We remain convinced that the institution of traditional leadership must
remain above party politics. The ANC government has established a
commission on disputes and claims and set aside R22 million to execute its
mandate. The death of kings and queens immediately after the establishment
of the commission is regretted as, no doubt, their contribution was
valuable. These and many other things are a clear indication that the ANC
government has high regard for the institution of traditional leadership in
South Africa.

I now turn to the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights
of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities. This commission is one
of the Chapter 9 institutions meant to strengthen democracy and was
established by Act 19 of 2002. Its main objectives include the following:
to promote respect for the rights of cultural, religious and linguistic
communities; to develop peace, friendship, humanity, tolerance and national
unity amongst and within cultural, religious and linguistic groups.

The commission will receive R43,3 million over the MTEF period. A sum of
R13,4 million has been allocated to the department during this financial
year. The commission, in its strategic plan document, has stated that, and
I quote:

   Racial discrimination, cultural intolerance and lack of respect based on
   stereotypes and prejudice have characterised tension between citizens
   throughout South Africa.


No doubt, there is a contribution of DA in this regard.

   Poverty or a lesser standard of living often characterises vulnerable
   groups, which contributes to the perpetuation of certain stereotypes.
   Western culture, which brings with it both positive and negative aspects,
   has a specific threat to African culture. Traditional social roles, such
   as held by indigenous leaders and parents have been undermined, leaving
   no clear direction.


The work of the commission has therefore raised certain challenges. In
order to effectively execute its mandate, the commission must have a clear
understanding of the rights and practices of cultural, religious and
linguistic communities of South Africa in their range of diversity. It will
no doubt therefore need funding to research and gather information. We call
upon all our communities to support the commission in its work.

I now conclude.

Phambi kokuba ndikhwelele eli qonga, ndinga ndingavakalisa ilizwi lokuyala,
ndinqanda bonke abantu abaneenjongo zokuba okanye zokusebenzisa imali
karhulumente okhokelwa yi-ANC, urhulumente ofuna ukuba bonke abantu
bafumane uncedo kweli lizwe, nezokulibala ngabantu bakuthi bahlohle ezabo
izisu, bafezekise iminqweno yabo egwenxa.

Ngoko ke singumbutho wesizwe, i-ANC, simemelela ukuba bonke abantu
basincedise silwe lo mkhuba, sibambe onke la matutu, nkqu nawe-DA, siwafake
kwezimnyama izisele, kuba ngawo angabangcatshi benkululeko. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Before I leave this podium, I would like to warn all those who steal or
use money from the ANC-led government, and who ignore our people and feed
their own stomachs to fulfil their evil purposes. The government wants to
help all the people of this country.

Therefore, the ANC-led government calls on all people to cooperate in
fighting this bad habit and to arrest all these thieves, including those
from the DA, and put them in a dungeon, because they are traitors of
democracy. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr V C GORE: Madam Chair, hon Minister, hon members, it is quite clear that
one of the greatest challenges facing this department is around the area of
service delivery. From the President to leading academics and commentators,
there is broader agreement and understanding that it is imperative that the
pace of service delivery, particularly at local government level, needs to
be accelerated and made more efficient. And we welcome the Minister’s
remarks around capacity and accountability, in this regard.

Unfortunately much has been said about the underperforming municipalities
in the country and particularly around Project Consolidate. Unfortunately,
little has been said about those municipalities and local governments that
are continually delivering and ensuring that progress is made. Much has
been said about those municipalities that are failing but little is said
about those that are passing and making an impact. A lot has been said
about what is not being done and little or nothing has been said about what
has been done.
Little has been said about those municipalities like Ekurhuleni, in Gauteng
province, hon Minister, that have succeeded and were able to roll out water
and electricity to over 80% of its citizens, provide free electricity and
water in excess of the national requirements of 6 kilolitres and 50kw per
household per month and ensuring higher levels of payments. This has
resulted in the metro being able to realise an annual growth which is
significantly higher than the average for the rest of the country. Not only
does it provide a booming economy for its citizens but provides a safe and
reliable opportunity for local and foreign investors.

One of the main reasons why this metro has been able to achieve these
successes is, simply put, a competent and well-motivated team, whose
passion is about delivering services – your capacity, hon Minister.

The ID believes that one of the greatest challenges that exist for our
country and our fledgling democracy is the great inequalities that exist
within our society. It is highly undesirable that in 2006 such huge divides
still exist between the rich and poor, between white and black, between
rural and urban dwellers. It is quite clear that if this country as a whole
does not address these inequalities and these divides, we are not going to
be able to realise the full potential that this country possesses.
[Applause.]

Mr H CUPIDO: On 1 March 2006, the voters of Cape Town spoke.
[Interjections.] In the forthcoming by-election in Mitchell’s Plain, the
voters will confirm that by 2009, the ANC will not rule this province
anymore. [Interjections.]

Shortcomings in the local government service delivery have received much
attention of late and in particular, during the 2006 local government
elections. The ACDP is aware that the lack of institutional capacity and
skills has been cited as the major reason for service delivery failures. We
are further satisfied that the emphasis placed by the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa on skills development, will play
a significant role in the enhancement of service delivery.

It is within this context that the ACDP wishes to draw attention to the
department’s underspending with regard to the filling of vacant posts.
While it is reasonable to expect that unfilled posts will help to cut down
on operational costs, we have to be concerned about such vacancies placing
added strain on service delivery and constitutional capacity.

A skills audit has being performed and scarce skills have been identified.
In addition to this, the department has been giving closer attention to its
relationship with educational institutions and the utilisation of interns.
Enhanced training and development of existing staff have been taking place
at a much larger scale.
Taking into consideration all these positive developments, it has become
evident that the Department of Provincial and Local Government is now in a
position to start taking urgent measures to fill these vacant posts so that
the citizens of South Africa may start reaping the rewards of immediate and
sustainable service delivery of the highest standards. We support this
Budget. [Applause.]

Mr B M SOLO: Chairperson, hon Minister Sydney Mufamadi, Deputy Minister
Nomatyala Hangana, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present, mayors from
various municipalities, ...

... mhlawumbi ngesiqala ngokutsho ukuba kufike ixesha lokuba kuphunywe
egusheni, umntu acace. Enye into, kubalulekile ukuba sihloniphane. Ndiza
kungena kuloo mba njengokuba ndiqhuba nentetho yam.

Xa kuthetha inkosi, ngokwesiko lethu, kufuneka sizole, simamele.
Sisebenzisa amagama afanelekileyo xa kuthetha abantu abahloniphekileyo,
hayi amagama afana noo “Hierdie Minister”. Sisisizwe esihloniphayo kakhulu,
kwaye sifundiswe ngolo hlobo. Mhlawumbi ezinye izizwe aziyiboni ibalulekile
into yokuba sihloniphane. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... perhaps we can start by saying it is about time to come out, to see
the real person. And also, it is very important to respect each other. I
will allude to that as I go through my speech.

In our culture when the King speaks, we must be silent, and listen. We use
the appropriate words when honourable men speak, not to use words like
“Hierdie Minister”. We are a very respecting nation, and we have been
taught that way. Maybe other nations don’t realise the importance of
respect for one another.]

Guided by the Freedom Charter, the ANC has entered into a people’s contract
to create work and fight poverty. The budget vote presented here today
should be seen in that context. Judging by the outcome of our recent local
government’s last elections, it is my view that the prophetic words in the
state of the nation address are correct and allow me to spell them out:

  That our people are firmly convinced that our country has entered its age
  of hope; they are convinced that we have created the conditions to
  achieve more rapid progress towards the realisation of their dreams and
  the progress we have made to alleviate the poverty afflicting millions of
  our people and the strides we have made to expand and modernise our
  economy.

Umntu uma apha ekhukhumele, asixelele ngeziphumo zonyulo loomasipala eKapa.
[A person stands here with pride, telling us about the results of the local
elections in Cape Town.]

Let us look very carefully into those results, but I am not going to do it
today; it is not my task to do that. Today I must speak about the things
that we are going to do to alleviate poverty. It is therefore important to
perceive the budget presented today, which we, from the ANC, support from
this context. This budget inspires us for it projects a clear picture of
where we are going. It ensures that: “Today is better than yesterday and
that tomorrow will be better than today,” as stated by President Thabo
Mbeki in his state of the nation address.

If one looks at the budget closely, one would realise the key components
that contribute to a better life for all. The budget addresses the
strategic objectives to fight poverty by ensuring proper mechanisms and
instruments to realise, once more, the shared prosperity and better life
for all that President Mbeki speaks of.

The budget puts a lot of emphasis on issues such as development monitoring,
intergovernmental relations, integrated development and local economic
development. This emphasis is based on the past experience since the
introduction of the new system of local government five years ago.

Le nkqubo ekhoyo yoomasipala ayifani nenkqubo eyayikho ngaphambili;
yinkqubo entsha. [The present municipal programme is not the same as the
previous one; it is a new programme.]

That is why we talk about the three spheres of government.

Asazi ke ukuba kufuneka senzeni xa abantu bengayiqondi loo nto. Asizi
kuthatha isichazi-magama ze sikhangele ukuba kuthethwa ntoni na
ngamanqanaba amathathu karhulumente. [We cannot do otherwise if people
don’t understand that. We will not turn to dictionaries and search for the
meaning of the three spheres of the government.]

We have learnt many lessons and gained a lot of experience in this new
system. If one looks at Programme 2 of the budget, one would see that the
Programme links very accurately with the strategic objectives set out by
the department, thus the relationship with Asgisa. Part of the objective is
service delivery, public or community participation and communication
development.

When we say in the Freedom Charter that the people shall govern, we mean
that the people shall actively participate in the various processes of
government.

An HON MEMBER: Especially in Cape Town!

Heke! Uza kufunda ngoku kuba sinivulele iingcango. Zange khe sibekho kwezi
zinto zenu. Ezinye izinto benizenza kumabala egalufa, apho nanithatha
izigqibo khona, ngathi ningamagqwirha. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Indeed! You have to learn now, because we have opened the doors for you.
We were not involved in some of your activities. You did some of those
activities on golf courses, where you took decisions, as if you were
involved in witchcraft. [Laughter.]]

You cannot talk development planning without involving those who would be
affected hence the Integrated Development Program, IDP. Having planned and
started the process, there is a need to explain why the starting point is X
and not Y. Of course, along the way you might encounter difficulties or
make incredible progress. That needs to be communicated very clearly. The
impact of all these would be derived from feedback you get from the people.
There will be an ongoing dialogue to ensure consistency. Thus, the strategy
is to deepen democracy through performance, monitoring, service delivery,
evaluation and communication of development including certain winning
municipalities. But let’s wait; the crossing of the floor is coming and I
know they are going to make a mess thereof. [Laughter.]

Once more, this is what this budget says. It is not just huge figures, but
a tool to ensure a better life for all, particularly the previously
disadvantaged communities. The ANC has an action plan to make local
governments work better. As a governing party with the mandate, this budget
operationalises the plan. This is your own English and if you don’t
understand it, then God help us all. [Laughter.]

It does that by responding to the ANC’s call in its manifesto that
emphasises people participation. [Laughter.]

Given all that, we need to indicate that we still have challenges
particularly around some of the programmes. I want to talk about disaster
management ... [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: God has a plan for you too!

Mr B M SOLO: You are right, because you are talking about your God and I
have my own God. You must understand that you brought us a religion that
does not suit our situation, thus the confusion. [Interjections.]

As a country, we have demonstrated our capacity to deal effectively with
disaster. In this instance, I would refer to the floods in Mozambique,
quick response and quick rescue plans. For now, it does not seem like we
are doing those basic things in terms of community participation. The Act
calls for establishment of structures such as contingents of volunteers.
The Act calls for recruitment of volunteers, establishments of forums,
gathering of information including indigenous knowledge and not the
knowledge they have been pumping us with, which is sometimes terrible.

Regarding prevention and mitigation, the Act is about people taking care of
their own safety and rehabilitation ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Parliament is a serious place; you must stop making these
jokes. [Interjections.]

Mr B M SOLO: Andizi kubayeka. Yithi ndilungise lo mcimbi. [I am not
finished with them. Let me correct this first.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Order! Not you, hon speaker, I
am trying to help you.

Mr B M SOLO: What about my minutes?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You still have a lot of time left.
Mr B M SOLO: We are, indeed, confident that both the Minister and the
department are committed to carry out the mandate in the spirit of Batho
Pele. We will teach you in the spirit of making local governments to work
better so that tomorrow can be different from yesterday and for all of us
to witness the dawn of hope ...

... isimilo yinto efunekayo. Kodwa ke siyabona ukuba nineentloko
ezilukhuni. Nokuba singenzani, ngekhe nibe sajika. Nangoku anikwazi kuchaza
ukuba nihlalele ntoni apha ngaphandle nje kokuxwaxwa okweengqeqana
ezincinci ezilambileyo.

Nisadla ngendeb’ endala; nisafuna ukuba siqhube ngalaa ndlela yakudala.
Fundani ngoku ukuba kukho utshintsho, sisebenza nabantu. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... respect is important. But we can see that you are stubborn. We can try
everything, but you cannot turn from your ways. You can’t even explain why
you are here besides being here to make noise like hungry puppies.

You are still embedded in your old ways; you want us to do things of the
old order. You must learn now, because there is a change; we work with
people.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, would you please take
your seat?
Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, on a point of order: the hon member seems to
refer to members of the DA as dogs and this is strictly unparliamentary.
That is certainly the impression that came across in the interpretation.
And I would urge, Madam Chair, that under these circumstances you ask him
to withdraw. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, it is very difficult to
try and listen to the English from the interpretation and yourselves on
this side. I cannot actually say that I heard that and I doubt that it was
said in that sense. However, if it was, I would ask the hon member to
withdraw.

Liqhawe, liqhawe! Mhlawumbi kufanelekile ukuba sivule isikolo, sibafundise
abahlekazi ukuba ngoku ... [He is a hero, he is a hero! Maybe it will be
appropiate for us to open a school, and teach them that now ...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, please take your seat for
one moment!

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I am not at all aware of the fact that he made
any attempt to withdraw. In fact, I don’t know what he said in terms of
what you asked him to do. And I would prefer to have a ruling from you as
to what the procedure is from now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Deputy Chief Whip, I did give a
ruling. I said that if the words were actually used in relation to the
members that it should be withdrawn. However, I unfortunately also do not
understand and I am battling to hear the interpretation. I will ask the hon
member if he won’t please withdraw in English. [Interjections.] Yes! That
is my ruling. If he actually compared the members of this House to dogs, I
wish him to withdraw.

Mr B M SOLO: Madam Chair, I thought there is something called phrases and
idioms in English; in isiXhosa it is called iqhalo. That is why it was
used. It was used in that context. However, anyway, I don’t want to waste
your time, if you feel very strongly I will withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order please! Order please! Hon
member, please give the opportunity to the member speaking to do what you
have required him to do. Actually you asked him to withdraw and now you are
preventing him from doing so. Please continue.

Sinentlonipho kakhulu. Silindele ukuba nathi sihlonitshwe. Indlela abanye
oogxa bethu abaziphatha ngayo kule Ndlu, noko ayanelisi kwaphela.
Mhlawumbi, xa befuna ukusazi indlela esiphila ngayo nendlela esihlonipha
ngayo, singalivula iziko lemfundo yabadala apha ePalamente ukuze
bafundiswe, kuba sifuna ukuba nabo basazi. Bathatha iminyaka emininzi
besifundisa ukuba le nto babeyenza ilungile, nangale ndlela ababeyenza
ngayo. Kodwa sibonile – nani nizibonele, bantu bakuthi – ukuba ikhulu
leminyaka sihleli kubugxwayiba, kwiimeko ezinzima, bengabonisi nosizi
ngoko, bexhamla, besitya kamnandi.

Babesitya ngecephe elikhulu, besivalele phaya ngaphandle, simane sibabukela
singaphandle. Thina asityi sodwa. Siyababiza sisithi masisebenzisaneni.
Yilandeleni indlela esisebenza ngayo kuba yiyo eya kusikhulula kobu
bugxwayiba. Ndiyabulela kakhulu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[We have great respect. We also expect to be respected. We are not
satisfied by the conduct of some of our colleagues in this House. It leaves
a lot to be desired. Maybe they are interested to know how we live and the
way we manifest respect. We can even open an elderly institution here in
Parliament so that they can be taught, because we want them to know us.
They spent many years teaching us that what they did was right, and they
did it. However, we have seen – and you have seen for yourselves, my fellow
people – it has been hundreds of years, living under adverse conditions,
bad circumstances. They did not show any sympathy then, they were
benefiting, eating nicely.

They had all the privileges. They isolated us; we used to watch them from
the outside. We don ’t eat alone. We are calling them for co-operation. You
must follow our way of doing things, because it is the one that will
liberate us from bondage. I thank you very much. [Applause.]]
HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Igama
lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Chairperson, hon Minister for Provincial and Local Government, hon members,
you know, my political teachings, where I come from, were that I should be
honest to the people of this country. That is the kind of background that I
come from, from my organisation.

Now, if we have to apply that strategy in this Chamber, it doesn’t matter
how many spin doctors a party might have, but it has to admit that it was
in power before and did bugger all. Nothing! To come here.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chairperson: may I address you on a point of order?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Madam Deputy Minister, please take
your seat?

Mr M J ELLIS: I think Rule 65 or Rule 66 of the House makes it quite clear
that members of the House should not use unbecoming language, and I believe
the hon Deputy Minister has just used unbecoming language, and I think she
should withdraw it.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, I
apologise and withdraw. Now, people should not come to this House and
pretend that they did something, whereas they did nothing.

We are saying, hon Mr Doman, that we shall meet on the battlefield when we
are going to vote. No amount of blowing hot air here in this Chamber is
going to assist you. What we want to tell you today, Minister, is that
everybody in this country can see that local government is getting
stronger. [Applause.]

We admit that we have made mistakes in our path to strengthening local
government. However, we can see that local government is gaining momentum.

Now, allow me to acknowledge the presence in the gallery of eminent friends
and partners of the Ministry and the Department for Provincial and Local
Government. Amongst those whose partnership is indispensable to our
functional efficacy are the hon MECs who are sitting there.

U-Star, nabaya behleli phaya. [There sits Star and others.]

They are responsible for local government and traditional affairs. There
are also the National House of Traditional Leaders, led by iNkosi Mzimela
and other traditional leaders of our people, the leadership of Salga,
representatives of the Local Government Seta, members of the audit
committee, representatives of the Development Bank of SA, representatives
of the Finance and Fiscal Commission, CEO of the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities,
CEO of the Commission For Traditional Leadership Disputes and Claims, and
CEO of the Cities’ Network.

The local government elections held on 1 March mark the beginning of a
second term of office for elected mayors and councillors since the
introduction of our new system of local government in 2000. This is an
important milestone in strengthening democratic participation on which our
Constitution is founded.

Our system of local government is based on social dialogue, in terms of
which communities and the public at large are required by legislation to
influence and direct policy and development within their municipalities.

Indeed, the last term of local government was marked by achievements and
challenges, achievements in that more of our communities now have access to
basic services. The Department of Minerals and Energy notes that at least a
total of 374 733 household connections were made in the rural nodes from
2002 up to September 2005, despite the challenges experienced in this
sector.

These connections have contributed differently towards improving the
livelihoods of these communities. For instance, provision of electricity
for cooking, lighting and heating translates into lesser time being spent
in collecting wood in some rural communities by women.

It is indeed undeniable that more people share in the hope of where we are
headed as government. Although we experienced challenges, which manifested
themselves in the manner and nature of public disturbances evidenced prior
to the elections, the DPLG report on the review of the past five years of
local government performance confirms that more effort should be directed
towards improving greater public participation through izimbizo.

Ward committees have been established so that all social groups in wards
are represented, including youth, women, children and people with
disabilities. In rural areas the geographic model is used for the election
of these representative structures, thereby ensuring that each ward has a
voice in how its municipality should be governed.

In our development and democracy South Africa recognises that culture,
religion and language are a central factor in the holistic development of a
nation. It was befitting, therefore, that in 2004 we saw the Commission for
the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities, CRL, come into operation. We urged the CRL to
utilise existing government structures, such as ward committees and IDP
forums, to entrench their role of facilitating communications between
communities and government as it pertains to such issues.

In 2005 we started the municipal izimbizo programme, targeted at engaging
national, provincial, local and ward committees. Whilst we learnt that most
ward committee members had been trained in understanding their critical
role as linkages between the municipality and the community, we equally
noted areas that inhibited the operations of ward communities.

We continue to encourage communities to participate in these structures and
support our local government system. A handbook and a resource book were
launched in February 2006 to close some of these gaps. Structures and
accredited training programmes will also be rolled out in this term of
office to ensure that we create a local government environment that is
responsive, transparent and accountable to our communities.

Current legislation has transformed the composition of traditional councils
to provide for elements of democracy: 40% of members to be elected, gender
representivity, one third of members to be women. We are equally encouraged
that traditional leadership now plays a part in the national, provincial
and local spheres of government development initiatives and programmes.
We envisage a partnership with traditional leaders that must lend a hand in
uplifting the standards of living for the estimated 14 million people
living in the rural areas.

Coming to the local government economic development, in the same vein, that
we need to bring government closer to communities, it is necessary that we
create conditions under which the local economy can grow and increase the
flow of income and stock of wealth and target support to disadvantaged
communities.

Women have a considerable role to play in making local economies work, and
in many instances it is a decisive role. Around the world women are the
drivers of small enterprises, co-operatives and social enterprises, owing
to their ability to plan and budget, which often stem from their experience
as carers and supporters of their families.

The government’s framework for stimulating local economies clearly
indicates the need for sustainable community investment programmes, and
municipalities have a large responsibility for seeing that available
opportunities, particularly from the myriad of government finance
programmes, are fully utilised at local level.

There is ample scope for innovative ideas and practice in this regard,
which can frequently be developed through community- stakeholder
participation. Sustainable community investment programmes look at how
resources move through a neighbourhood or a community, and what impact that
movement has on the people within that particular community.

The majority in the second economy are women, who are also in the remote
rural areas, and are still trapped in high levels of poverty. This group is
a priority for sustainable community development programmes.

Typical of the type of approach to encourage sustainable community
programming is the Moutse Cotton Umbrella in Dennilton, in Mpumalanga. The
cotton umbrella is a representative community-based organisation comprising
14 cotton-farming associations in rural South Africa under the programme.

Funded by the labour job creation trust, after identifying the area as a
poverty pocket, it will benefit over 130 women farmers and has already
created 150 new jobs, having begun producing cotton, despite a severe
drought in the region.

Coming to the urban and rural development nodes, owing to immigration of
men to the urban areas in pursuit of employment opportunities, women head
most families in rural communities, or most families have one adult.
Related to this is poor access to services and times spent obtaining water
and fuel.

This makes it difficult for women to participate in structures outside the
family as they are faced with the burden and responsibility of looking
after children. The increased number of families that are affected by HIV
and Aids worsens this situation. These factors have combined and are
noticeable in the negative effect on participation of women in governance
and development.

We believe, therefore, that the newly elected and increased representation
of women in local government will add to reverse this undesirable trend. It
is 50-50 now.

The interaction with community groups and enriching local government and
local ownership of development processes, including participation in the
initiatives that are aimed at the identification and prioritisation of
developmental needs, is a critical cornerstone that defines our system of
social dialogue.

It is against this background that in the implementation of the Integrated
Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP, and the Urban Renewal
Programme, government emphasised the need for developmental programmes to
provide benefits and opportunities to the vulnerable groups, more
particularly women, youth and the disabled.

Although minimum analysis has been undertaken on nodes, there is an
indication that women and youth do benefit from these programmes directed
towards geographic spaces.

According to the Department of Social Development, over a million people
were receiving grants in the rural nodes in October 2005. This amounts to a
total of R498 billion per month, and 84% of the people who receive grants
are female. The majority of the people who receive grants are children and
pensioners. It must be noted that by virtue of being primary caregivers,
women become indirect recipients of grants.

Several income-generation projects that are being implemented in all the
nodal areas have provided benefits to the vulnerable groups. Another
example is the Goxe Cut Flower in Alfred Nzo District, which involves the
cultivation of cut flowers for the local and export markets, and which has
created employment for 111 people, 27 of them being women, 43 youth and 41
men.

Pertaining to disaster management, the heavy rains that occurred in the
North West province between January and April 2006 resulted in flooding.
This caused extensive damage to infrastructure in the Greater Taung
Municipal area, leaving communities isolated, with six lives lost. These
bore testimony to the vulnerabilities that we are still exposed to, and
challenge us to continuously find smarter ways of responding to these
unforeseen hazards.
Apart from the fact that approximately 1 500 homes were completely
destroyed and several thousand people were left without shelter, food or
clothing, vulnerable groups such as women and children could not reach
clinics or schools.

Good early-warning systems need to consider community vulnerabilities, as
well as the hazards. The early-warning signs of vulnerability, are growing
poverty, environmental degradation, populations crowded in risky locations,
civil strife and lack of knowledge and preparedness.

Often, there are warning signs well ahead of a hazardous event, and we are
confident that our national disaster management centre is gradually
enhancing its capacity to detect and respond timeously. [Time Expired.]
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Chair, could you please clarify
for me because now that the issues of substance transformation are being
put in front of the House, there’s very little excitement from the DA.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, I understand that there’s
a lot of excitement on account of the number of people that are listening
but I don’t think that is a point of order. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I must agree with you and I would just like to
say to the Chief Whip that it’s so nice to see him in the House. He spends
so little time here anyway.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, that’s even less of a
point of order. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chairperson, I didn’t rise on a point of order; I
simply rose.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, on that point, please sit
down. [Interjections.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, a look at the programme of
action of government comes as a big challenge for the Department of
Provincial and Local Government to rise to the occasion, because
strengthening local government is the second priority after the Accelerated
and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa.

The responsibility of ameliorating relations among the three tiers of
government will keep the department in check. Parliament has passed the
Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, Act 13 of 2005, to enable the
necessary vertically and horizontal interaction among the three spheres.
The deployment of community development workers to serve as the ears and
eyes of government on the ground could not have come at a better time.
Whatever problems that arise will be nipped in the bud.

In the wake of the local government elections that were held on 1 March
2006, there is more to write home about. Cross-boundary municipalities are
no more, therefore blockages to development have been removed. All that
remains in some areas, such as Merafong and Matatiele, are gripes, which we
hope government will be able to handle. We hope that, as the Minister
explained last week, those who have problems follow the proper channels of
communication. They should go via Parliament.

A lot of time has been wasted on bickering over positions at
municipalities, such as Mamuse in the North West and Cape Town in the
Western Cape. The Mamuse issue is the most nonsensical as it involves
councillors from the same party, namely the ANC. The Cape Town aberration
will be healed by time. The UCDP calls on all councillors involved,
regardless of which party they represent, to focus more on delivery of
service and desist from struggling for personal aggrandisement.

We, in the UCDP, look forward to the day when the inhumane and unhygienic
bucket system will be no more. Let us hope it happens even before the
target date of 2007. We hope that the current councils will perform better
than the last ones because they have undergone training. They were not left
to swim and sink, as was the case with their predecessors.

There is no doubt that the disaster management will rise to the occasion in
addressing the flood-ravaged areas as in Taung in the Bophirima District of
the North West, parts of the Northern Cape and Eastern Cape that were
ravaged this week. The UCDP supports the budget vote. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

An HON MEMBER: Izwelethu! [Our land!]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Izwelethu! Madam Chairperson, this Budget Vote comes barely
85 days after the second local government elections held at the beginning
of March this year. The PAC wishes to thank all loyal members and
supporters who have passed the test of time by voting for the PAC of Azania
in large numbers during the last elections. [Interjections.] You have stood
with the PAC in her cause to bring about the total liberation in our
country.

We are debating this budget 24 days after a summit of the PAC public
representatives held in Bloemfontein from 29 April to 30 April this year
where the PAC MPs, MPLs and councillors took a vow to work tirelessly to
turn things around for the best in our country.

The country that is still faced with multiple problems raging from
disgusting acts of rape, murder, the HIV/Aids pandemic, massive
unemployment and extreme exploitation of the workers by big capital.

Indeed, there’s a new format of modern slavery where workers are less
protected by labour legislations, working as casuals and retrenched at any
given time. The PAC wishes to propose a lasting remedy to the problem
facing us at both provincial and local government.

Discourage political appointments and employ rightful professionals to all
strategic posts in government. This will bear fruit as service delivery
demands professional and skilful personnel. A time to reward liberation
struggle comrades is over. What is in demand is delivery, delivery and
delivery.

Our frontline in all levels of government should be staffed by patriots who
are politically deeply rooted and understand that the liberation struggle
was all about the downtrodden, exploited and poor masses of our people, and
not about the handful of elite who devour the riches of our country at will
while the majority are struggling to make ends meet. The PAC supports the
budget.

An HON MEMBER: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Malibongwe! [Praise!]
Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, members of Parliament, mayors,
MECs present and officials of the department, I wish to thank you for this
opportunity to address this august house and also thank everybody for
having taken off from their busy schedules to come here and hear what I’ve
to say. [Laughter.]

Now, hon Doman, let me just stay one minute on you. This thing called
affirmative action is here to stay. You can insult it, you can disagree
with it and whatever, but it is here to stay. You have to learn a lesson
from it as a minority in the DA and ask for your own affirmative action
there, because logic has it that you were suppose to be the Mayor of Cape
Town but now, you see, they just bypassed you. [Laughter.] So, I think you
have to learn lessons from affirmative action. [Interjections.] That’s what
we are here for.

Our portfolio committee has taken time to look at the budget in detail and
it is our considerable opinion that this Budget Vote will go a long way in
making a meaningful contribution in our fight against poor service delivery
and dysfunctional municipalities. We just came from a successful local
government election in which the ANC was elected by the overwhelming
majority of the people as their organisation of choice.

This third local government election confirmed to all South Africans and
the world that our democracy is standing firm and we’ve reached an
irreversible point in the evolution of the South African anecdote. This is
something to celebrate because what it means is that it gives an
opportunity to now focus on other important national goals. One key
national goal that requires our attention is the need to develop local
government institutions with the capacity to deliver service to the people.

It has become apparent in the last few years that there are serious service
delivery capacity problems, especially in those municipalities located in
small towns and in the rural parts of the country. These inefficiencies and
incapacities cannot be blamed on the ANC. These are the legacies of the
apartheid municipal system. That’s why the ANC is coming in here to correct
the wrongs that the apartheid system has done. Anyone with good common
sense cannot expect that in the short space of time of ten years we would
have turn around the system completely.

It is critical that we support and ensure that we develop efficient local
economic development strategies that are linked to the provincial growth
strategies and the national development strategies. This will contribute to
the alignment of spatial and economic planning and ensure that all spheres
of government focus on the same things at the same time. Municipal councils
are strategic government organs that are appropriately positioned to
deliver on our promise to improve the quality of life of all of our people,
especially the poor.

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Well, I will tell you what the problem is. During
apartheid when I was arrested, I was poisoned.

The centrality of local government in our development agenda has not been
given attention that it deserves. I suppose this was because in the last 10
years we were caught out in efforts to establish and consolidate local
government structures and systems. Our local governments must serve as
institutions and a system of municipal governance as advocated in the Local
Government: Municipal Structures Act, and the Local Government: Municipal
Systems Act.

This is not a task to be achieved overnight, especially in the light of the
fact that here we are talking about over 283 municipalities to serve over
42 million people. To achieve results in this regard, local government must
develop the capacity to raise own resources and to make sure that these
resources are spent in line with the integrated development plans, IDPs and
their local economic development strategies.

These challenges require that municipalities should be capacitated with
skills in the field of organisation management and development, municipal
financial management, strategic planning and project management. This is a
major challenge because these skills are very scarce. They tend to be
scarce even within the private sector. The transformation of the organs of
state was identified by the democratic movement as one of the key strategic
items that the democratic government had to attend to with immediate
effect.

It is for this reason that government had to introduce complete new
institutions of local government that are new in form and content, and had
to achieve qualitatively different goals and objectives. These structures
had to be fully compatible with the outcomes and impacts government used to
achieve. In this regard, we can proudly report that a lot has been achieved
and effective governance is taking root.

We must welcome the intervention that comes with Project Consolidate.
Project Consolidate has gone a long way in improving the capacity of the
department to develop a scientific understanding of the magnitude of the
problems that the apartheid municipal system has created for our country,
and to come with appropriate interventions. Through Project Consolidate,
the department will provide hands-on support to weak municipalities in
endeavours to facilitate the development of capacity of municipalities to
discharge their mandate.

The department’s determination to improve its support to provinces and
municipalities is demonstrated by the substantial increase in the
provincial and local government transfers. The transfers have increase from
R15,6 billion to R24,5 billion with equitable share rising from R9,6
billion to R18 billion in this financial year. These figures will continue
to increase albeit in a reduced rate over the MTEF period.

From this year through to 2009, a total of R82 billion will be spent on
provinces and municipalities. These amounts are delivered to municipalities
through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant for capital expenditure and
municipal systems improvement grant for capacity-building and local
government equitable share for operating expenses. In addition to these –
among those that I have mentioned – R10 billion will go to municipalities
from the Water Affairs and Forestry, Transport and Minerals and Energy
departments.
We must also use the opportunity to make a note of the work done between
the departments, Salga and local government’s Seta in developing skills
that are required. In the recent past we have experienced municipal service
protests in different parts of the country, especially in the Free State.
These protests are an expression of grievances on the absence of
infrastructure and services in these areas, although we must condemn the
violence which was used in some of these actions.

Some of our detractors tend to use these developments to run a campaign
aimed at portraying government as a failure. It is important to do more in
these municipalities, but it is also important to note that government has
started to do a lot of work in these areas. We should also note that
service delivery backlogs that the ANC found when it ascended to political
office in 1994 was too huge for any amount of resources to make a
difference in 10 years.

We must make sure that the mass action that I referred to earlier is not
hijacked by self-styled and self-proclaimed militants whose cause has
nothing to do with the national democratic discourse. The burning of houses
of councillors and other forms of property during the cross-boundary and
service delivery protest is not acceptable and has to be denounced.

We call on government to bring the perpetrators of these heinous actions to
book and to provide meaningful support - financial and emotional - to the
affected families, because these people have done nothing wrong but just
participated in a legitimate political system of our country.

The increase in the provincial and local government transfer also means
that government will be more equipped to increase the impetus of service
delivery to poorer municipalities. These will also facilitate government’s
efforts to eliminate the bucket system whose indignity was imposed on our
people by the apartheid municipal system.

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

Mr M M S LEKGORO: Yes, that’s exactly what we are talking about, if you
were listening. Government has resolved to mount a frontal attack on
poverty and underdevelopment. To this end, it has introduced the provision
of free basic services and wants to create an institutional mechanism to
ensure that this happens. It is obvious that a lot more still need to be
done. We still need to expand these services to other communities that
never had the basic infrastructure to facilitate the delivery of services.

All these challenges outlined above are the direct legacy of the apartheid
past, of which some of you are actually the beneficiaries. Not a single of
these weaknesses can be blamed on the ANC-led government. Despite these
challenges, our government and the Department of Local and Provincial
Government have made great strides in positioning our country on the right
path of effective service delivery and development.

Our institutions of government have, for the first time in history, made
ordinary people feel part of the governance system and feel the ownership
of that government system. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Thank you, Chairperson. It is via this auspicious department
that the mechanics to deliver to ground level is set in motion. The MF
welcomes the department’s 23% nominal growth for which transfers naturally
constitute 98%. We continue to view the department as our hawk’s eye in
rural development and urban renewal.

While many municipalities have matured in delivery, some remain challenged
by the realities of minimal resources, skills shortages, and the MF,
jointly with the department, seeks to turn this around.

We note that the department is experiencing a staff shortage, explaining
its saving over the last year. The MF, in this regard, expresses its
concern as to why these posts have not as yet been filled and notes that
this shortfall of staff certainly hinders service delivery that needs to be
addressed urgently.

We next turn our attention to free basic services, where we are especially
concerned at how effectively and efficiently municipalities have been
providing free basic services, and whether the department has been
monitoring municipality delivery in light of this. We further enquire as to
how many households have benefited from the free basic services. Certainly,
the review of this shall give us insight into the success of this
programme.

Next, we look at the serious opposition to demarcation of areas and the
relocation of areas under the different municipalities. The MF hopes that
all the demarcation challenges have been settled to enable municipalities
to identify those to which its services shall be rendered and in turn
enable residents to pursue their needs and requests to the correct
municipalities.

The MF believes that our ward councillors play an important role in service
delivery. It is crucial that councillors familiarise and educate themselves
on the economic status, activities, unemployment and poverty in their
areas. This valued information shall greatly assist in service delivery,
and in meeting community needs.

Even where municipalities continue to be challenged by minimal resources,
indications of higher levels of growth shall determine the improvement of
service delivery. Looking at the department, overall, the MF does however
embrace that if the shortage of technical and managerial skills shortages
at municipalities and institutional management capacity is addressed, it
shall serve to balance operational efficiency and effectiveness between
provinces and municipalities.

Lastly, the intensification of intergovernmental relations between the
departments, the varying spheres of government and the provisions of
support of these to local government, is the true determinant of service
delivery, nation building, growth and social development.

The MF supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Ms M M GUMEDE: Chairperson, Members of Parliament, distinguished guests,
ladies and gentlemen, comrades and friends, with due respect, can you allow
me just to use one sentence in Afrikaans, so that Mr Doman can understand
me correctly.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Go ahead ma’m.

Ms M M GUMEDE: I am making this special request because I don’t know
Afrikaans that well. Mr Doman,

... in Afrikaans sê hulle: As jy ’n slang kry wat lê in sy gat, moenie met
hom gaan lol nie. As hy daar uitkom, dan pik hy. [Gelag.] [In Afrikaans
they say: if you find a snake in its hole, don’t bother it. If it comes out
of the hole, it will bite you. [Laughter.]]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Dit was goeie Afrikaans, baie
goeie Afrikaans. [That was good Afrikaans, very good Afrikaans.]

Ms M M GUMEDE: I mean to say that Mr Doman must be aware that people who
live in glasshouses should not throw stones. It is not the first time that
I tell you, Mr Doman. Your house is built of glass. If one can just pass
with one stone, that whole house of yours will be broken down.
[Interjections.]

I suspect Mr Doman is not one person. He must have a duplicate, because
whenever we are in the portfolio committee, he is the one who comes up with
proposals and, in turn, we support him. Then when he comes to this podium
he becomes a different man. [Laughter.]

Maybe to tell Mr Doman the last thing so that he can regain his senses, he
is always telling us that he has been in this Parliament for 17 years. But
he takes so long to understand issues, niyangilibazisa, [you are delaying
me,] unlike me who has been in this Parliament for only 17 seconds.
[Laughter.] I wish he could become a 17-year-old MP and not a 17-second MP
like myself.

It is with pleasure, again, today to be given this opportunity of
delivering this budget vote speech for the Department for Provincial and
Local Government, which will be focusing mainly on the strategic plan for
2006-11. This budget vote deals with the strengthening of the Department
for Provincial and Local Government for them to have capacity and
capability, which are the only things that Mr Doman knows about the local
government. [Laughter.]

There is a programme that has been rolled out, maybe to close that gap for
the hon Mr Doman - with due respect.

Whenever we speak of strengthening something, the first thing that comes to
one’s mind is the budget - whether it will allow one or not. That is why
the Minister of Finance, Comrade Trevor Manuel, has increased our budget
from R82 billion to R92 billion this year, with R82,9 billion going to the
municipalities.

South Africa, like many African countries, had a very strong culture of
traditional leadership of kings and queens that governed the lives of
African people for centuries. However, today, the ANC government has
transformed that leadership into a leadership that leads in a democratic
way, and has set a national framework, norms and standards to define the
place and role of our traditional leadership within the system of
democratic governance.

In anyway, out of all your difficulties of 48 years, Mr Doman, we have
managed to have 284 municipalities, focused on growing local economies and
extending the provision of services previously neglected by your apartheid
government. Amen. [Laughter.]

By July 2005, 67% of the population had access to free basic water, whilst
64% of South Africa’s 284 municipalities were providing free basic
electricity to 49% of the population.

Bakithi nina enilapho phezulu ngicela ukunitshela ukuba uma ngabe ugesi
ungakafiki kwakho uzofika noma awukabi namanzi egcekeni ... [To those of
you in the public gallery, I want to tell you that if you don’t have
electricity, you will get it or if you don’t have potable water ...]
Local government has got a new strategy that they have developed so that
they can accelerate their delivery services. It does not mean that
bayahluleka [they are incapable]. No, it is because we are the largest
population in the world. That is why in South Africa, the ANC-led
government has noticed that without us, you will never succeed, Mr Doman.
If you turn to me, maybe, unlike the hon Mr Seremane, who is bait for the
DA, isilumiso [bait.] [Laughter.]

The past training workshops held nationally ... musani ukuhleka kakhulu man
[please, don’t laugh.] [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon members.

Ms M M GUMEDE: The past training workshops held nationally to induct new
and old councillors gave them the strength to execute their duties
efficiently. The Department for Provincial and Local Government budget vote
will encompass the implementation programme of Project Consolidate.

I am saying this with pride, because it is the language that I never
learned at school. I just picked it up when I was old within the ANC-led
government. If I had not listened to the politics of the ANC, I would never
have matured in politics. That is why you should belong to the movement of
the ANC.

Project Consolidate is a two-year programme that allows national and
provincial government, together with the private sector partners, to find
new ways of working with local government. The target focus of Project
Consolidate is to realise the people’s contract and mobilise social
partners around this programme.

I heard somebody dreaming during the day in this budget vote, saying that
the ANC must be aware of the votes. You know, when we went towards the
elections, there were a lot of riots that were taking place. In fact it
were demonstrations, and somebody was overwhelmingly excited, always saying
in this Parliament that the ANC is going to lose the elections. That was a
demonstration to show you that it is and vice versa. The ANC is the only
party and the only government that we are dying for in South Africa.
[Applause.]

The implementation of the Batho Pele programme is not favoured by
councillors and public servants. It is an important delivery pillar of
service delivery. Batho Pele, which means “mense eerste” [people first] is
not a slogan; it marks the beginning of humankind. It means that whatever
we do, we must always put people first.

Forty something years back, when the apartheid government was in place, I
thought that to be white meant you were a small god. You couldn’t just go
to people because if you went to us, Mr Doman,

... ek sal jou met dié swart kleur smeer. [... then I will tar you with the
black brush.]

There is a dire need to put financial resources into rural development to
create new economic nodal points. The department must enforce finance
legislation in all municipalities, with special focus on rural
municipalities. The ward committees and community development workers in
our municipalities are also part of strengthening the Department for
Provincial and Local Government.  Not very long, they will also be trained,
as they work hand in glove with our local municipalities.

Let me first congratulate my Minister, together with my Deputy Minister and
the Minister of Housing, for visiting our Taung area that was flooded.
Their delegation was led by the hon Deputy President. I wonder if Mr Doman
were to be the Deputy President, if he would go there. [Laughter.] The
present floods in Taung district have exposed the amount of poverty,
underdevelopment and years of neglect and deprivation, mostly caused by the
previous apartheid government. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr P J NEFOLOVHODWE: Chairperson, Azapo has noticed that the budget that we
are discussing has gone a long way to provide for the improvement of
services for citizens, particularly those who are living in municipalities
that are not in the position to stand on their own.
What is needed now is to monitor that the resources allocated reach the
targeted sections of our society, particularly the poor. The delivery
mechanisms should be improved; training and capacity building should be
intensified. These measures are necessary in order to improve the quality
of service.

It is not uncommon for the poor to expect their democratic state to ensure
that they have access to basic and quality services as well as economic
opportunities. It is not uncommon that when services are not delivered,
citizens become unhappy, and in some instances, even begin to question the
basis of their support for the new dispensation.

It is indeed reasonable for citizens, particularly the poor, to expect
support from those like us, whom they have elected. It is for this reason
that Azapo is concerned by a tendency prevalent in some municipalities who
depend on outsourcing key services to consultants, who in return do not
deliver services to the satisfaction of communities. At the same time,
these municipalities refuse to be held responsible for the poor services
rendered by the consultants.

In rural areas, for example, Eskom is supposed to heed the call by national
government to continuously and progressively intensify the supply of
electricity to communities. This is not happening at the pace intended. In
some instances, Eskom pleads budgetary constraints or the absence of an
agreement with a particular municipality.

Eskom is a parastatal, and it should be made to understand its mandate and
responsibility for development. Azapo supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Ms L M MASHIANE:  I am “L M” not “B L”.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We apologise for that. We will ask
the Table to correct the record.

Ms L M MASHIANE: Can you see me? [Interjections.] If you don’t see me, you
will hear me. You have no choice.

Chairperson, hon Minister Sidney Mufamadi, hon Deputy Minister, Nomachala
Hangana, thank you very much hon members, and hello to our dear friends in
the in the gallery there.

In her presentation to the Local Government Budget Vote hearings, the
Director-General of the Department of Provincial and Local Government, Ms
Lindiwe Msengana Ndlela, said that the budget of R82 billion within the
DPLG over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period represents a
financial commitment and contribution to improve performance at provincial
and local government level.

While this is welcomed, the department must however continue to intensify
its support to other delivery arms of government to ensure that the spread
and distribution of finances speaks to the people on the ground, in terms
of providing a better life for all. We think the department has done well,
in the last financial year, in terms of meeting the largest part of the
targets, as encapsulated in the governance’s programme of action.

However, we believe that the department should now do more in terms of
monitoring and evaluating the performance of provinces, if it wishes to
fully achieve and fulfil its developmental mandate. If this is not taking
place, then we must, as politicians, begin to examine whether the
department is in itself capacitated enough to carry out its tasks.

It would be gross neglect if we do not do this, as the department is better
placed to give leadership to other institutions of the state.

The current work of the department puts more emphasis on national and local
government, but places lesser focus on provincial government, as it is,
regrettably, the spheres faced with continued underspending. This is also
in the light that provinces are also positioned to assist local government
in developing both infrastructure and capacity to deliver services. For us,
this is an area of concern.

I would like to reiterate that this year’s budget registers staggering
improvements, and the developmental initiatives by the department are
consistent with our national agenda. However, in our observation, we feel
that the money set aside for training will not make the sort of impact we
want to see in preparation for the type of capacity the country needs.

The department needs to mobilise adequate resources, and seriously look at
additional resources for training. Therefore, the current resource
allocation for capacity and training across local government does not seem
to be having the desired developmental outcome.

As the ANC we want to see ward-based integrated development plans, because
we believe only ward-based IDPs have the capacity to act as the driving
force for resource allocation in municipalities. The department must
continue its good work in addressing service delivery and managing capacity
in a number of municipalities. We support Project Consolidate as a base for
improvement, but we would like to see these municipalities out on their
own, as viable delivery arms of our developmental state.

The ANC-led government has long recognised the need to strengthen local
government by providing support plans to make local government work better.
That is why the ANC is determined to make sure that local government plays
it role in the people’s contract to create work and fight poverty.
Therefore, we call on all South Africans from all walks of life to work
together to achieve the objectives of creating work and fighting poverty in
the spirit of co-operation.

Our message is clear. The basic needs of the masses of the people must be
addressed. The creation of jobs, houses, the introduction of electricity,
building of schools and hospitals, providing free running water, paved
roads, etc. are our priorities.

The ANC supports the Budget Vote. I am sure Mr Doman is happy that I did
not deal with him today.

Mr S SIMMONS: Hon Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister and colleagues, in
the recent past, there have been numerous advocacies for this Department of
Provincial and Local Government to address the problems relating to poor
service delivery at local government level. Unfortunately, little of these
advocacies were accompanied with realistic practical proposals to address
these problems.

We would be misleading ourselves if we maintained that the department was
totally passive in producing remedial actions. The hon Minister earlier
pointed out his department’s plan for ensuring improved levels of service
delivery. The United Party welcomes this.

Dit het te veel van ’n gewoonte geraak in hierdie Huis om met groot
entoesiasme en doelgerigtheid, programme en inisiatiewe aan te kondig wat
probleme aanspreek, om maar net op die lang duur skipbreuk te ly. Dit is om
hierdie rede dat ek graag daarop wys dat dit blyk dat die mislukking van
sulke programme en inisiatiewe hoofsaaklik die gevolg is van die
afwesigheid of onvoldoende uitleg van konkrete, praktiese en veral meetbare
maatstawwe en teikens vir die uitvoer van sodanige programme. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It has become too much of a habit in this House to announce, with great
enthusiasm and purposefully, programmes and initiatives addressing
problems, only to fail in the long run. For this reason I would like to
point out that apparently the failure of such programmes and initiatives is
mainly as a result of the absence or inadequate setting out of concrete,
practical and especially measurable criteria and objectives for the
implementation of such programmes.]

The bottom line is that the remedies have been formulated and are in the
process of being implemented. I hope the governance aspect of
municipalities will indeed become realistic through policy guidance from
the governmental agencies to redesign the policies and programmes.

In order for municipal development capacity to be improved, a great deal of
effort needs to be expended by national and provincial departments. Time
will only tell if these latest efforts from the hon Minister and his
department will result in municipalities becoming real developmental
facilitators. I thank you. [Interjections.] You can give me as much as you
want to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your speaking
time is over.

Mr S SIMMONS: What seats? In which election?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Simmons, will you leave the
podium, please.

Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, as my colleague argued, we need a new approach
about a number of matters in local government if the second term is to be
deemed a success.

Firstly, I want to deal with finances, which, to a large extent, determine
everything. The DA fully endorses the intentions of the Municipal Finance
Management Act. The extent to which the Municipal Finance Management Act
will be implemented and complied with will go a long way to determine the
success of the local government in the next five years.

To ask the question whether the capacity exists to do this is to know the
answer. Extra care should be given to attract financially skilled people to
municipalities to appoint on merit and to concentrate on this terrain in
training.

The total debt owed to municipalities is now over R32 billion and is rising
by R3 billion a year. Councils should exercise the political will to
implement their policies in regard to credit control, indigent relief and
debt collecting.

If this department and the provincial departments of local government
really want to make a difference they should concentrate on assisting
municipalities around finances.

One of the big failures of the Minister and the ANC is to get people to pay
for their services. The Masakhane Project has come and gone. The project
has been researched and unpacked at conference after conference. What we
need now is action, and we need the Minister to play a much more active
role in solving this challenge.

What we further need in this new term is that money intended for
infrastructure does not go unspent. As the DA has stated repeatedly in the
past, we applaud the huge sums the government make available for
infrastructure. This addresses the backlog and also creates jobs. It is
unacceptable that money is not spent in the budget cycle it is intended
for.

A huge challenge is also developing in terms of the maintenance of old and
new infrastructure. Our country can ill-afford to let this infrastructure
deteriorate. To this very end, there is still a drastic shortage of skilled
engineers and other technical employees at municipalities. [Interjection.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Are you rising on a point
of order, hon member?

Mr C V BURGESS: No, hon Chairperson. I just wanted to know whether the hon
member will take a question.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Are you able to take a question,
hon member?

Mr M M SWATHE: No.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Unfortunately not, Mr Burgess.
Please proceed, hon member.

Mr M M SWATHE: Municipalities around the country last year failed to spend
R1,2 billion of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant because of lack of
skilled engineers.

It is worrying indeed that 74 out of 231 local municipalities have no civil
engineers, technologists or technicians, 45 have only 1 civil engineer and
186 local municipalities have no civil engineers. Minister Mufumadi must
now apply his mind to this problem or else people will not receive the
services that they are entitled to. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Are you rising on a point
of order, hon member?

Ms M M GUMEDE: Chairperson, some members in this Chamber like to be
addressed as ``hon members’’ but when they speak to other people they say
``that Minister’’, ``that so and so’’. Yet to the women they would say, out
of order, chairperson – hon. Are they the only hon members and others not
hon, yet we are holding the same status in this Parliament?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I don’t think that is a point of
order. Hon member, please proceed.

Mna M M SWATHE: Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. Se se re tliša go bothata bja
tlhokego ya ditirelo tša motheo tša go se lefelwe dileteng tša magaeng. Ge
ditšhelete di sa sepetšwe le go abja ka hloko, gona ditirelo tša motheo tša
go se lefelwe e tla fo ba ditoro.

Re kwela mebasepala ya dilete tsa magaeng tša go swana gaSekhukhune,
Waterberg, Molemole, Aganang, Nkumpi-Lepelle le Blouberg bohloko. Tše ke
dilete tšeo ke bonego di sotlega le ge mebasepala ya tšona e le ka gare ga
lenaneo la tlhabollo – nodal points. Tlhokego ya meetse, ditsela tša go
išega le mohlagase e sa le tlhoba-boroko. Lenaneo la tlhabollo ya dilete
tša magaeng – ISRDP - ga le bonagale go thuša go lwantša bodiidi.

Ditšhaba di lla ka go se rerišwe ge go dirwa mananeo a tlhabologo – IDP. Ka
tsela yeo IDP ga e sepedišane le dinyakwa tša setšhaba. Mananeo a go hloma
mešomo le dikgwebopotlana, go swana le LED a fiwa bagwera le meloko. Baswa
ba mabjoko a bogale ga ba fiwe monyetla ka ge ba se na kamano le basepidiši
ba mebasepala.

Ditšhaba di kwa bohloko ka tsela yeo di sa rerišwego ka kabo ya ditirelo.
Ke ka lebaka leo re bonego go na le ditšhupetšo tša boipelaetšo ka megwanto
naga ka bophara. Go thwalwa ga bašomi ba tlhobollo ya setšhaba – community
development workers – go hlotše mathata le go se kwišišane magareng ga
maloko a di-ward committee ao a sa hwetšego meputso, thekgo ya mašeleng le
didirišwa tša maleba. Bona ba bona ba šomela lefela mola bašomimmogo ka
bona ba lefšwa. Taba ye e hlotše go se kgotsofale ditšhabeng.

Re le ba DA, re ka amogela gore tšhelete yeo e aroganyago setšhaba ka
diripa tše pedi e šomišwe go hlabolla batho, go swana ditirelo tša go se
lefelwe tša kabo ya meetse le mohlagase go bao ba di hlokago.

Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. [Nako e fedile.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi speech follows.)

[Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you, Chairperson. This brings us to the problem of
lack of free basic services in some rural areas. If money is not properly
allocated or properly used, then the free basic services will just remain a
dream.

We sympathise with municipalities like Sekhukhune, Waterberg, Modimolle,
Aganang, Nkumpi-Lepelle and Blouberg. Even though their municipalities are
busy with the development programme, these areas are still suffering. Lack
of water, proper roads and electricity is still a nightmare in these areas.

The Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP, doesn’t seem
to be helping the needy people.

People are complaining that the Integrated Development Programmes, IDPs,
are initiated without their consultation. That way IDPs do not meet the
people’s needs. Job creation and entrepreneurship programmes like the Local
Economic Development Programme (LEDP) are full of nepotism. Youth, with
potential are not able to get the opportunities, as they have no relations
with the management at the municipalities.

People are complaining that they are not consulted on issues of allocation
of basic services. That is why we see demonstrations and marches in the
whole country. The employment of community development workers has created
problems and misunderstandings between voluntary members of the ward
committees, financial support and proper services. The voluntary members
are aware that they work for nothing whereas their colleagues are getting
paid. This has caused dissatisfaction among the people.

We, as the DA, would appreciate it if the money that is dividing the people
into two groups is instead used for their development, like free basic
services such as water and electricity to those who do not have.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired] [Applause.]]

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Mufamadi, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon members, distinguished guests and the House at large, maybe
before I talk ``sense’’ let me deal with all the unwanted truth. Firstly, I
would like to talk to the left as I stand here. One is that hon member
Doman, your behaviour reflects on who you are. You made reference to the
past mistakes. I just want to advise you that if you are wise enough to use
Cape Town as a case for analysis when the tools of analysis and the model
you are using is wrong, the outcome is going to be misleading.
[Interjections] Secondly, you spoke about the decisions taken behind closed
doors. You have a short memory because this Parliament was closed to us as
black people for years until 1994. [Interjections.]

On the matter of corruption, we believe, regarding your silence on your
failure as an MEC in this province, that this should have been shared with
us. On the Project Consolidate lamentations, I have to advise you in
isiXhosa.

Izinja zikhonkotha imoto ehambayo. [Dogs always bark at a moving car.]
[Laughter.]

Hon Smith, it is unfortunate that although you have agreed regarding the
issue of traditional leaders, unfortunately you must have benefited
thereafter from what Nkosi Nonkonyana has shared with us. You also made
reference to the electoral process. Let me remind you that transformation
of local government included three phases, and we are in the last phase
that includes establishment, consolidation and implementation. Systems that
were not in place in the past are in place today. [Interjections.]

HON MEMBERS: [Inaudible.]

Mr S A MSHUDULU: I will not join you in your imbecility. [Laughter.]
The last one is that it is unfortunate, hon Swathe.

Ngoba uyayibhalelwa intetho yakho, mntan’ am. Yonke into oyithethayo
awuyazi. [It is because someone writes your speech, my child. You don’t
know what you are saying.] [Laughter.]

Firstly, I support the budget on behalf of the ANC. The reason I support it
is because I represent an organisation that stood the test of time in terms
of representing the plight and the needs of the poorest majority of this
country, an organisation that is founded on the will of the people, as
contained in the Freedom Charter that was signed in Kliptown in 1955 when
it said: The People Shall govern! This people’s contract to advise the
vision of the Freedom Charter is celebrated this year through an ANC-led
government’s commitment to dedicate all government service delivery
endeavours to a participatory democratic process guided also by the RDP
founding principles of people-driven, people-centred service delivery as
well as the one that is founded on the theme: The People Shall Govern! Just
to educate you that this is the principle that no government can justly
claim authority unless it is based on the will of the people as enshrined
in the country’s Constitution. This further affirms that by involving the
people in the process of government their involvement is not limited to the
right to vote.

Let me dedicate my speech to community participation and public
participation to the most marginalised poor – women, the youth and those
with disabilities, including the rural poor – more especially in the areas
that have known social and economic exclusion for more than 100 years like
Evaton, Alexandra and Bekkersdal in Gauteng – which is my constituency. My
motivation on this subject as related to today’s budget is well informed by
a political directive coming from our President Thabo Mbeki in his state of
the nation address this year. In his reference to the historical context
from which South Africa emerged, he highlighted events that shaped the
country’s history, which I believe we celebrate today through people-
driven, people-centred service delivery, of which we are clearing the mess
you have created as you make noise over there. His reference to the Codesa
Declaration of Intent reminded us of the commitment by all participants to
freedom, equality and security for all irrespective of race, colour, sex or
creed.

The concept of community participation in this context has to be understood
within the Municipal Systems Act under the Preamble, which I will quote to
educate the DA on the other side:


  Whereas the system of local government under apartheid rule failed
  dismally to meet the basic needs of the majority of South Africans;


  Whereas the Constitution of our non-racial democracy enjoins local
  government not just to seek to provide services to all our people but to
  be developmental in orientation;


  Whereas there is a need to set out core principles, mechanisms and
  processes that give meaning to the developmental local government and to
  empower municipalities to move progressively towards a social and
  economic upliftment of communities and the provision of basic services to
  all our people, and specifically the poor and the disadvantaged;


  Whereas a fundamental aspect of the new local government system is the
  active engagement of communities in the affairs of municipalities of
  which they are an integral part, and in particular planning, service
  delivery and performance management;


  Whereas the new system of local government requires an efficient,
  effective and transparent local public administration that conforms to
  constitutional principles ...


I would like to affirm what hon member Tsenoli, the chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Local Government, said earlier that it is time that
people go into their archives and begin to go into the white Paper on Local
government so that you can be empowered to understand where we stand.

It is therefore opportune in this instance against the background and the
founding mandate given to the ANC through the provincial government’s
outcome to outline some of the challenges that have been referred to
earlier, some of the challenges that we face include of course – and I take
advantage of the presence of our mayors here because these are the
challenges we face unclear in absence of IDP strategy in some
municipalities that do not have capacity an IDP that cannot be translated
into implementable  programmes as you would know in terms of project plans,
short-term or quick-fix programmes that are not sustainable and have no
impact on citizens due to no consultation. I have an experience of having
attended all IDP meetings in my area in Vaal. So I am not speaking from
textbook experience.

Deliberate exclusion of citizens in developmental projects is a problem
also if they are excluded more so that they have little awareness of
council’s priorities. The challenges we face here on the ground is that the
people out there seem not to know what councils’ priorities are because of
some IDPs that are done or constructed by technocrats.

Also, there is this matter of departmentalism and silos where departments
sometimes would have programmes that do not talk to one another. Then it
creates a problem in terms of alignment with the budget. This is one area I
have to elaborate more in Sesotho ...

... ya Sesotho, jwaloka motho ya tswang Lekwa. Ho tsohle tsena, re
kenyelletsa le kaho ya matlo, ditulo kapa mabala a boithabiso, le ditulo
tsa ho bala, dikolo le ditliliniki, tlhokomelong ya tsona, ha ho ka moo re
ka etsang hore batho re se ke ra ba kenyeletsa ho tsona kapa re ba siye
morao. Ho ngangisano ena ya kajeno, ho bohlokwa hore re kgone hore re
tsebise bao ba phehisanang le bajete hore re keteka dilemo tse leshome
kajeno tsa Molaotheo wa rona. Molaotheo ona ke ona o etsang hore re be le
bokgoni ba hore mmuso wa rona, haholo Lefapha la Mmuso wa Selehae, le
eteletsweng pele ke Ntate Mufamadi, le thuse setjhaba sa mona hore se kgone
ho phela.

Re boele hape re bontshane hore ho ANC, eo e leng yona e eteletseng mmuso
wa selehae kajeno, ho bile le setlamo, moo le tsebang hore pontsheng ya
mang kapa mang, makhanselara a rona a saenne tumellano ya hore ba tla bitsa
dikopano ka mora kgwedi e nngwe le e nngwe kapa ha ho hlokahala. Le ...
[Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[... of Sesotho, as a person from Lekwa, in all these we include the
building of houses, places of recreation, libraries, schools and clinics.
In their maintenance, there is nothing that we can do to exclude or leave
the people behind. In today’s debate, it is critical to tell those who are
against the budget that we are celebrating the decade of our Constitution.
This Constitution enables our government, especially the Department of
Local Government led by hon Minister Mufamadi, to help the community to
make a living.

We must also show that the ANC, which is leading the local government
today, had an agreement, where our councillors signed the agreement,
publicly, that they will call a meeting every month when necessary. And...
[Time expired.]]

The MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, all who
participated in the debate, especially the Chairperson of the Portfolio
Committee, have a right to an expression of my thanks and appreciation. I
fully appreciate the views that they so generously shared with us.

Hon members will recall that it is exactly a year and six days from the day
that our Ministry commended a Budget Vote to this House. We consider it our
duty to account to the people of South Africa through the House. It is for
this reason that we appear before you, with a view today, to recount the
progress made from the time of our last interaction. However, also to
identify challenges that lie ahead and to employ you to lend a hand to the
efforts we are making in order to meet those challenges.

As I said, indeed, we value the many insights that you shared with us,
including the advice that was given. An important piece of advice given to
me personally was from the hon Swathe, who advised me to exercise my mind.
However, he refused to exercise his mind to a question that one hon member
proposed to raise. [Laughter.]

Maybe it is because the performer was alone on the stage without the
privilege of leaning on the choreographer. [Laughter.] He proceeded to
lament about the integrated sustainable rural development strategy, which
he says is not visible. Not everything you do not see is invisible.
[Laughter.]

The hon Likotsi took this opportunity to thank the masses of Azania for
coming out in large numbers to vote for the PAC in the 1 March local
government elections. He went on to say, “Time to reward struggle,
comrades, is over.” In this regard, may I observe that your attitude is the
same as that of the voters: they want parties of substance. [Laughter.]

As I said earlier, I stood on this podium to recount some progress that has
been realised. I didn’t do this recounting of progress with a view to
disappoint anybody, because I assume that we don’t have and we can’t have
here, doom mongers, who regard progress as awkward news.

Mr Doman made an observation that all over the country, and I am quoting
you verbatim, “people are revolting against councillors.” Well, what we
refuse to do was to fall for this kind of overgeneralization. That is why I
made reference to extensive studies that were conducted, because
overgeneralization tends to lead to imprecision.

However, we need to try and understand why this propensity for
overgeneralization. Why is Mr Doman adept at nothing but only at
instrumentalising hysterical hyperbole? He does all this in search of a
remedy for his phantom pain, or maybe, as hon Swathe suggested, to make a
case for what hon Swathe would call “the argument of my colleague”.
[Applause.][Laughter.]

The hon Doman proceeded to give me advice, which reads as follows:

   Salga should be turned around, and the Minister must consider withholding
   funding for Salga.

I don’t know why he seemed so convinced that he was proffering advice of
persuasive substance. He advises me to build and to destroy Salga.

The hon Smith said many things about local government that I appreciate,
and what we need to do to improve its performance. However, his unfounded
assertion about the alleged dishonesty with which government deals with the
institution of traditional leaders, devalues some of the important things
he said in this debate. This is a tired, old argument that he has been
putting forward over a long period of time. I have, frankly, no appetite to
engage in the dialogue of the deaf with him. [Laughter.]

He must, for once, remove his narrow party political blinders, interact
himself with traditional leaders, premiers and MECs outside KwaZulu-Natal,
and he will be educated about the excellent relations that exist within our
provincial and local spheres of government, at least, everywhere else in
the country.

The overall sound relations that exist between government and the
institution of traditional leadership should not be seen through the prism
of what is happening in one province. However, this does not detract from
the fact that what is happening in KwaZulu-Natal is a matter of grave
concern to us. It is for that reason that the Chairperson of the National
House of Traditional Leaders, Nkosi Mzimela, and I have been in
discussions, which led to an agreement that we are going to intervene and
exorcise this ghost out of the body politic of our country once and for
all. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

House adjourned at 19:05.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Health Professions Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
         Minister of Health. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health
         and the Select Committee on Social Services.

    (2)     Firearms Control Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
         Minister of Safety and Security. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Safety and Security and the Select Committee on
         Security and Constitutional Affairs.

2.    Calling of Joint Sitting

      The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 24 May 2006, called a Joint
      Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
      Provinces, as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

      The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, have, in terms
    of Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Thursday, 25 May 2006 at 11:00 to conduct a debate in
    recognition of Africa Day.


    B MBETE, MP        M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY       NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
                 PROVINCES”


TABLINGS


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     1) Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Public Service Commission for
        2006/07 to 2008/09.


     2) Letter from the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly, dated 25 April 2006,
        informing her of the upliftment of the provisional suspension of
        Magistrate M S E Khumalo from Amsterdam.

        Dear Madam Speaker


        UPLIFTMENT OF PROVISIONAL SUSPENSION OF A MAGISTRATE, MR M S E
        KHUMALO FROM AMSTERDAM
        A report on the provisional suspension of Mr Khumalo from office
        with effect from 22 August 2005 has been tabled in Parliament on 23
        August 2005. It was done in terms of 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates
        Act, 1993. Mr Khumalo’s provisional suspension has since been
        confirmed by both Houses of Parliament in terms of section 13(3)(c)
        of the Act (by the National Assembly on 30 October 2005 and by the
        National Council of Provinces on 15 November 2005).


        I have in the meantime received a report from the Magistrates
        Commission requesting me to uplift Mr Khumalo’s provisional
        suspension. A copy of the report is enclosed herewith. As you will
        note, the Magistrates Commission has decided to terminate its
        inquiry into Mr Khumalo’s fitness to hold office in relation to the
        incident in respect of which he was provisionally suspended.
        Accordingly, the basis for his provisional suspension fell away. I
        have therefore decided to uplift his provisional suspension and to
        instruct the Magistrates Commission to arrange for him to resume
        his duties with immediate effect. Accordingly, the matter may be
        regarded as finalized.


        With kind regards


        Signed
        MS B S MABANDLA, MP
        MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT



COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on  Defence  on  Deployment  of
    SANDF to the Union of Comoros, dated 19 May 2006:

    The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having  considered  the  letter
    from the President on the  deployment  of  the  South  African  National
    Defence  Force  (SANDF)  to  the  Union  of  Comoros,  referred  to  the
    Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.


National Assembly


1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
    ON THE TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORTS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2005:

    The Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having considered
    Annual Reports and Financial Statements for 2005, reports as follows:


    A.      INTRODUCTION


        1.  The  review  and  hearings  on  annual  reports  and  financial
           statements of the  statutory  bodies  has  been  undertaken  and
           conducted in order to gain an understanding of progress that  is
           being made  to  improve  the  levels  of  service  delivery.  In
           particular, the Committee wanted to  uncover  shortcomings,  key
           areas  of  concrete  improvement  and  assess  the   impact   of
           government programmes in changing and improving the lives of the
           people.

        2. The Committee resolved that its efforts  would  be  increasingly
           directed in the area of monitoring  performance  and  evaluating
           delivery.


    B.      PARTICIPANTS IN THE TABLING OF ANNUAL REPORTS


    Those who appeared before the Committee included a delegation  from  the
    Department of Provincial and Local Government  Ms  L  Msengana-Ndlela  –
    Director-General, L Twaku, L Graham, M Rangali,  Shiva  Makotoko,  Elroy
    Africa, C  Clerihew  and  Veronica  Mafoko;  Mr.  Malcolm  Booysen  from
    Treasury; Ms Pumla Madiba, A Dockrat, M  Seroux,  M  Bethlehem,  Mongezi
    Guma and Sibusisiwe Dube from  the  Commission  for  the  Promotion  and
    Protection  of  the  Rights  of  Cultural,  Religious   and   Linguistic
    Communities (CRL Commission); the LGSeta was represented by Mr W  Nkosi,
    Mr W Roberts, Mr H A Deysel, Mr S Japie, Ms Millicent Collins;  MDB  was
    represented by Dr Vuyo Molokoti, Mr Hillary Monare, Mr Richard  Somamje;
    a delegation of the NHTL included Nkosi M B Mzimela, Chief F  P  Kutama,
    Morena MF Mopeli, Kgosi SV Suping,  Kgoshi  C  E  Mathebe,  Prince  Z  S
    Makaula, Prof. Sobahle, Mr Z Matebese, Mr S Nkosi; MIIU was  represented
    by Ms Danai Magugumela, Ms Laila Suryodipuro; and SALGA was  represented
    by its CEO Dr M Khoza, Cllr H Jenkins, Mr S Wasa, Mr K Miullagie and  Mr
    A Mpela.



    C.      DEPARTMENT OF PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT


        1. The department (DPLG)  reported  that  the  departmental  budget
           under review was R13.1 billion. An amount of about R7.7  billion
           was transferred directly to municipalities for  basic  services,
           R4.5 billion for municipal infrastructure and job creation, R130
           million for drought relief in South Africa and R20  million  for
           financial needs related to the East Asian (Tsunami) Disaster.

        2. The total amount of R17.3 million was transferred to  the  South
           African Local Government Association and R22.5  million  to  the
           Municipal Demarcation Board to prepare for the Local  Government
           Elections. A total of R8.6 million went to the National House of
           Traditional Leaders, R4 million to the Commission on Traditional
           Leadership  Disputes  and  Claims  and  R9.7  million   to   the
           Commission for the Promotion and Protection  of  the  Rights  of
           Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities. The R224 million
           was for  the  Department  of  Provincial  and  Local  Government
           operational budget.


        3. According to  Project  Consolidate,  since  April  2005  Service
           Delivery Facilitators (SDFs) have been mobilised and deployed to
           municipalities. The Department had been  directly  engaged  with
           more  that  40  municipalities  through  the  Presidential   and
           Ministerial Municipal Imbizo’s Programme.

        Expected outcomes would be:
    • Improved capacity of provinces and municipalities to deliver on their
      mandate
    • Accelerated delivery of quality services to communities
    • Empowered participation of communities in the governance structures
      and processes
         • 136 municipalities would emerge out of Project Consolidate and
           graduate through to the sustainability phase in terms of Local
           Government Transformation process


        4. The recent  audit  reports,  both  from  internal  and  external
           auditors,  point  at  instances  of  non-compliance  with  DoRA,
           especially as the framework for conditional grants by Provincial
           and Local spheres of government.


        5. While this appears to be a  recurring  finding,  it  has  become
           apparent that there was a misalignment between  the  legislature
           and the processes currently followed  by  Provincial  and  Local
           Government in executing their tasks.  The  Committee  noted  the
           various items, which  the  Office  of  the  Auditor-General  has
           listed as  impacting  on  the  internal  controls  and  must  be
           addressed as a matter of priority by the department.

        6. The department’s commitments to the Portfolio Committee  and  to
           Parliament  for  2004/5  was  that,  the  Department  would  pay
           priority attention to:
               • Leading and facilitating policy  coherence  on  matters  of
                 provincial and local government
         • Raising awareness and  recognition  of  the  depth  of  capacity
           challenges
               •  Follow  a  systematic  approach  in  addressing   critical
                 capacity  challenges  arising  from  decades  of   neglect,
                 poverty   and   underdevelopment   in   poor   and    rural
                 municipalities.
               • The department’s approach  in  addressing  Key  Performance
                 Areas (KPA’s) for municipalities, included the following:


           KPA 1: Municipal Transformation and Institutional Development -
           by stabilizing administrative and political components within
           municipalities, implementing a systematic programme of capacity
           building, strengthening the performance Management System etc.
           KPA 2: Municipal Financial Viability and Management – by
           improving municipal capacity in the following areas: Long range
           Financial Planning and Budgeting, Revenue and Debt Management,
           Financial controls, Implementation of MFMA and Regulations and
           Financial Reporting.


           KPA 3: Basic Service Delivery and Infrastructure – by monitoring
           implementation, particularly in areas highlighted in the IDP
           Hearing Report
           KPA 4: Local Economic Development – by mandating the Economic
           and Employment Clusters both at National and Provincial levels
           to accelerate the implementation of Local Economic Development
           strategies.


           KPA 5: Good Governance – by improving the functionality of  Ward
           Committees and rollout  of  the  Community  Development  Workers
           Programme, the three spheres of government  should  provide  the
           necessary support to ensure effectiveness of Ward Committees and
           Good Governance.

        7. The Committee welcomed the  Imbizo  initiative  however,  wanted
           assurance in a form of a monitoring mechanism that would be  put
           in place to ensure progress in addressing identified challenges.
           The Committee  further  mentioned  that  the  department  should
           seriously consider the information coming out  of  reports  from
           Imbizos and such information  needed  to  be  incorporated  into
           departmental strategic plan. The Committee also wanted copies of
           the report from Imbizo’s to be made available in order to assist
           members in their oversight responsibilities.

        8. The committee felt that the department should compile a list  of
           issues raised by traditional leaders to assist local  government
           in address issues of rural development and that  the  department
           needs to monitor the implementation of legislation  designed  to
           transform traditional governance systems.


        9. The Committee was concerned about the future status of the  MIIU
           and pointed out that the department needs to play  its  role  in
           this regard. The Committee felt that the good  relationship  and
           openness  between  the  department  and  its  Entities  is  very
           important and that such a relationship must be sustained.


       10. The Committee agreed that the department should investigate the
           state of readiness of municipalities for the 2010 FIFA Soccer
           World Cup.


    D.      SOUTH AFRICAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION (SALGA)

        1. The South African Local Government Association (SALGA)  received
           a qualified audit opinion from the Auditor-General  for  2005/06
           financial year. Regarding the disclaimer, Salga plans to address
           all issues raised by the Auditor-General and hopes to receive  a
           better report in the next financial year.


        2. Salga’s budget in 2003 was less than R 60m, and in 2005  it  was
           over R 100m.  The breakdown of income for 2005 was as follows:
      - 16% from DPLG
      - 65% from Municipal Levies
      - 8% from Donor Funding
      - 11% from Other Income


        3. Salga complained about a very low payment rate from  Metros  and
           that remuneration packages accounted for 31% of the  budget  and
           was below the general norm of 35%.


        4. SALGA wanted to see full-time  councillors  appointed  in  rural
           areas to enable  devotion  to  development  and  achieve  better
           results.

        5. Salga acknowledged that many municipal facilities/buildings were
           not user-friendly for people with  disabilities.  Municipalities
           had been sensitised about the  shortcomings  and  budgets  would
           reflect the need to improve the  situation  for  most-frequented
           areas and buildings. A database of user-friendly  municipalities
           for people with disabilities would be compiled.  Best  practices
           would be exchanged amongst municipalities to promote  compliance
           with acceptable standards.  All  councillors  would  be  trained
           including  proportional  representation  councillors,  but  ward
           councillors would receive  specific  training  as  they  had  an
           important role to play in development.

        6. The Committee point out that Local Economic  Development  in  so
           far as it relates to local communities remains a  challenge  and
           that Salga needs to find ways of ensuring that the  LED  becomes
           the beneficiation of local communities.


        7. The Committee congratulated Salga on  successfully  hosting  the
           Founding Congress of the United Cities and Local Governments  of
           Africa in Tshwane in May 2005. SALGA is also  a  member  of  the
           Commonwealth Local Government Forum and the partnership with the
           UK-based Local  Government  International  Bureau  has  assisted
           SALGA with funding to develop  the  association’s  International
           Relations strategy.


        8. For the year under review, Salga established a new directorate
           called Strategic Affairs Directorate, whose strategic objectives
           are to:
               - Ensure that SALGA enhances and maintains a high profile
                 position locally, regionally and internationally
         - Mainstream issues of gender, youth, people with disabilities and
           HIV and Aids
         - Facilitate and support the capacity of member municipalities.


E.    MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT UNIT (MIIU)

   1. The MIIU received an amount of R12 342 from grants  and  disbursements
      amounting to R15 341 for the 2005/06 financial year.

   2. The Cabinet Memorandum No. 14 of 1997 created the MIIU in  1998  as  a
      short-term arrangement whose term would come to an end in  five  years
      (April, 2003). The MIIU reported that this term was then  extended  by
      Cabinet Memorandum 4A of 2003 for an additional three years, ending in
      31 March 2006.

   3. Due to MIIU’s term coming to a close, they are reducing and downsizing
      their operations towards closure in  2006.  During  2005/06  financial
      year, the MIIU will be executing their exit plan  in  preparation  for
      closure. This plan will then be implemented as follows:
         • Closure of projects on the pipeline
         • Archiving of projects deliverables
         • Packaging of institutional memory  for  the  DPLG  as  executive
           authority.

   4. The MIIU was concerned about the capacity of the municipal  market  in
      absorbing and taking optimal advantage of  private  sector  investment
      through Municipal Service Partnerships (MSP).

   5. The MIIU reported that heavy reliance in MIG and  lack  of  skills  to
      borrow caused reluctance on borrowing and this trend resulted  into  a
      decline in private sector involvement in municipalities.

   6. The MIIU explained that a chief directorate responsible for MSP in the
      DPLG would  absorb  some  of  their  functions.  While  the  Committee
      welcomed this undertaking, the  Committee  was  nonetheless  concerned
      about the degree of the vacuum that would exist  in  terminating  MIIU
      and who would then be responsible for  performing  the  functions  and
      continue the work that has been started by  the  MIIU.  The  committee
      further wanted to know the actual handover of  functions  when  MIIU’s
      work is being concluded. While the MIIU is preparing for closure,  the
      committee pointed to strong indications of a growing  demand  for  the
      work and projects provided by the MIIU.

   7. The Committee welcomes the clarity of the report and  presentation  by
      the MIIU and further expressed its appreciation for the valuable  work
      undertaken by the MIIU. The Committee further expressed concern  about
      the future of the MIIU and the relevance of its  institutional  memory
      when they have closed shop.

   8. The committee believes that the work of  the  MIIU  is  most  relevant
      within the context of Project Consolidate and if closure goes through,
      a transitional measure should be  initiated  with  the  Department  of
      Provincial and Local Government (DPLG).

   9.  The  Committee  explained  that  lack  of  technical  expertise  from
      municipalities created and necessitated  the  creation  of  MIIU.  The
      Committee wanted to know whether the closing of MIIU presupposes  that
      the conditions that informed the creation of the MIIU no longer exist.
      Due to this, the Committee believes that this need still  exists.  The
      Committee therefore, emphasized its position that  the  MIIU  is  till
      relevant today.

  10. The MIIU report showed that all their projects were  in  urban  areas,
      the Committee then felt that the work of  the  MIIU  is  bias  towards
      urban municipalities, while the issue of infrastructure investment  is
      more challenging in rural areas.

  11. The Committee indicated that it is going to pursue the possibility  of
      extending the MIIU term with the DPLG to determine whether there is  a
      process in the executive to review this  decision  with  the  possible
      view of extending the term of the MIIU.

  12.  The  Committee  agreed  that  the  following  issues  needed  further
      discussion with MIIU and DPLG:

         • Progress on the response they are waiting for, from the DPLG
         • DPLG to elaborate on what plans do they have in place in  taking
           over the functions of the MIIU
         • If there is  any  possibility  in  reversing  the  closing  down
           decision of MIIU.
  13. The MIIU promised to give answers on issues that they were  unable  to
      respond to on the  next  workshop  that  will  be  arranged  for  more
      engagement.

F.    MUNICIPAL DEMARCATION BOARD (MDB)

   1. The Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) indicated that they have created
      4 clusters and a staff compliment  of  about  24  distributed  in  the
      following category:
    • 4 vacant
    • 85.7% black
    • 38% female
    • 4.7% people with disabilities.
   2. For the 2004/05 financial year,  total  expenditure  amounted  to  R28
      million with a net deficit of about R1.9 million  at  31  March  2005,
      which is 5.97% of their total budget.

   3. The MDB explained that  logical  support  for  the  ward  delimitation
      process is the primary reason for this deficit and that the Board with
      the support of DPLG has requested the Finance Committee to approve  an
      additional amount of about R15 670 000 for the delimitation of  wards.
      However,  the  Finance   Committee   only   approved   an   additional
      R5.5million.

   4. The process of ward delimitation and cross boundary would be completed
      by December and that elections needed to  take  place  no  later  than
      April in 2006.

   5. The Committee strongly felt that the Voting Districts that were  being
      used by the IEC were causing confusion  and  that  user-friendly  maps
      should be considered and disseminated. The Board acknowledged that VDs
      are a problem, but pointed out that the IEC focussed on VDs while  the
      Board concentrates on ward demarcation.

   6. The Committee further felt that the net deficit of R1.944 million  was
      a  huge  amount,  and  was  worried  about  the  financial  management
      principles of the PFMA  that  are  being  ignored  purposely,  at  the
      expense of completing the process of ward delimitation. The  Committee
      wanted to get a sense  of  the  Auditor  General’s  response  on  this
      consistent net deficit.

   7. The MDB confirmed that they have a sound working relationship with IEC
      and that  a  national  technical  committee  that  included  DPLG  was
      currently in place.

   8. The board reported that their assets  register  and  asset  management
      system is in place.

   9. The Committee suggested that MDB, IEC and DPLG work  together  in  the
      formulation of boundaries as they are going to  impact  on  elections.
      The DPLG  to  assist  and  give  guidelines  on  issues  beyond  their
      authority e.g. the inflexible criteria of  Municipal  Structures  Act,
      which authorises the board to take into account  the  security,  which
      does not fall under the board.

G.    NATIONAL HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS (NHTL)

   1. The NHTL reported that mechanisms had to be devised for the  House  to
      monitor the creation of traditional legislation and that  no  province
      had  completed  implementation  of  the  Traditional  Leadership   and
      Governance Framework Act of 2003 to meet the deadline of September.
   2. The budget of the National House has been controlled by the department
      (DPLG) but it is hoped that the newly appointed  CEO  would  have  the
      capacity to improve the financial position of the House.

   3. Regarding the establishment of regional  Houses,  the  National  House
      reported that only the Eastern  Cape  has  done  some  good  progress.
      Provinces like North West, Mpumalanga, Free State  and  KZN  have  not
      started yet, meaning that the regional Houses were  not  going  to  be
      erected by the set target of 24 September. The NHTL said  it  was  not
      possible for them to operate  in  Provincial  level  until  Provincial
      Houses are established.

   4. The NHTL explained that gender issues  have  been  addressed  but  the
      tradition and the custom of  communities  are  not  flexible  in  this
      regard, they felt that the implementation of  gender  balancing  would
      however, be implemented over time.

   5. The NHTL had made valuable  contributions  by  making  submissions  in
      several Bills and were involved in drafting legislation in provinces.

   6. Regarding the NHTL Chamber, the Department of Public Works and DPLG
      must work together in order to ensure that the Amakhosi are housed
      within close proximity to Parliament.
   7. The Committee was unclear with the strategic plan and  the  budget  of
      the National House, as there was no indication on the presentation  of
      any substantial information regarding their financial status and their
      accountability to the Auditor General.


   8. The Committee continued to express its  concern  about  the  financial
      status of the National House  and  said  that  the  current  reporting
      format before it requires revision and more clarity on key performance
      areas. Moreover, reports should clearly indicate  how  the  House  had
      utilised the amount allocated to it and how they  managed  to  improve
      the lives of rural dwellers and added value to rural communities.

   9. The Committee emphasised the  importance  of  having  an  action  plan
      supplementing   the   strategic   plan   including   timeframes    for
      implementation.

  10. Again the Committee expressed its concern  over  lack  of  clarity  on
      corrective action that  had  to  be  taken  after  previous  Committee
      recommendations.


Resolution
The committee requested NHTL to take note and correct the following:
    • Their format of report writing.
    • Programme for the year to be tabled in the Committee.
    • To put time frames on key performance areas
    • Clearly identify the link between the budget, the expenditure and what
      is to be done.
    • Clarity on their contribution and role in service delivery.
    • DPLG to assist the NHTL in all the above.

H.    COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF
      CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC COMMUNITIES (CRL)

   1. The Commission reported that in implementing its mandate it formulated
      five distinct but closely related strategic objectives:
         • Organizational Development
         • Human Resource Development
         • Public Education and Advocacy
         • Research and Policy Development
         • Investigation and Conflict Resolution

   2. The Commission indicated that the post of CEO and CFO have since  been
      filled.  The  CRL  Commissioners  were   organized   into   functional
      committees to facilitate effectiveness in policy development, delivery
      and monitoring of activities.
   3. The Commission in its brief period of existence received a substantial
      amount of complaints and  submissions  for  investigation.  After  the
      investigation and analysis, the Commission  discovered  that  all  the
      complaints were related  to  the  issues  of  Language  in  Education,
      Community rights and cultural rituals, religious  Education,  Marriage
      laws and rights etc.

   4. The Commission hosted a  National  Consultative  Conference  (NCC)  in
      their first  twelve  months  of  establishment.  The  NCC  provided  a
      platform for a display of diverse cultural, religious  and  linguistic
      communities. Some of the recommendations of the  NCC  were  that,  CRL
      should  interact  with  religious  leaders  to   promote   interracial
      religious dialogue, bridge general gaps caused  by  the  influence  of
      western culture, religion and language etc.

   5. The Committee felt that the Commission should  be  introduced  to  all
      other relevant department in Parliament  and  the  challenges  to  the
      Committee was to direct this process.

   6. The Committee felt that the Commission is till in its infancy and  has
      to be nurtured by all relevant role-players; nonetheless the Committee
      would follow-up on policy direction applied to the Commission  by  the
      department (DPLG).
   7. The Committee emphasised that the activities of the Commission  should
      be  linked  to   the   Presidency   Cluster   programme   to   enhance
      effectiveness.

I.    LOCAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING AUTHORITY (LG-SETA)

   1. The LG-SETA reported that last year 2004, the Minister of Labour  sent
      them a letter seeking explanation for continued  underperformance  and
      requesting and immediate  improvement  on  standards  and  turn-around
      strategy.


   2. As a consequence they declared 2004 as  a  year  of  consolidation  to
      remove all the inefficiencies and improve their activities  hence  the
      new the LG-SETA as oppose to the previous LG-Water and related SETA.

   3. SETA explained that 1550 municipal employees would be  trained  within
      the EPWP and the training for traditional leaders would be  undertaken
      after initial research.

   4. SETA said that service providers  responded  slowly  to  requests  for
      registration and that SETA would attempt to  use  newly  and  emerging
      service  providers  and  discourage  the  continuous  use   of   well-
      established entities. However, certain new service providers displayed
      capacity weaknesses that had to be considered.

   5. The Committee was  worried  about  the  160  learner’  dropout  during
      training programme. Due to this, the Committee wanted to know if there
      were any strategies in place to correct the situation or  whether  the
      dropouts were just left out. What has been done to prevent the wastage
      of money?

   6. The Committee further wanted  to  know  whether  LGSETA  had  assessed
      learners before taking them for training? Questions were raised around
      the training  of  LGSETA’s  Academy  staff,  municipal  workers,  ward
      committees and Traditional Leaders, and how  efficient  they  were  in
      terms of training, equipment and placement of trained people.

   7. The Committee wanted sufficient information regarding progress in  the
      area of training within the  context  of  the  Expanded  Public  Works
      Programme, the participation of SALGA, and  to  what  extent  do  they
      train Councilors. The Committee was also interested in knowing whether
      LGSETA has a  service  provider  or  training  package  for  municipal
      managers and senior staff members.

   8. The Committee wanted to get a better sense of how LGSETA measures  its
      improvements, on numbers or outcomes, and whether follow ups are being
      conducted after training. The Committee was concern  about  indication
      of duplication regarding training  provided  by  different  government
      department and LGSETA and whether linkages can be forged  for  greater
      impact.

   9. We don’t seem to hear the kind of training that talks to the  type  of
      training that intends to correct the intrinsic behavior  and  attitude
      of public servants along the lines of Batho Pele.

J.    CONCLUSION

   1. The hearings on annual reports have presented the  Committee  with  an
      opportunity to gain the necessary information and detail that  relates
      to the mandate of the statutory bodies in so far as the implementation
      of core government programmes is concerned.


   2. The hearings have also presented a picture of where we  are  as  local
      government to enable us to look at the progress and challenges we  are
      faced with. This session has given us an opportunity to deliberate  on
      issues with the aim of finding  practical  ways  of  coordinating  our
      efforts in moving forward  with  an  efficient  machinery  of  service
      delivery. They have provided us with a broad preview of the  strategic
      priorities of government in the fight against poverty.

   3. The Committee is thus focusing on implementation of service  delivery,
      building and strengthening capacity; developing  human  and  financial
      resources and having the necessary  skills  required  in  implementing
      government programmes.

   4. The Committee conveys its appreciation to the  department  (DPLG)  and
      all the statutory bodies for their participation and  co-operation  in
      the hearings. The Committee emphasized the need to further engage with
      the statutory bodies on the recommendations made.

 2.   Report of the Committee on Provincial and Local Government on  Budget
      Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government, dated 23 May 2006:


The Committee on Provincial and Local Government, having  considered  Budget
Vote 5: Provincial and Local Government, report as follows:

A. INTRODUCTION
   1. The budget review of the Ministry and Department of Provincial and
      Local Government (dplg) was undertaken on 13 March 2006 and the budget
      review of the statutory bodies accountable to the Portfolio Committee
      was undertaken on 14 and 15 March 2006.


   2. The budget briefings also served to acquaint the Portfolio Committee
      with the plans, programmes and projects of the Ministry and Department
      of Provincial and Local Government.

B. PARTICIPANTS IN THE BUDGET HEARINGS

   1. Those who appeared before the Committee included a delegation from the
      Department of Provincial and Local Government, Director-General  Ms  L
      Msengana-Ndlela; Deputy Directors-General Mr E Africa, Mr P Flusk,  Ms
      T Mketi, Ms S Makotoko, Mr D Powell, Ms L Molapo; Chief Directors Mr M
      Rangata, Mr O Cupido, Mr L Williams, Ms L Graham, Ms Z  Ngcobo,  Ms  F
      Zangca, Ms M Jacobs, Mr N Jack, Mr T Fosi, Ms V Mafoko, Ms J Morulane,
      Mr L Twaku, Mr O Nzimande and Chief Financial Officer Mr C Clerihew.


   2. The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) was represented
      by CEO Ms M Khoza, Cllr C Johnson, Mr S Wasa and Mr  K  Mullagie.  The
      Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) was represented by Dr V Mlokoti  and
      Mr H Monare. The National House of Traditional Leaders was represented
      by Inkosi M Mzimela, Inkosi M  Mthethwa,  Kgosi  S  Suping,  Prince  Z
      Makaula, Mr Z Matebese, Mr M Ntsanwisi, Mr S Khandidlela, Mr A Sithole
      and Mr T Shikwandana.   The  Local  Government  Sector  Education  and
      Training Authority (LGSETA) was represented  by  Mr  S  Maloka,  Mr  M
      Sebezo, Mr S Mofokeng, Ms J Davies and Mr E  Mnyakeng.  The  Municipal
      Infrastructure  Investment  Unit  (MIIU)  was  represented  by  Ms   B
      Magugumela and Ms J Lesoane. The Commission  for  the  Protection  and
      Promotion  of  the  Rights  of  Cultural,  Religious  and   Linguistic
      Communities (CRL Commission) was represented by Dr W Langeveldt, Dr  M
      Guma, Mr H Gouvelis, Mrs M Bethelehem, Mr B Mgcina,  Mrs  M  Soni-Amin
      and Mrs P Madiba.

C. STRATEGIC PLAN AND OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET

   1. The  Director-General  for  Provincial  and  Local  Government,  Ms  L
      Msingana-Ndlela, commended the Committee and other stakeholders on the
      successful local government  elections  held  on  1  March  2006.  She
      revealed that the March elections saw  an  increase  in  the  national
      average of voter participation and therefore reflected that the public
      is optimistic and expected  government  to  deliver  on  its  mandate,
      particularly at local level.


   2. In terms of the local government review and  the  strategic  direction
      for the next term of local government, the Director-General emphasised
      that the purpose is to assess the main lessons from the first term  of
      local government in order to achieve a viable and  consolidated  local
      government  system  in  the  second  term.  She  identified  the   key
      challenges for  this  first  term  as  poor  capacity  and  inadequate
      accountable systems.

   3. In this regard, the department identified three strategic priorities:
         • Mainstreaming support to local government to  improve  municipal
           governance, performance and accountability.
         • Addressing structure and governance arrangements of the state to
           strengthen, support and monitor local government.
         • Refining and strengthening the  policy,  regulatory  and  fiscal
           environment for local government.
   4. The Director-General explained that local government will receive  R92
      billion over the MTEF period, of which R82 billion will  be  allocated
      to municipalities through the DPLG Budget and  the  remainder  through
      national departments of Transport, Minerals and Energy, Water  Affairs
      and Forestry and National Treasury.

   5. She further explained that funds have been  set  aside  for  improving
      skills and systems in  municipalities  and  that  municipalities  will
      receive allocation from the Capacity Building Grant, to the  value  of
      R600 million for the next three years. In addition,  R73  million  has
      been set aside for the implementation of Project Consolidate  and  the
      deployment of expertise.

   6. The Director-General pointed out that over the 2006/07 MTEF period, an
      amount of R35.7 billion will be transferred directly to municipalities
      through the  Local  Government  Equitable  Share  in  order  to  place
      municipalities in a better position to  fund  the  provision  of  Free
      Basic Services and Sustainable Development.

   7. The Municipal Infrastructure Grant will receive an additional increase
      of about R21.4 billion to be used for infrastructure  development  and
      maintenance. This amount includes R1.2 billion for eradication of  the
      bucket sanitation system. Metro and District municipalities will  also
      receive an additional amount of about R24  billion  to  perform  their
      mandate and improve  service  delivery.  These  funds,  the  Director-
      General explained, will replace the RSC  levies  previously  collected
      from employees and the business sector.

   8. In her presentation, the Director-General emphasized the importance of
      spreading  growth  to  the  poor  through  favourable  conditions  for
      economic development. She revealed that data from CSIR reflected  that
      of the 52  district  and  metropolitan  areas,  the  economies  of  13
      municipalities grew consistently above the national average over an 8-
      year period from 1995-2003.

   9. The Director-General pointed out that in 2005 all  affected  provinces
      were able to pass provincial-specific legislation as required  by  the
      Traditional Leadership Framework Act  of  2003.  An  amount  of  R68.2
      million has been set aside as a  contribution  for  promotion  of  the
      institution of traditional leadership of which  R26  million  will  be
      transferred to the National House of Traditional Leaders, R22  million
      to the Commission on Disputes and Claims and R18  million  within  the
      DPLG Budget. The Commission for the Protection and  Promotion  of  the
      Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities will  receive
      R43.3 million over the same period.

  10. In her conclusion she noted that the Budget of R82 billion within  the
      DPLG over the  MTEF  period  represents  a  financial  commitment  and
      contribution  to  improve  performance   at   provincial   and   local
      government.

  11. The Committee welcomes the greater clarity, coherence and focus of the
      department’s strategic plan. However, the Committee is concerned about
      the capacity within the department, and wanted  to  know  whether  the
      department is in itself capacitated to undertake  what  they  seek  to
      achieve in the next term of local government.

  12. The Committee was further concerned about the continued under-spending
      by provinces and wants the department to play  an  active  and  robust
      role to guard against this pattern and to further give  guidance  with
      respect to infrastructure roll-out.

D. ADMINISTRATION

   1. Expenditure on this branch grows significantly  right  into  the  MTEF
      period. The increase of 19.6%  in  support  services  is  due  to  the
      following:
         • Increases in the management structure of the office  of  the  DG
           and the full  funding  of  the  DDG  posts  for  monitoring  and
           evaluation and the Chief Financial Officer.
         • The increase in the total establishment necessitated an increase
           in the provision for telecommunications and others.
         • Activation of the  Chief  Directorate  position  to  provide  an
           advisory and coordinator service to the department.
         • The function of property management has been transferred to  all
           national departments.

   2. The increase in  the  outer  years  of  the  MTEF  is  3.4%  and  5.3%
      respectively.


   3. The branch has two clear strategic objectives:
         •  To  monitor  performance,   evaluate   service   delivery   and
           communicate development.
         • To strengthen the DPLG organizational capacity and capability.

   4. Achievements for this branch includes:
         • 2004/05 annual reports finalised and presented on time.
         • Analysis of year to date strategic progress.
         • Review of monitoring and evaluation strategies finalized.
         • Communication strategy approved, rolled-out to key  stakeholders
           and Project Consolidate municipalities.
         • HRD strategy developed and approved.
E. GOVERNANCE, POLICY AND REASEARCH

   1. There is a considerable increase on the total Budget  of  this  branch
      for 2006/07 compared to the one for 2005/06 financial year (R29 287  -
      R24 041). This expenditure increase continues into the  MTEF  period).
      The expected growth in funding is mainly due to increased  commitments
      in intergovernmental and international relations.


   2. The department explained that a number of municipalities had completed
      their draft IDPs and that this was  part  of  an  ongoing  process  to
      ensure that all municipalities had IDPs by the end of July 2006.

   3. When challenged by the Committee about the possible dangers of the two-
      tier system of local governance with regard to the differentiated  yet
      complementary functions of  district  and  local  municipalities,  the
      department explained that it would not challenge the  fundamentals  of
      the two-tier system, but would seek to strengthen the original concept
      as all types of municipalities were regarded as on par to  each  other
      regardless of  the  perceived  view  to  the  contrary.  However,  the
      department emphasized the need for greater clarity  on  the  roles  of
      district and local municipalities.

   4. The department emphasized that it views provinces as very critical  in
      the overall programme of support for and work with  local  government.
      The department would, in time undertake to review the current state of
      provinces to evaluate their ability to provide the  necessary  support
      to local  government.  In  this  view,  all  national  and  provincial
      departments would then need to indicate in concrete  terms,  how  they
      would lend support to municipalities.

   5. The  Committee  expressed  its  support  for  the  programmes  of  the
      department, but felt that performance indicators in most IDPs are  not
      kept static so that they guide municipalities that did  not  have  the
      necessary capacity. Moreover, the Committee wants  the  department  to
      set standards in respect of the signing of Performance Agreements  for
      Municipal Managers.

   6. The Committee in its assessment found it difficult to appreciate clear
      alignment of targets from national, provincial and local government in
      respect of IDPs, PGDS and NSDP.

   7.  The  Committee  was  concerned  about  the  continued  prominence  of
      consultancy-led processes of drafting IDPs.


F. URBAN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT


   1. The total Budget of this branch for the 2006/07 is R10 729 billion and
      the total Budget for the MTEF period will be R33.853  billion  with  a
      yearly increase of 9.8% over the 2006 MTEF, reaching  R11.844  billion
      in 2008/09.
   2. The programme has  a  predominantly  co-coordinating,  monitoring  and
      evaluation role and the Budget split over the  MTEF  period  reflected
      this – 70% of the yearly Budget is for operational costs and  30%  for
      programme implementation.  The  ISRDP  programmes  have  a  marginally
      higher allocation, in line with the larger number of  rural  districts
      (13) to be serviced.

   3. Achievements for this branch includes:
         • Enhancing nodal capacity and capabilities
         • Tailoring ISRDP  and  URP  initiatives  towards  addressing  the
           challenges of the second economy
         • Communicating and market ISRDP and URP across the spheres.

   4. Key strategic priorities for 2006/07 financial year are as follows:
         • All nodal areas will  be  assisted  to  realize  their  economic
           potential and to  improve  the  active  participation  of  nodal
           communities in the economic growth sectors of the country.
         • Community Investment Programme in  the  former  Bohlabela  Node:
           Bushbuckridge and Maruleng local municipalities.
         • Strengthen Project Management and M&E Technical Support  to  the
           nodes.
         • Preliminary Impact Assessments in 2 urban and 2 rural nodes.
         • Assessment of impact of Cross-Boundary changes on current nodes.
         • Strengthen communication of the programme with  an  emphasis  on
           beneficiary communities.

   5. The Committee acknowledged the need for additional development  nodes,
      however, the department should provide clear details about  the  work,
      status and the progress made within the current nodes.

G. SYSTEMS AND CAPACITY BUILDING

   1. The Budget for this branch has increased from R91.1 million to  R109.8
      million in 2006/07, with an annual average increase  of  about  21.7%.
      The biggest increase is being absorbed by Project Consolidate.

   2. There is a greater  focus  on  Performance  Management  and  achieving
      better institutional  development,  including  addressing  governance,
      anti-corruption and financial viability.


   3. The department declared that  there  is  a  general  increase  in  the
      remuneration of councillors and that an amount of about  R200  million
      has been made available for this 2006/07 financial year.

   4. Strategic achievement include the following:
      • Realigning provincial boundaries.
      • Phased implementation of the Property Rates Act –  developed  first
        set of Regulations and monitoring Framework.
      • Implemented anti-corruption strategy in selected municipalities  in
        line with Project Consolidate.
      • Approval of the new Councillor Remuneration framework.
      • Local Government Employees Bill drafted.
      • Launched the Local Government Leadership Academy by 31 March 2006.

   5. Strategic priorities include the following:
         • To finalise the Local Government Laws  Amendments  Bill  with  a
           view to have it submitted to Parliament during 2007/08.
         • Review the division of powers and functions between  category  B
           and C municipalities.
         • Enforcing a more  effective  performance  management  system  in
           local government.
         • Finalising a local government competency framework by July  2006
           (which will include improving the regulatory environment).

   6. The Committee wanted specific reports made available to it in order to
      determine progress and results around Projects Consolidate.

   7. The Committee commended the department on its efforts to deal with the
      weaknesses and challenges faced  by  local  government.  However,  the
      Committee feels that lack of progress  reports  about  the  work  done
      around Project Consolidate makes it difficult to assess the  project’s
      status.

   8. The Committee believes that the current work of  the  department  puts
      more emphasis on national and  local  government,  but  places  lesser
      focus on provincial government as it is the sphere faced  with  under-
      spending. This is also in light that provinces are also positioned  to
      assist local government in developing both infrastructure and capacity
      to delivery services.

H. FREE BASIC SERVICES AND INFRASTRUCTURE

   1. Expenditure in this Branch has increased to an annual average increase
      of 49.2%. The increase is due to government’s commitment to:
         • Wipe out the backlogs and achieve the targets by 2013.
         • Increase the roll-out of FBS to those people who have access  to
           this new infrastructure and;
         • Contribute jobs consistent with the EPWP Guidelines for 2006/07.

   2. Progress and achievements include the following:
         •  Draft  policy  framework  on  public  participation  has   been
           developed and circulated for comment.
         • Research of the CDW Programme has been completed and  report  is
           now available for circulation.
         •  3000  CDWs  have  been  recruited  and  will  be  deployed   in
           municipalities in the next financial year.
         • Of 5 517 090 Indigents/poor households, 3  919  402  (71%)  with
           infrastructure have access to Free Basic Water.
         • Of the 5 517 090 Indigents/poor households, 2 901 134 (52%) with
           infrastructure have access to Free Basic Electricity.
         • A national total of 184 municipalities have indigent registers.
         • A total of 94 Project Consolidate municipalities have functional
           Indigent registers.


   3. While the Committee acknowledged and appreciated the work done by this
      branch, the Committee was however, worried about the apparent lack  of
      compliance by some municipalities in compiling indigent registers. The
      Committee wants the department to establish whether this is a case  of
      lack of capacity or simply lack of compliance with S78.


   4. The Committee  reiterates  its  position  of  support  for  additional
      development nodes however, believes that the focus should also  be  on
      challenges facing cities and other urban areas.


I. SOUTH AFRICAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION (SALGA)

   1. SALGA’s Budget for the 2005/06 financial year  amounted  to  R161  934
      000.00. SALGA derives revenue mainly from membership levies paid to it
      by municipalities. The percentage distribution of the budgeted  income
      was as follows:
         • Membership fees        -     49%
         • Donor funding          -     33%
         • Grants from DPLG       -     11%
         • Sponsorship            -     0.4%
         • Others                       -    0.6%

   2. The CEO of SALGA  explained  that  they  received  a  qualified  audit
      opinion from the Auditor-General for 2005/06 financial year.  However,
      she reported that efforts are currently being employed to formulate  a
      comprehensive plan to turn the disclaimer of the audit opinion  around
      and report back to the Committee.


   3. The CEO of SALGA, Dr Makhosi Khoza reported that SALGA was  previously
      100% reliant  on  government  funding  but  currently  the  DPLG  only
      accounts for 11% of its income. SALGA further explained that the  fact
      that they are listed as a Schedule 3A public entity makes it difficult
      to become self-sufficient.


   4. SALGA reported that general attendance  in  IGR  structures  has  been
      observed and relations with stakeholders have generally improved  with
      exceptions.


   5.  SALGA advised the Committee that the Extension of Security of  Tenure
      Act does not favour the poor and needs to be re-looked at seriously to
      reduce evictions.


   6. SALGA acknowledged that CDW’s had undergone  accredited  training  and
      had been deployed within wards, although no significant  progress  has
      been made to absorb CDW’s in municipalities.


   7. SALGA mentioned that the twinning agreements have  been  entered  into
      where municipalities were partnered together to  share  knowledge  and
      expertise. Where one municipality had an  overabundance  of  capacity,
      such capacity would be used in another to cover shortfalls.


   8. Dr Khoza noted that the role of SALGA needed to be further  clarified.
      In  terms  of  the  Constitution,  SALGA  was   supposed   to   be   a
      representative  body.  However,  in  practice,  it   was   maintaining
      municipalities.  SALGA  is  not  supposed  to  monitor   and   oversee
      municipalities; rather it should focus on promoting and protecting the
      interests of local municipalities.


   9. The Committee expressed its concern about the increasingly high number
      of Acting Municipal Managers and wants SALGA to  detail  a  report  on
      this at a later stage.


  10. The Committee feels that SALGA makes representation without addressing
      issues that were raised and did not sufficiently address some  of  the
      issues that were raised  by  the  Committee  in  the  previous  Budget
      hearing of 2004/05.


  11. The  Committee  and  SALGA  agreed  that  SALGA  needs  to  strengthen
      relations with the National House of Traditional Leaders  and  further
      increase parliamentary participation in the two Houses  of  Parliament
      to ensure that a delegate takes part in the legislative processes.  It
      was further agreed that different legislatures  need  to  ensure  that
      SALGA has a seat and an active role to play.


  12. SALGA confirmed the following successes as:
      • Improvement in membership levy collection from 40% to more than 95%
        by March 2006.
      • Improved staff turnover from 47% to 13.8% by the end  of  the  last
        quarter.
      • More visibility of  SALGA  in  Inter-Governmental  Relations  (IGR)
        structures.
      • Comprehensive  involvement  in  the  Cross-Boundary  Municipalities
        Bill, and the Constitutional 12th Amendment Bill.
      • Financial statements were  consolidated  with  all  its  provincial
        structures for the first time in 2004/05 financial statements.


  13. SALGA proceeded to highlight the following challenges:
      • The twinning arrangements and the exchange of best practices.
      • Lack of an international relations strategy.
      • The listing of SALGA as a schedule 3A public entity, which in  turn
        limited it’s ability to be self-sufficient  and  generate  its  own
        income and ensure sustainability.


  14. It was  resolved  that  SALGA  should  forward  quarterly  reports  on
      crosscutting issues e.g. disability, gender, etc to the Committee.

J. MUNICIPAL DEMARCATION BOARD (MDB)

   1. The total income of the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) amounted  to
      R29 784 000.00.


   2. The MDB currently has capacity constraints to effectively assess local
      government performance.  More  funding  is  required  to  ensure  that
      facilitation and consultation takes place with communities.


   3. The MDB explained that consultants are used on a  seasonal  basis  and
      are thus less expensive as they are only used when a need arises.
   4. The Committee declared that the MDB should  play  a  role  in  Project
      Consolidate to assess the distinction between powers and functions  at
      the local government level and  research  resources  and  capacity  at
      municipalities.


   5. The Board believes that Cross-Boundary issues could have been  handled
      differently and certain lessons had been learnt. The  reason  for  the
      confusion was that ward delimitations had been clarified first  before
      provincial boundaries were considered.


   6. The Committee acknowledged that the recent cross-boundary disturbances
      had shown a clear lack of consultation with affected  communities  and
      that the Board needs to show practical steps  taken  to  correct  this
      process.


   7. The Board acknowledged that they experience challenges in  maintaining
      their asset register.


   8. It was resolved that the MDB should increase its visits to  rural  and
      smaller towns. The Board was  requested  to  make  research  documents
      available to the Committee on the  consultation  that  took  place  in
      relation to the Cross-Boundary Bill. Both the NA and  the  NCOP  would
      have discussions with the Minister to ensure that further  funding  is
      made available to the Board.


K. MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT UNIT (MIIU)

   1. The financial of the MIIU as at 31 March 2006 reflected the following:
         • Total unspent income         -    R8.27 million


         • Outstanding operational and
           Capital expenditure               -     R7.15 million
         • Operational expenses         -    R0.90 million
         • Caretaker budget             -    R6.26 million
         • Anticipated surplus               -     R1.12 million


   2. The MIIU stated that 45 projects were  completed  over  an  eight-year
      period and that 200 other projects had been launched.


   3. With regards to high and low points, MIIU mentioned that two  infamous
      water concessions were cutting  edge  projects.  The  Nelspruit  water
      concession completed in 1999  was  far  ahead  of  its  time  and  was
      successful; however, the Dolphin coast water concession is  viewed  as
      the  worst project  due  to  documented  errors  like  the  population
      growth.


   4. MIIU believes that the  need  for  such  an  institution  would  never
      completely disappear and that it would be valuable for  government  to
      have such an institution on a permanent basis.


   5. Ms Magugumela, the CEO of MIIU added that initially the mandate of the
      MIIU was  quite  narrow  and  based  exclusively  on  basic  services.
      However, with the new infrastructure agenda, the MIIU feels  that  the
      mandate should have been broadened.


   6. In terms of the MIIU’s exit or handover strategy, it was  agreed  that
      the DPLG would engage with the MIIU on legal issues  relating  to  the
      exit strategy, financial issues and the project pipeline.


   7. There was an additional agreement  with  National  Treasury  that  the
      project development facility in terms of PPP’s will have to extend  to
      local government, more so, that the DBSA has agreed to administer  the
      remaining project pipeline.


   8. From the financial point of view, the department (DPLG) was  satisfied
      with the way funds were disbursed and control exercised.


   9. The Committee was equally satisfied with the financials  of  the  Unit
      and the manner in which it carried its  work.  The  Committee  further
      commended the  Unit  on  the  good  work  done  and  stated  that  its
      contribution will continue to be  valuable  in  the  overall  work  of
      government particularly at the local government level.

L. LOCAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING AUTHORITY (LG-SETA)

   1. The Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority  (LGSETA)
      received  approval  for  the  amount  of  R70  100.00  to   fund   the
      implementation of Community Development Workers Learnerships.


   2. An amount of R25.8 million has been disbursed  by  LGSETA  during  the
      2005/06 financial year. The total breakdown of income and  expenditure
      was as follows:
      Skills Development Levy Income and Expenditure
         • The projected total  gross  levies  contributed  for  2005/06  -
           R188.9m.
         • Skills Development Levy Income          -    R14.2 million
         • Operational Expenditure Incurred        -    R13.2 million
         • Mandatory Grant Income for 2005/06           -     R70.9 million
         • Mandatory Grants Disbursed              -    R12.2 million

   3. Regarding a letter by Minister of Labour on the subject of the  under-
      performance of the LGSETA, the Chief Executive Officer of  LGSETA,  Mr
      Mofokeng said that SETA’s agreement with the Minister was to deal with
      their core competencies, which he defined as training and  development
      and its facilitation.


   4. LGSETA reported that a process of skills audit is  underway  and  that
      skills development facilitators within municipalities are supposed  to
      conduct skills audits as a foundational activity. The main problem  is
      that skills facilitators seldom have that duty as an urgent  function,
      because they often fulfill  a  multitude  of  functions  within  human
      resources management.


   5.  LGSETA identified recognition of prior learning  as  recognising  the
      experience of people irrespective of the origin of the experience. The
      experience, however, would be assessed relative to new  qualifications
      or old qualification standards to access their  competence.  If  found
      competent, they would then be issued with a certificate of  competence
      in the specific field. If found to be lacking, an  intervention  would
      be put into place to help these people fill the gaps.


   6. LGSETA acknowledged that the  biggest  problem  in  implementation  of
      programmes is the lack of workplace skills plan.


   7. Using the  grant  of  R32  million,  the  LGSETA  targeted  unemployed
      graduates in areas such as finance.
   8. The Committee was, however, worried about the extent of  accessibility
      and visibility of the programmes provided by LGSETSA.


   9.  LGSETA  said  that  a  framework  for  investigating  the  needs   of
      traditional  institutions  was  now  in  place  and  that  the  LGSETA
      supported the need for such institution.


  10. The Committee expressed  concern  that  bigger  and  more  established
      service providers are  crowding  out  the  historically  disadvantaged
      service institutions.


  11. The Committee wants the LGSETA in the future to provide documentation,
      way in advance and prior to the presentation.

M. NATIONAL HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS (NHTL)

   1. The National House of Traditional Leaders (NHTL) has been allocated R8
      258 000.00 for this financial year, which is a marginal increase  from
      the 2005/06 financial year.


   2.  The  presentation  of  the  financials  of  the  National  House  had
      significantly differed from that of  the  2005/06  financial  year  in
      that:
         • Provincial Houses were now actively participating in the affairs
           of the NHTL.
         • There was more cooperation between the NHTL and the Ministry  of
           Provincial and Local Government.
         • The human resources capacity of the NHTL had improved; and
         • The NHTL was much more focused due to its strategic plan.


   3. The National House reported that a close working relationship has been
      forged between itself and the provincial Houses.


   4. The NHTL is intent on receiving  autonomy,  be  given  the  status  of
      National  Public  Entity  and  the  provincial  House  the  status  of
      Provincial Public Entity.


   5. The NHTL has visited countries in both the continent of Africa and the
      SADC region to garner support for the Continental House of Traditional
      Leadership. The National House has visited these countries and learned
      valuable lessons from the countries  visited  especially  Zimbabwe  as
      their  House  of  Traditional   Leaders   functions   effectively   in
      Parliament.


   6. The National House confirmed that challenges in this  regard  included
      the cooperation with various countries and governments  and  budgetary
      constraints. The National House hopes that with the assistance of  the
      Committee these funds would be attained.


   7. The NHTL further stated that  funds  would  also  be  needed  for  the
      employment of a staff compliment, the maintenance of its own  Chamber,
      the acquisition of its won legal library, and the  employment  of  all
      members of the House full-time.


   8. The Committee was concerned about  the  prevailing  tendency  of  some
      traditional leaders/headmen refusing to co-operative  with  councilors
      and refusing to recognise them.


   9. The NHTL acknowledge that there appears  to  be  a  problem  with  the
      attitude of some headmen and the NHTL would appreciate  some  guidance
      on how to address the issue so as  to  ensure  that  service  delivery
      continues.
  10. The NHTL believes that it should be  an  autonomous  structure  taking
      care of its business and running its won  affairs  without  having  to
      obtain permission from the department (DPLG).


  11. The NHTL expressed a need for filling the positions of a Parliamentary
      Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Auditor.

N. COMMISSION FOR  THE  PROMOTION  AND  THE  PROTECTION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC COMMUNITIES (CRL COMMISSION)

    1. The CRL Commission elaborated on its mandate, role, function, vision
       and mission. The programmes  of  the  CRL  Commission  included  CRL
       Dialogue, Public Education  and  Awareness,  Investigation  and  CR,
       Research and Policy and Flagship/events.


    2. The Commission was involved with youth and  had  a  workshop,  which
       also involved the Department of Arts  and  Culture  to  bring  youth
       together to interact in respect of the different cultures.

     3.  The Commission also worked with many of the embassies of African
       countries on  the  Africa  Day  Celebrations.  The  Commission  also
       received visits from other countries on the work being done  by  the
       CRL Commission.

O. CONCLUSION

     1. The Committee believed that submissions are in part a response to
        past resolutions and mandates.
     2. The Committee further records some of its concerns and directives
        recorded in its Portfolio Committee Report in 2005, as adopted by
        Parliament and, directs the Department and institutions that
        appeared before it to implement the decisions of the Committee that
        are still outstanding.
     3. The Committee further commits itself to strengthening its oversight
        role through visits to Municipalities.
     4. The Committee thanks parties concerned for the progress made so
        far.

3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on  Budget  Vote  3:
   Foreign Affairs, dated 24 May 2006:

The Committee received a briefing from the Department of Foreign Affairs on
the Strategic plan and Budget Vote of the Department on 10 May 2006.

The Context

The Director-General outlined the context around which the strategic plan
was formulated. These include, the overall agreement with the stipulations
of the Public Finance Management Act and included foreign policy and
strategic objectives.

Strategic Goals and Objectives

The strategic goals of the Department were broadly outlined as:

    • The consolidation of the African agenda:
      Among other things, this entails the strengthening of the capacity  of
      the  African  Union  (AU)  and  continued  support   to   its   organs
      particularly the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) and the New  Partnership
      for Africa’s Development (Nepad). It  also  entails  contributions  to
      peace efforts in the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)  and  Ivory
      Coast  as  well  support  towards  post-conflict   reconstruction   in
      countries such as the Sudan.


    • Strengthening of South - South Co-operation:


      This entails continued work in enhancing the agenda of the South
      through the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) initiative, the Non-
      Aligned Movement and the Group -77.


    • Strengthening the North-South Dialogue:


      Build dialogue with relevant structures such as the G8 to ensure that
      commitments made towards Africa are honoured and furthermore, that
      Africa remains on their agenda.

    • Engagement in Global Governance:


      Subdivided into two related areas, namely:
     a) Political and Security Issues and
     b) Socio-economic issues.


      Accordingly, work would focus on issues such as the Reform of the
      United Nations (UN); peaceful settlement of disputes in the Middle
      East with particular reference to Israel/Palestine, Iran’s nuclear
      energy and peace in Iraq.


    • Strengthening Bilateral Relations

Work in Progress

The Department presented two other important issues, namely, their plans
for Asset Management and the Information and Communication Technology Plan.
In terms of the Asset Management Plan, the Department indicated that a
report of the Feasibility Study has been finalised and it would be used to
formulate the Department’s property acquisition plans.

Secondly, the Department has come up with a plan to improve its
communication through the better use of information technology.

The  Department  highlighted  the  following  as  some  of  the  initiatives
undertaken for the 2005/06 financial  year  to  improve  its  work,  namely,
conducting a skills audit; increased  awareness  of  Gender  and  disability
issues; developing of multi-purpose job profiles and  introduced  leadership
management in the Department.

Budget

The budget allocation for the Department for 2006/07 has  increased  due  to
the country’s increasing commitments in Africa and internationally.

Comments

The members had the opportunity to  comment  and  raised  questions  to  the
Director-General. The following issues were raised:

    • That enough resources should be raised for the Pan-African  Parliament
      and South Africa’s role thereof;
    • The Department should compile a document on South  Africa’s  strategic
      approach on Nepad.
    • The Department needs to improve its communication and interaction with
      the Committee by for example, inviting members to relevant events like
      conferences.
    • The issue of the AU Gender Declaration was raised and the  Director  –
      General responded by indicating that the Department  was  looking  for
      ways of implementing the  Declaration  by  working  closely  with  the
      Office of the Status of Women.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on Budget
    Vote 30 – Minerals and Energy, dated 24 May 2006:

    The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered Budget
    Vote 30 – Minerals and Energy, reports as follows:


    A.      Terms of Reference


        The Committee resolved to conduct budget briefings on 16 and 17 May
        2006. The objectives of the briefings were to:


      • Establish how allocated funds and transfers to statutory bodies were
        to be spent;
      • Monitor the achievement of targets, and whether funds allocated meet
        those targets;
      • Monitor progress made and establish problems encountered;
      • Fulfill its mandate of overseeing the Department of Minerals and
        Energy and statutory bodies that fall within its portfolio;
      • Determine whether policy developments take place in accordance with
        the key objectives and aims as stated in the Department’s strategic
        plan;
      • Determine whether policy developments take place in accordance with
        government’s priorities of poverty alleviation, job creation Black
        Economic Empowerment (BEE), human resource development and growing
        the economy;
      • Monitor compliance with the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA).



     B.     Introduction


         The first day of the two–day session with the Department of
         Minerals and Energy was a joint session with the Select Committee
         of Economic and Foreign Affairs. The Director-General presented
         the Department’s strategic plan for the 2006/7 MTEF period. The
         focus of the first day was on programmes 1 to 4, which covered
         Administration; Mine Health and Safety; Mineral Regulation; and
         Mineral Policy and Promotion. The focus of the second day was on
         Hydrocarbons and Energy Planning, Electricity and Nuclear and
         Associated Services.

     C.     Overview of Departmental Programmes

           The Director-General explained that Department’s strategic plan
           was informed by a commitment to ensure that its implementation
           plans, programmes, time and resources were allocated to
           activities aimed at advancing the economy, bridging the gap
           between the first and second economies, redressing past
           imbalances, developing of appropriate skills needed to grow the
           economy, facilitating job creation and fighting poverty. Special
           attention was also paid to providing access to energy and
           ensuring security of energy supply to all South Africans. The
           implementation of key legislation, such as the Mineral and
           Petroleum Resources Development Act, the Petroleum Products
           Amendment Act and the Petroleum Pipelines Act, demanded a shift
           in focus from policy making to policy implementation. This also
           meant that restructuring the Department would be imminent to
           effectively improve service delivery.

     D.     Key issues emanating from the presentation

           1.    Mine Health and Safety Branch


                 The purpose of this programme is to regulate and promote
                 health and safety in the mining industry to the highest
                 standards in the world, thereby improving the quality of
                 life of those employed in industry and those affected by
                 industry’s activities. Its measurable objective is to
                 reduce mining-related death, injuries and ill health. The
                 Department highlighted “the fatality rate per million hours
                 worked has decreased from 0.25 in 2004 to 0.21 in 2005 –
                 this corresponds to 246 deaths in 2004 and 202 deaths in
                 2005.” (These statistics were taken from the Director-
                 General’s presentation notes). Much more work was needed to
                 bring it in line with international rates. As it stood, the
                 rate was at its lowest in South African mining history.
                 Detailed statistics were made available to the Committee.

           2.    Mineral Regulation Branch


                 The main aim of this programme is to effectively promote,
                 manage, transform and regulate the mining sector to achieve
                 transformation and sustainable development. This branch’s
                 responsibility was to implement the Mineral and Petroleum
                 Resources Development Act (MPRDA) and other mineral
                 policies. It would also be incumbent upon the branch to
                 improve the turn-around time for processing prospecting and
                 mining licence applications in this sector, with a special
                 focus on assisting first-time entrants in the industry.
                 Statistics on progress relating to licences and
                 applications were made available to the Committee.


           3.    Mineral Policy and Promotion Branch


                 This branch is effectively responsible for policy
                 formulation and promotion. Work has already started around
                 amending the MPRDA, which proved to have some unintended
                 negative consequences to the spirit of the Act.


           4.    Energy


                 4.1   Electricity


                       The first Regional Electricity Distributor (RED) was
                       launched in Cape Town last year in an attempt to
                       consolidate the country’s electricity distribution
                       industry. Following a Cabinet directive to establish
                       a seventh RED, the Department has started to explore
                       the viability of this National RED, which will cover
                       the areas outside the six metros already identified.
                       Other highlights included the launch of the National
                       Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA), a single
                       energy regulator for electricity, piped-gas and
                       petroleum pipeline industries.


                       In terms of reaching the targets for universal access
                       by 2012, the Department was behind schedule as a
                       result of inadequate financial allocations. The same
                       challenge was experienced with the Integrated
                       National Electricity Programme (INEP) which made
                       provision for the electrification of 500 000
                       households per annum, but the funding provided in the
                       2006/7 budget only allowed for 89 525 connections.


                 4.2   Nuclear


                       Investment in nuclear research and development
                       capabilities will increase during this MTEF period.
                       Cabinet’s approval of the Radioactive Waste
                       Management Policy necessitated the establishment of
                       structures to facilitate the implementation of the
                       policy.


                 4.3   Renewable Energy


                       Legislation was being developed to address areas in
                       the White Paper on Energy (1998), which had not yet
                       been covered by existing legislation. Special
                       attention will be given to promoting the uptake of
                       renewable energy, energy efficiency and climate
                       change.


                 4.4   Hydrocarbons


                       The petroleum industry in South Africa will for the
                       first time this year be regulated by way of licensing
                       and fuel quality regulation. The Petroleum Products
                       Amendment Act and the Petroleum Pipelines Act would
                       be key regulatory tools. The unsatisfactory results
                       from the five-year review of the Liquid Fuels Charter
                       necessitated the establishment of a supplier
                       development agency, SASDA, to address issues around
                       procurement.


                       The Department set out to conclude the paraffin
                       safety strategy this year, which will ensure the
                       phasing out of paraffin as a household fuel, while
                       looking at other more environment-friendly fuels. The
                       provision of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and other
                       renewable energy sources to households will be
                       intensified.


      E.    Budget
           The Committee was given a breakdown of the Department’s budget.
           Of the total budget of R2, 548 billion, transfers and subsidies
           accounted for R2 billion, of which R1,5 billion was allocated to
           electricity and the remainder to the public entities. An amount
           of R500 million was used in the department of which R290 million
           went to employee compensation. The remainder was allocated for
           goods and services.  Mining rehabilitation programmes also took
           up a large portion of the budget.
      F.    Public Entities


           A large portion of the Department’s budget was transferred to
           the public entities. The Department plans to improve the
           monitoring of the operations of its entities and also to align
           the entities’ objectives with those of the Department and
           Government.

      G.    Other Key Focus Areas

           Restructuring of the Department to improve service delivery,
           finalising its strategy on the support of SMME’s, using the
           transformation legislation to ensure effective and efficient BEE
           and gender empowerment would receive special attention in all
           line function programmes. There would be a commitment towards
           continuous capacity–building within the minerals and energy
           sectors.

      H.    Issues raised by the Committee

            • The Committee expressed concern at the lack of information
              around the motivating factors to establish RED 7. The
              Committee was taken through an extensive process of
              understanding and overseeing work towards the establishment
              of the other six REDs. The Committee was not aware of any
              evaluation of the RED process, which would inform the
              viability of a seventh RED, nor had it been involved in any
              discussion in relation thereto. The Committee, therefore,
              questioned its establishment at a time when only one of the
              six REDs had been launched.
            • Were there enough mine inspectors to visit the mines?
            • How would the new Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
              regulations affect the Department?  Would the Department be
              bound by the new EIA authorisations and would there be a need
              to amend the MPRDA, which also provided for regulation on
              Environmental authorisations?
            • Clarity was sought on the Department’s youth and gender
              focus.
            • How would electricity targets be met from the current budget?
            • Did the Department have a reliable staff retention programme?
            • What was being done to identify suitable sites for high-level
              nuclear waste? What was the Department’s position with regard
              to the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR)? How much more money
              would be required for the PBMR?
            • What portion of the budget goes to ESKOM, and why was only
              10% allocated to electricity and nuclear? Would such a low
              allocation not cause the Department to run into problems in
              these areas?
            • What were the time frames for filling vacant posts in key
              offices of delivery?
            • How was the Department monitoring the mining scorecard and to
              what extent were companies complying?
            • Could legislation be used to address the issue of “fronting”?
            • Was progress being made with regard to SMMEs. in the mining
              sector, and what statistical information was available in
              that regard?
            • If the need arose to urgently assess a mine, would the
              Department have the flexibility to attend to it? What was the
              line of communication in drawing attention to a particular
              mine, given that the presentation made mention of the
              involvement of the Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry
              and Environmental Affairs and Tourism?
            • What happened to the Committee that was established and
              tasked with overseeing compliance with the Liquid Fuels
              Charter?
            • The Department should explore developing policy to encourage
              government departments to procure energy-saving appliances in
              terms of stand-by time.
            • The Committee commented on the opportunity for BEE in
              relation to biofuels and was looking forward to the strategy
              on biofuels. It was suggested that one should look beyond
              just using agricultural products for biofuels. Weeds from
              wetlands might be an option to consider
            • The presentation did not place much emphasis on climate
              change, commitments and plans relating to the Kyoto Protocols
              although South Africa was a signatory thereto.
            • Tax and other incentives with regard to renewable energy were
              not sufficient.

      I.    Responses by Department

            • The substance of the Department’s policy was to de-racialise
              the South African mining industry and to introduce previously
              disadvantaged South Africans into this sector. The shift from
              policy formulation to policy implementation exposed a number
              of challenges. These challenges related to activities of not
              only established companies, but also to the beneficiaries of
              this process. Black people allowed themselves to be used to
              defeat the objectives of the law. In an attempt to penalise
              “fronting“, the Department wanted the documentation submitted
              in this respect to be in the form of a declaration, so that a
              false declaration would constitute criminal liability
              according to law.
            • Compliance with the mining scorecard was being monitored.
            • Staff retention and vacancies remained a challenge due to the
              scarcity of skills and the skills requirements were knowledge-
              intensive. This also has an effect on the time frames for
              filling vacancies.
            • The evaluation of the business case for RED 1 was not only
              confined to the Department, but also involved broader role
              players.  At the implementation phase of RED 1 and at the
              time of making the business case for RED 1, it was felt that
              some things might have been overlooked by the Department,
              which necessitated the establishment of the National RED. A
              process of engagement on this matter between the Committee
              and the Department should follow.
            • There were enough inspectors to visit mines.
            • In terms of mine rehabilitation, the Department was
              prioritising the most polluted mines, but these priorities
              could be shifted. Provisions under the MPRDA were still being
              enforced, but there were consultation processes with the
              Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry and of
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
            • There had been a five–year review on the Liquid Fuels
              Charter.
            • The Department could not respond to questions on the PBMR as
              its governance, operational and shareholding functions were
              located in the Department of Public Enterprises. The
              Department of Minerals and Energy was the policy department
              as far as the PBMR was concerned. The Director-General
              explained that the same applied with Koeberg and ESKOM, where
              the Department of Minerals and Energy was only responsible
              for the regulatory environment.
            • The development of the biofuels strategy would result in
              enormous opportunity for rural development and upliftment.
              The Committee would be updated as the strategy was being
              developed.

      J.    Conclusion and Way Forward

           1.    The Committee acknowledged the open manner in which the
              Department presented its strategic plan and budget,
              highlighting both strengths and challenges. The Committee
              resolved to follow up on key issues raised with the
              Department on an ongoing basis. The Committee undertook to
              strengthen its oversight and monitor the implementation of
              programmes and projects highlighted in the Department’s
              strategic plan. The Department’s annual report will have to
              reflect the extent to which it had delivered on its services
              efficiently, effectively and economically, and whether these
              services had impacted on or made a difference in terms of the
              strategic priorities identified.

           2.    The Committee was not satisfied with the Department’s lack
              of response on PBMR matters. The Committee noted the movement
              of this project from the Department of Minerals and Energy to
              the Department of Trade and Industry, and questioned the
              current location of this project within the Department for
              Public Enterprises. In discussing its scope for oversight on
              nuclear-related matters, the Committee resolved to seek
              clarity on the situation of the PBMR project through
              facilitating a joint inter-ministerial meeting with Minerals
              and Energy and Public Enterprises. The Committee was also
              concerned about the minimal role the state utility on nuclear
              issues, the Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa
              (NECSA), had to play in the PBMR process. It recommended that
              a much more meaningful role for NECSA in the PBMR process be
              explored. Role clarification was necessary to ensure
              accountability.

           3.    The Committee recommended that the Department strengthen
              its leadership initiatives in the profiling and highlighting
              of key departmental programmes and policies. Specific
              reference was made to the Minister of Public Enterprises’
              recent pronouncement on the biofuels strategy, once again
              motivated by the issue of role clarification between
              departments/ministries to give effect to meaningful oversight
              and accountability.

           4.    On the issue of electrification and the inability of INEP
              and the Department to meet their targets due to insufficient
              budget allocation, the Committee recommended that a briefing
              session be arranged with National Treasury to enhance
              Members’ understanding of how allocations were made to
              departments that were tasked with specific goals by the
              President, but that lacked the financial resources to
              implement.

           5.    The Committee expressed concern over the lack of
              consultative processes regarding the establishment of a
              seventh RED and recommended that all relevant stakeholders be
              brought together to discuss, through a public participatory
              process, the decision to establish the viability and role of
              this seventh RED.


Report to be considered.

