---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-11-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:02.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                           WELCOMING OF MINISTERS

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Order! We would like
to acknowledge the presence of the national Ministers at the plenary this
afternoon. Thank you, hon Ministers, for being with us.

                                   MOTIONS


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon members, I have
been informed that the Whippery had agreed that there will be no notices of
motions or motions without notice today except for one.


      COLLISION OF TRAIN AND TRUCK AT RAIL CROSSING NEAR SOMERSET WEST


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the Council –

      1) notes -


         (a)      the horrific accident in which a train ploughed into a
              truck carrying farmworkers at a rail crossing near Somerset
              West in the Western Cape early on Monday, 13 November 2006,
              killing 19 people and injuring 12; and


         (b)     that preliminary investigations suggest that the immediate
              cause of the accident was that the driver ignored warning
              signals and proceeded to cross the level crossing, resulting
              in the collision with the train;


  (2) extends its condolences and deepest sympathies to the families and
         friends of those killed, and wishes those injured a speedy
         recovery; and


  (3) calls on all motorists and drivers of both passenger and goods
         vehicles, as we approach the festive season, to be more vigilant
         and drive safely in order to arrive alive.
Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, Chief
Whip. A request was made and I have agreed that we deal with questions to
the Minister for Public Enterprises first, thereafter we will proceed to
deal with all the questions to the Minister of Finance.

Before that, I wish to remind hon members that the time allocated for
replies is five minutes per question, time for asking the supplementary
question is two minutes, time for replying to supplementary questions is
four minutes and only four supplementary questions are allowed per
question. I therefore call upon the Minister for Public Enterprises to
respond to Question No 80.

             The capacity of Eskom to meet future energy demands

80.   Ms M P Themba asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

   What is being done to ensure that future energy demands will be met by
       Eskom, especially in areas such as the Western Cape?     C335E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Deputy Chairperson, thank you very
much for accommodating us, because, as you know, we have to be in the other
House shortly. I have to deal with legislation there.

Eskom is indeed taking a number of steps to ensure that we can secure
electricity supplies not only nationally but also locally, particularly
here in the Western Cape.

I could probably summarise the steps as follows: Firstly, we need to deal
with a range of demand management measures. As you would probably recall
during the crisis that we had earlier this year, we introduced one of the
most successful demand management exercises that we have had in South
Africa. We continue on that path to manage the overall demand to reach
agreements and arrangements with various customers so that we could, in
certain circumstances, buy back electricity from them.

We have also established in Eskom an executive management committee
structure that deals with all areas nationally, particularly in crisis
areas, like the Western Cape. This focuses on making certain that the
system is well maintained. We have introduced new maintenance requirements
and schedules so that we can protect the basic operating facilities and
equipment that we have. So, the first area we are working on is the demand
management, special management committees to deal with that and to deal
with maintenance programmes.

Ultimately, there are two major investment areas, which will assist us to
ensure electricity supply particularly to the Western Cape. The first and
very important investment is in the much larger transmission lines or 757
megawatts lines that will then allow us to bring greater amounts of
electricity to the Western Cape; in fact, to the whole of the Western and
the Eastern Cape area.

We are also investing in new generating capacity. The main activities here
are the close-cycle gas turbine power plants at Atlantis and Mossel Bay. We
are confident that those two plants should be operational before the middle
of next year. This will add some 1 000 megawatt capacity in this area for
peaking and mid-range activity. And, we will then continue with our
progress for a major generation programme where we will be investing up to
8 000 megawatt of new capacity between now and about 2010.

So, I think that there are very strenuous efforts being made to ensure that
our electricity situation is more secured; and, as you know, a major
investment programme is new generation, transmission and distribution
facilities. Thank you.

Mr S SHICEKA: Deputy Chairperson, it’s clear that the Minister for Public
Enterprises says that we must spare him the asking of many questions, given
the fact that he has to rush to the National Assembly. My question then is
whether the department is looking at other forms of energy supply in order
to ensure that we have energy in the country? Linked to that, at what level
is the private sector expected to play a part in ensuring that electricity
is generated in this country?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you, hon member, for the
question. Yes, there is additional generation capacity planned, provided
through what are called Independent Power Producers. The requests for
proposals have gone out. These are also for gas turbine plants, so they are
essentially also for peaking and mid-range plants. The two proposed tenders
would amount to the sum total of about 1 000 megawatt. To the extent that
the Independent Power Producers would be private sector companies, they
will be involved.

There are, in fact, throughout our system a number of smaller co-generation
activities such as certain sugar mills, plants and factories that generate
electricity and they sell some of that to Eskom. But that’s a relatively
small part of the total system at the moment. The main role that the
private sector would play is through the Independent Power Producers.

Are we looking at other energy forms? Yes, we are looking at other energy
forms. There are major programmes, not just in Eskom but also in the system
as a whole, on wind, solar energy and possible wave action energy. There
are more complex technologies dealing with the gasification of coal, which
would reduce some of the greenhouse gas effects. But that’s a pretty long-
term project and a very big one.

We are also involved in the development of the Pebble-Bed Modular Reactor,
which is a fourth-generation nuclear technology and Eskom is currently in
the last stages of evaluating the technologies for a conventional nuclear
plant. We hope to make a decision on that in the first quarter of next year
and that plant is also likely to be located somewhere in the Southern part
of our grid to strengthen the base-load capacity. There is indeed a wide
range of research projects on the go.

One of the realities that I think we have to come to terms with is that,
thus far, it has been very difficult to provide big base-load capacity for
a big grid with the renewable energy forms. They are supplements but they
have not yet been established as a very effective base-load supplier. If
they were used for base-load, as is the case in parts of Europe, it would
be very expensive.

     Measures against provinces unable to utilise financial allocations

     65. Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister of Finance:
      Whether he or his department will take measures against provinces that
      are unable to utilise their allocation within a financial year; if
      not, why not; if so, what measures?          C160E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chair, the question is from hon Kgoshi
Mokoena and deals with whether we will take any corrective action against
provinces that failed to utilise all the resources allocated to them.

Now there is a very important context that’s provided firstly by the
Constitution with its emphasis on co-operative governance. Secondly, in
section 216 of the Constitution, conditions are set out which allow us to
withhold the transfer of funds because, at the start of the year, we don’t
transfer all the money. I think it is important to recognise that all of
that involve certain requirements.

Also, in the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, in section 3 of that
Act, we have actually provided for the need for consultation. There have
been significant improvements in the last period, largely because as the
Public Finance Management Act has matured, we actually use the forum of
Parliament, through publication of actual expenditures on a quarterly
basis, thereby empowering Parliament to call any province. We have
certainly seen the Select Committee on Finance do this on the conditional
grants, and doing so very effectively.

But, instead of allowing the situation to happen where money remains
unspent for a long period, I think trend lines can be established because
of actual publications in the Gazette that hold recipients of public
finance accountable to Parliament.

Of course, what we are also able to do is have discussions in the Budget
Council, which is that formal body of Minmec, the Ministry and the nine
MECs of Finance. On a quarterly basis, the President has the Presidential
Co-ordinating Council where the President and the Ministers on an as-needs
basis meet with the Premiers and the representatives of the SA Local
Government Association, and then, on a quarterly basis, we actually do
presentations of the trends.

So rather than act with the big stick to hold back money, I think our
emphasis is largely on co-operative government. Where it is unavoidable, as
with conditional grants, we have done so but I think it is something we
will deal with in a later question today.

Last year, R746,7 million of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant for
provinces was withheld. Now I think that, if you ask hon Ralane there at
the back, he has called the provinces. He knows the details. We have
ensured that Parliament knows that it is not any capricious act - you know,
wake up in the morning and say, ``I’m angry with Limpopo. Let me withhold
money from them.’’

There are actually set procedures, and on conditional grants we are very
strict. We insist that the provinces, one, budget for the money; two, plan
for the money; and three, report on money received. So, you’ve got that
ongoing discussion. That is the basis on which we actually withheld those
amounts of money. In that year, provinces underspent their capital budget
by R938,3 million.

Sometimes it’s a capacity problem. Sometimes it’s as a result of the fact
that people want the money even though the plans will only be put out
later.

I think we are working through all of those things. It is an improving
situation because, in 2002, provinces underspent their capital budgets by
10%. Now, if you look at the situation last year, even though that R938
million is a big number, it has dropped to 6% of an even larger capital
budget. So, it is an improving story.

I think that if I left here without ensuring that every member of the NCOP
understood that we don’t do this without due care and attention and without
an emphasis on co-operative governance, I’d be leaving the wrong
impression. Thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, let me thank the Minister for the
elaborative response to my question. I thank him so much for that.

Arising from that reply, I want to find out from the hon dynamic Minister
that in dealing with all processes to make sure that they use all their
allocations – that’s the provinces - how are we avoiding this fiscal
dumping that is done by some of the provinces?

Having realised that they might not be able to use all their allocations,
they resort to fiscal dumping to justify that they have spent all their
money. That’s the first question.

The second question is, as this House is playing its oversight function
over provinces, can I get the view of the eloquent, calculating and
wonderful Minister as to how we deal with some of the provinces that are
reluctant to account? They even go to the extent of refusing to come and
appeal before the committee that plays the oversight role in their
activities. How do we make those kinds of arrangements, hon Minister?
Thanks, Chair.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, hon Chair, and may I thank
our outstanding representative of the people, the hereditary leader of our
people, for his follow-up question. Kgoshi, Deputy Chair, part of the
difficulty is that what the Constitution requires of us is to transfer an
equitable share to provinces.

The formula is calculated. It’s an open, transparent issue in the length
and spirit of the law and the oversight for that. It’s of course managed by
the Financial and Fiscal Commission. So, once a province receives its own
allocations, it has to account for that amount of money to the provincial
legislature.

I want to express the hope that oversight in provincial legislatures is as
strong as what we are seeing from this House. Now there is a bit of a
constraint. You can’t ask a provincial department to account to the
National Council of Provinces because there is no direct line of
accountability.

But where there is a direct line of accountability, and this happens in
respect of conditional grants, there can be no excuse, because it is
actually out of the national share granted to provinces and, therefore,
there are certain conditions that must be met; and there can be no escape
from that line of accountability.

Now this House has been exceedingly forthcoming in responding, for the
second year running now, to the Intergovernmental Fiscal Review. Very
important workshops were held on this. We try to include the provincial
legislatures. We believe that it is an important tool. It’s important
because you bring to light what the outcomes are. It’s a round of
discussions.

Hon Mkhaliphi chaired the Joint Budget Committee, now we are focusing on
the allocations for next year. What we will publish on Budget Day are the
estimates of national expenditure, the measurable objectives of
departments. But what we have thereafter is what the money actually bought.


I think that, by raising the consciousness about these issues, we are
saying to legislatures that this is the most perfect opportunity for
oversight.

So, if the department of agriculture in the Free State province received
R100 million, on the front end of that is the budget, we can ask but what
did the money buy if that province then decided to buy Bonsmara cattle and
give it to the friends of the Deputy Minister here? They must account for
it. [Interjections.]

It is getting those kinds of issues right. I think I suppose the question,
Kgoshi, is a plea from you through me; and let me give feedback to you that
there are many instruments for oversight that strengthen that role of
legislatures, and the plea is to use it because we need to act together.

Once we release the money, except for conditional grants as in the case of
the capital works grants, we tend to stand back and plead with
legislatures: Take the ball and run. We do so through the Gazette and a
number of other means. Thank you.

      Municipalities: Regulation of borrowing practices, and receipt of
                                 allocations
66.   Mr E M Sogoni asked the Minister of Finance:

       (1)  Whether, with regard to municipalities borrowing financial
           resources from the Development Bank of Southern Africa, he
           intends to regulate the borrowing practices of municipalities;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


       (2)  whether municipalities that have the capacity to spend their
           allocations appropriately will receive such allocations; if not,
           why not;


       (3)  whether he will make a statement on the matter?
           C207E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chair, this is a question from the hon
Sogoni relating to municipalities borrowing from the Development Bank of
Southern Africa, the DBSA. What is important is that we recognise that
municipalities borrowing from the DBSA have to meet the same requirements
as are set out in the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.

We try to encourage the DBSA to lend to municipalities, especially small
municipalities that don’t have credit ratings. Last year, province by
province, the book to municipalities was quite significant.

The measure for us is whether they would get out into the rural areas. I
always say to the DBSA, “Don’t bother about eThekweni, Joburg and Tshwane;
they’ll get themselves to market okay.” It’s okay to support them in that,
but the key issue is to try to drive the change. In driving the change,
it’s sometimes a huge capacity constraint in municipalities in that you
have this contradiction in terms of which municipalities in rural areas
don’t provide free basic services to the really, really poor that are
there, because the services are not in place. Before you can provide free
basic water, you must first provide water. But if the capacity isn’t there
in that municipality, then we are actually denying the poor, who happen to
live in rural areas.

This is why the Siyenza Manje project is as important as it is. In and of
itself it is not a lending tool, but it is a capacity-building tool. You
have, located in one place, a group of professionals, who have retired, and
others who can go there and do mentorship programmes. This is because there
are too many municipalities that employ no engineers, no technicians, and
so they have no technical skills to get the water, the electricity or the
sanitation to people.

So driving that programme is going be important. You might well in the
future, as a result of that, have identified the need, and the DBSA might
then be the institution that that municipality seeks to borrow from.
But the first and most important objective of Siyenza Manje is to try to
get the capacity in there, so that the services can be provided and the
money is accounted for properly, because there are a number of financial
managers who are part of this project.

What we will be doing shortly, though, as the National Treasury is publish
a series of regulations for borrowing by municipalities. There are some
things in the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act. We have
had to stop municipalities that would call from London and say, “We are
here to borrow money”, and it’s very clear that you can’t, as a
municipality, borrow outside of the country.

We need to further enhance and create capacity but, more importantly, I
think, what we want of municipalities, through the DBSA and other channels,
is not to borrow in the short term, because in the short term the interest
rates are high, but to borrow over long periods as we do as government,
say, over 10 years, to issue bonds and be able to manage their
infrastructure spending quite differently from what we’ve seen in the past.
So, this is an evolving situation.

I think, in the main, municipalities are eligible to borrow from the DBSA.
The DBSA stands ready to help, but we are not going to rush the DBSA into
municipalities to create a situation in which they actually have unbearable
debt because that will create its own wave of problems. Thank you.

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson, and thank you, Minister, for
the response. I don’t have the adjectives the hon Mokoena had to describe
you. However, we agree with what the Minister is saying in terms of
municipalities borrowing from the Development Bank of Southern Africa. I’m
not sure if the question really conveyed the issue. The issue is that the
municipalities build the infrastructure for water, for roads, for
electricity. In terms of the Division of Revenue Act, the departments are
supposed to allocate funds to those municipalities. Now, the problem that
we are really raising here is that municipalities do not go, for instance,
to the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry or the Department of
Transport and say that they need their allocation.

Now, is this borrowing going to be regulated in such a way that if
municipalities want to build reticulation for water, for instance, that
they start accessing their allocation from Dwaf or whatever department
beforehand? This is because, in most cases, we’ve found that they have not
accessed those allocations they are entitled to. That is the question.

From oversight we have done in the provinces, we have found that they
really don’t bother going to the departments. They just rush directly to
the Development Bank of Southern Africa. Thank you very much, Deputy Chair.


The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chair. I don’t know. I stand
to be advised by the hon Sogoni on exactly what the issues are. When I look
at the book of the DBSA, I’m not seeing those kinds of numbers. I think
it’s also important to recognise that you’re not going to be able to get,
in all instances, a national department allocating resources, partly
because you need a very fine reading of the Constitution because
reticulation remains a municipal competence.

Schedule 5 of the Constitution is abundantly clear on that issue. In the
context of co-operative governance, you can’t overstep the line and say,
“We don’t like what you are doing,” or “We favour you, so here is a pile of
cash”.

There are examples in the Eastern Cape. In the Nelson Mandela Metro there
are two different loans, both of which are 2020 facilities. In Chris Hani
there is a programme for the eradication of the bucket system - a
R10 million programme. In Ukhahlamba there is a water and sanitation
programme of R1,5 million. In Alfred Nzo there is a programme for basic
service delivery for sanitation and roadworks of R25 million; it is quite a
big programme. In Dlambe there is a multimunicipal infrastructure
programme, Phase 2, of R10 million.

So for the entirety of the Eastern Cape, including R800 million to the
Nelson Mandela Metro, the total loan book from the DBSA is R846 million.
That is not excessive. I think that the DBSA does not want to be placed in
a position of having to foreclose against a municipality - take the
tractor, the grader and stuff like that. So, they have their own banking
interests at heart in engaging with these things. I am not sure, when I
look at the list of projects, how many of them may have been declined for a
whole host of reasons. This is going to be an evolving story to actually
resolve all these matters. Chair, thank you.

  Participation of councillors in adjudication of tenders, and favouring of
         formerly disadvantaged communities by procurement policies

71.   Mr E M Sogoni asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   Whether, with reference to the Municipal Finance Management Act,
           Act 56 of 2003, that provides that councillors should not
           participate in the adjudication of tenders, any assessment of
           this reform has been made; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details;

      (2)   whether procurement policies, especially at local government
           level, favour formerly disadvantaged communities as intended; if
           not, what is (a) the position regarding the challenges in this
           regard and (b) being done to address the challenges; if so, what
           are the relevant details?
                                  C288E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I am going to insist that hon Sogoni
pay me a bonus after this. The question relates to a supply chain
management in the context of the Municipal Finance Management Act. What we
are doing as the National Treasury, together with our provincial
counterparts, is to monitor and assess what is happening in municipalities
with supply chain management, and what is actually happening with the
framework.

The question is quite specific: It asks about the exclusion of councillors
from the adjudication of tenders. From our perspective, I am sure that if I
can ask the hon Sogoni whether he has participated in any tender board as
an elected representative, he will say no. Hence I can say that members of
the executive here can say without fear of contradiction that we do not
participate in decisions about tenders.

What we have done in respect of the municipalities is to ensure that
councillors do not participate in the awarding of tenders. There is a very
definite reason for it and that is ethics. Hon members, you may have seen
the President express himself on this matter in the North West Province in
Mafikeng this past weekend.

We do not seek to become councillors or mayors just because being a
councillor or a mayor gives you access to resources and allows you to see a
lot of money flashing in front of your eyes. Being a councillor or a mayor
is all about service.

If you locate the awarding of tenders to officials who are duly accountable
to the elected representatives of the people, then there is somebody to
hold them accountable. If the elected representatives themselves were
awarding the tenders, whom would they be accountable to? There is a very
definite reason and I think it would be a constant thread in the Public
Finance Management Act and the Municipal Finance Management Act.

In broad terms, Chairperson, the Constitution requires of us to put in
place a Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act. This sets out the
scores that the Minister of Trade and Industry is engaged in, and it is a
very intensive process on quotations that would have to dovetail with the
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act.

We will do these things together and it might require certain amendments.
The intention of the Constitution is abundantly clear. It says that you
must put in place the national legislation that will impact on all organs
of state to ensure that tenders are awarded to historically disadvantaged
groupings and people.

It is not an optional issue but it is a Constitutional imperative. This
matter is not one that we can deal with without limitations. In terms of
the Municipal Finance Management Act we have published regulations. There
was a huge Gazette published at the end of May 2005. That Gazette limits
the rights of certain groups.

Firstly, it says that the municipality may not issue a tender to somebody
who has not paid income tax - it is perfectly rational. You cannot take
taxpayers’ money and enrich people who do not bother to meet the
obligations of the citizens by paying tax. It is quite straightforward and
it is uniform across all tender requirements.

The second limitation is on people who are in the employ of the state.
Those are strict prohibitions in terms of the legislation and again there
is a provision, which is sometimes misunderstood. It asks that where awards
are made to first-degree relatives of elected representatives, or people in
the service of the state, that that be published.

For example, if the hon Dirk du Toit’s wife gets a tender from the
Bloemfontein municipality, they would have to publish it as a footnote in
their financial record. She is not prohibited by virtue of her association,
but the council has a responsibility in the interest of transparency to
publish that in a footnote.

Those are the ethical premises, and they are very strong in the regulations
and the Municipal Finance Management Act. I am sure that the hon Sogoni and
every hon member of this House would stand by this, because we believe that
it is correct that these regulations obtain in the way that they do.

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you, Chairperson. I do stand by those regulations,
Minister. However, I think that there should be a mechanism to ensure that
those officials who are responsible for adjudicating tenders are clear
about the government’s BEE policies of addressing the issues of affirmative
action.

Maybe I should in the near feature try to provide the hon Minister with
some small audit of the tenders that were issued by the Tshwane
Municipality and Johannesburg Municipality in the past year. These small
tenders could have been given to an ordinary person, but it is given to
someone who has resources and who may not necessarily need that small
tender. I am not sure if there is a mechanism used to look at that. We know
that councillors do not have the capacity to monitor allocations but they
are supposed to monitor them.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE:  Chairperson, the hon Sogoni places me in some
difficulty. I do not know that people would submit a tender if they do not
have a need for the money. In capitalism, people want money: the more they
see, the more they want. But that is not what I am talking about.

You see, some of these things are exceedingly difficult at face value. Let
us assume that you are awarding a tender for some complex bit of work, for
example, not just in construction, but a complex thing: You take the NCOP
and you must get specialised air-conditioning systems into the NCOP.

You might say that there is a company that looks like it does not need
money; it is just construction after all. The problem is that if you award
that tender to a black-owned company that may have never done anything like
this before, they could actually create enormous difficulty in a Chamber
like this.

It is very difficult to oversee all of these things and the nitty-gritty,
and that is why rather than just looking at race and gender, it is also
important when you are making a call like that, that you also look at the
tender specifications. One of the worst things that I have seen is a road
that was built. Within two years of rains, the road was gone. Why? Because
the road construction contract was awarded to people who met the race and
gender qualifications, but had no experience of construction. The local
authority issuing the tender has to start again and whilst that is
happening the inhabitants or the residents are punished. There are balances
that must be struck. What is very important is that we build the capacity
as we proceed.

The other story is the one for which I appeared on television. I was in a
house, which was poorly constructed in the Mpumalanga Province. This woman
showed me just how bad the house was and I was upset because we should not
do that to poor people.

When I asked the municipal manager about it, he said that it was a BEE
contractor. Then I asked him if he is paying half price for the house. He
said no, it was full price. But we should not do that. It is wrong for the
recipient of the service. Government must mediate on behalf of the people.
Part of the BEE codes is getting the stuff right so that we can get the
service and value for money, but we can do so on a basis whereby we extend
on a rising floor, opportunities to historically disadvantaged businesses.

Mr S SHICEKA: Thank you, Chairperson, and we appreciate the response of the
hon Minister, particularly on the issue of high ethical standards that we
are trying to put across. I want to link the follow-up question to these
high ethical standards: Is there any requirement whatsoever that people who
sit in the adjudication committees are required to declare their interests?


The fact that they are officials does not necessarily mean that they cannot
be corrupt; they can also be corrupt themselves. This means that the buck
can stop with them. I think I would agree with comrade Sogoni that if an
audit can be done to check the situation of this policy decision, it would
help a great deal. Just because it was done in the province and not
nationally does not mean that it might not be helpful.

The last point on that question is: What happens if these officials take a
wrong decision and appoint the wrong company, one that is not in compliance
with our policies? What is the level of recourse of these politicians who
do not sit there to ensure that the right thing is done? They are not
expected to become closely involved with the process. They must be far
removed from the process, so what do they do? They are accountable to the
public out there. They must make sure that whatever is done is done
properly and that it does agree with ethical standards.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson, and thanks to
the hon Shiceka for the question. I think the first issue is that public
servants must understand that they are not working for their parents or in
their own corner shops. They are employed by government institutions that
have policies, and that is a core responsibility of management.

I have to sit with the managers of my respective departments on a regular
basis, work things through with them and ensure that we are exactly on the
same page when it comes to policy issues. If there are deviations from
that, they will try and seek prior approval from me. In that way, I know
that I can be held publicly accountable for policy implementation or lack
thereof.
This reality even exists in municipalities. There would be a member of the
mayoral committee who is responsible for a particular function - that is
the first issue. The second issue is, on disclosures, we have a situation
now in the Public Service Commission, which requires us to ensure that our
public servants annually submit declarations of assets and liabilities.

This is a very useful measure, merely by virtue of submitting it does not
preclude the Public Service Commission or anybody else from making an
enquiry if they need to. Part of it is a declaration in the presence of a
commissioner of oaths, that the statement you are submitting is done so
under oath. You cannot have public servants who have no regard for the
oath, because if they do they should not be public servants.

That is raising the ethical standards and I think it is an ongoing issue
now. I could not tell you, off-hand, exactly what the position is with
municipalities. Clearly, we have to work in that direction and I know that
the DGs keep a very careful eye on it.

Whilst the declarations are only requirements for the senior management,
such as the service directors, chief directors, deputy DGs and DGs, where
people are involved in the decision-making - like we still have some tender
board functions within the Treasury for instance - even though they may be
below that level, they are required to submit their declarations of assets
and liabilities, so that there is a consciousness.

You are not going to resolve all of these issues, but I think what is
important is that you show a spotlight on it, and if the spotlight is on,
then it is frequently more difficult for the people to get away with
issues.

One of the issues that I think we still have to resolve in the broader
procurement arena is the compliance office. What we have done is to free up
departments from the strictures of the State Tender Board. What most
departments do is that they place the tenders or award the tenders, but you
need a centralised compliance office to do occasional checks and so on. I
am sure that we are going to need something like that for municipalities as
well. That will help because I think it gives a higher comfort level about
what we are doing and that the checks and balances are in place.

            Transfer of unutilised resources by National Treasury

  75. Mr D Botha asked the Minister of Finance:

      Whether the National Treasury transferred unutilised resources,
      originally distributed as conditional grants, to another provincial
      department (a) within the same province and/or (b) in a different
      province in the financial year ending 31 March 2006; if not, why not;
      if so, what are the relevant details?

                  C326E


The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chair. It’s a question from
the hon Botha and it is similar to that of Kgoshi Mokoena. It relates to
whether we’ve transferred unutilised resources originally distributed as
conditional grants to other provinces. Now, firstly, there is the R746
million that I referred to earlier, part of the infrastructure grant to
provinces that was withheld because of certain processes. Those are
published numbers.

Since 2005, in the Division of Revenue Act, we’ve included a clause that
allows us to move funds between one province and the next for a similar
function where it appears that that province would not be able to spend the
money. The first of these grants that we’ve moved around like that is the
hospital revitalisation grant. The amounts withheld from last year are R10
million from the Eastern Cape, R7 million from the Free State, R10 million
from Limpopo, R40 million from the North West and R24 million from the
Western Cape.

Of the R91 million withheld, R71 million was transferred to Gauteng and
R20 million to the Northern Cape during the 2005 provincial adjustment
estimate process. It’s just smoothing that process, because if provinces
have momentum in the construction of revitalised health facilities, we want
to see the money go there rather than have it sitting in other places.

Secondly, we redirected a portion of the infrastructure grant for provinces
that was stopped during the last financial year, namely R20 million from
Mpumalanga and R100 million from Limpopo. We redirected R55 million of that
to the North West and R65 million to the Western Cape, who indicated that
they could absorb the reallocated funds.

We have already appropriated these amounts in the other House in the
Adjustments Appropriation, and this House will do it this week. I again
want to express our deepest appreciation to the Select Committee on Finance
because, given the fact that you now have a mechanism in the Division of
the Revenue Act to apply these facilities differently, the consciousness
raised by the select committee here has helped us to reallocate these
resources in the way that we have. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon Minister. We were
informed that the Minister of Minerals and Energy, the Minister of Labour
and the Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism were abroad, but I’ve
just been informed that hon Dr Skweyiya, the Minister of Social
Development, is standing in for the Minister of Minerals and Energy. Is
that correct, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Something like that. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you very much.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I wish members of the House the best
for the Christmas season ahead. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you very much.

                 Collapse of World Trade Organisation talks

68.   Mr J M Sibiya asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   What led to the collapse of World Trade Organisation, WTO,
           talks;


      (2)   whether there is any possibility of the talks being resumed; if
           not, why not, if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                              C216E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Let me say that the Doha Round, which
was launched in November 2001, has been a complex and difficult set of
negotiations amongst 150 members across seven core issues. Many planned
interim deadlines have been missed over the course of the negotiations, and
the suspension and not the collapse on 24 July is an expression of such
difficulties. This happened after a series of ministerial engagements, over
the course of 2006, including an intensive session amongst the six members
who were loosely referred to as “the G6” – the US, the EU, Australia,
Japan, India and Brazil. On 23 July, substantive differences on the key
issues of agriculture could not be bridged. The DG of the WTO, Mr Pascal
Lamy, as chair of the negotiating committee, had little choice but to
suspend the negotiations indefinitely.

A window of opportunity may be opened after the mid-term elections in the
United States at which time the US administration may be in a position to
re-engage in negotiations, if the current Farm Bill, which is under
negotiation, provides space to improve the US offer to reduce agricultural
support.

If this possibility materialises, the EU would also be required to firm up
its offer to reduce agricultural tariffs. Should these basic ingredients
become available then the Doha Round has a strong possibility of resuming.
So, the final point that I would like to make is that it is in the same way
that the Doha Round development agenda had identified agriculture as core
to the achievement of these developmental objectives. This is exactly the
area where the negotiations came unstuck.

On the issues that relate to what developing countries needed to do in the
area of industrial tariffs, it is important to mention the point that it is
not on those issues that the negotiations actually deadlocked to the point
where the DG decided to suspend the negotiations. Thank you, Chair.
[Applause.]

Mr M J SIBIYA: I am very glad to learn that there are some moves in the US
to try and have a look at the agriculture subsidies and try to act in the
manner that can enable the talks to resume. In the meantime, are we not
likely to find the situation, in your assessment, where the regional
economic groupings elaborate protective measures that might be agreed upon,
and each member of that grouping is required to make sure that whatever
discussions take place in the event of the WTO talks resuming, they have to
be looked at in such a way that they bear in mind the regional agreements
that they have in their regional groupings? I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: In responding to this question, it is
perhaps important to make the point that the world and the world economy,
but in particular the developing world, really needs a multilateral
solution to the issue of global trade. Some of the risks of not achieving
through the multilateral system’ through the World Trade Organisation, the
objectives that were set out in the Doha Round ministerial which are really
about opening up trade in the world today are, amongst other things, the
proliferation of a lot of bilateral agreements and arrangements and
regional agreements and arrangements. What these things do is that they
make the trade environment more complex. Who pays the price? It is the
developing countries, because they have to administer a whole series of
trade agreements which are by nature just complex, because they are about
administering many different lines of tariffs. They are about your custom’s
procedures. So, it is a complex set of issues. The more complex the global
trade environment becomes, the higher the prices that the developing
countries, which need these more than anybody else, pay. So, it is
important that we work as quickly as possible to have a resumption of these
negotiations in a manner that will ensure that through the multilateral
system, we establish a free, fair and open global trading system within
which all of us – developed and developing countries - can participate in a
meaningful and beneficial way.

I am not so sure whether at the moment or up until the elections took
place, there were moves that we could really speak of in a very serious way
in the United States. What we experienced with the US as they were
approaching the elections – those of us who were in the negotiations, and
you can ask the Minister of Public Works and the Minister of Agriculture
who at the time were part of this process – was an absolute inability to
engage; a rigidity which just emerged and made it extremely difficult for
the negotiation process to move forward. So, we actually hope that in the
course of time, we will be able to move away from those hard positions.
[Applause.]

Mr S SHICEKA: Chair, we welcome the political developments that have taken
place in the US in relation to the elections, because they are beginning to
balance the situation. However, what makes the Minister to be cautiously
optimistic is that the situation can change in as far as the US positions
to the WTO are concerned. That is the first thing.

Secondly, isn’t Europe itself having rigidity in terms of its positions of
not allowing the issue of reduction of this support to agricultural
products and development of the farmers in relation to what was in Doha
Round? Don’t you think that Europe will also cause more problems even if
the US can change or soften its stance? I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I think that the cautious optimism
results from the fact that we had worked in such a way that we were very
close to what looked like a deal that would emerge out of the Doha Round. I
think that generally, or politically speaking at least, the commitment is
still there to ensure that we can deliver on this Doha Round development
agenda. So, the fact that we had worked to a point where we were so close,
gives us the optimism that if we can address some of the specific issues
that really accounted for the deadlock in the negotiations, we do actually
stand in a position where it would be possible to have a deal on these
negotiations. It is fair to say that the responsibility for the deadlock in
the negotiations, does not solely reside with the US, because the kind of
triangle that had emerged as we were getting closer to the point, which of
course represented the suspension of the negotiations, was that there was a
need for the US to go further in terms of the offer that it had made to
reduce its own agricultural subsidies.

Generally, there was an acceptance that the US needed to do more in that
area. There was also an acceptance that the EU also needed to do more to
open up its own market to agricultural products from other parts of the
world. More specifically, the EU needed to provide greater clarity and show
greater flexibility in terms of the treatment that it sought for its own
sensitive products.

So, on both sides of the Atlantic, there was a need to move further. We
needed the EU to effect further cuts to its agricultural tariffs and to be
a lot less aggressive in terms of the treatment that it wanted to be given
in terms of its own sensitive products. The way we saw it was that through
these sensitive products, whatever commitments the EU would make to opening
up its own market, would be undermined through loading everything onto the
sensitive products which would then be carved out and excluded from the
dispensation that would be agreed upon. So, those are the issues that
needed to be addressed on both sides of the Atlantic. Those issues are
still on the table; they still need to be addressed. [Applause.]

   Implications of decisions taken at SADC summit for boosting of economic
         relations and membership of Southern African Customs Union

76.   Ms N D Ntwanambi asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether the decisions taken at the Southern African Development
           Community, SADC, summit held in South Africa will assist in
           boosting economic relations; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details;

      (2)   whether there are any proposals from the task force that will
           benefit South Africa both politically and economically; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether these proposals will allow countries that are not
           Southern African Customs Union, Sacu, members to join and
           benefit from the Sacu; if not, what is the position in this
           regard; if so, what are the relevant details?            C329E

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: House Chair, key decisions taken at the
recently held SADC Extraordinary Summit on 23 October 2006 relate to the
confirmation of previous SADC decisions on the following issues, the
attainment of a free trade area by 2008, as well as a SADC Customs Union by
2010.

These decisions are articulated in the SADC Regional Indicative Strategic
Development Plan. This is an approved framework for the full realisation of
regional economic integration. In short, the summit escalated regional
economic integration to an immediate priority for a SADC ministerial task
force comprising ministers of trade, planning and finance.

The decisions will facilitate intraregional trade and invariably boost
economic relations in the region. The ministerial task force was only
sanctioned in August 2006 with a broad mandate to fast-track the issue of
regional economic integration. So it is still work in progress. The
immediate proposal from the task force is to commission a study that will
inform policy decisions so as to facilitate the attainment of the regional
economic integration. The study will address the following questions. How
do member states deal with the issue of multiple memberships? How does the
SADC region relate to extra-SADC trade and economic agreements already in
existence? How does one ensure that the economic partnership agreements
being negotiated with the EU by all SADC members do not divide the region
but contribute towards regional integration?

So amongst other things, these are some of the issues that the work of the
task team will cover. And of course the work of the task team will also, in
our view, promote economic unity in the region. The expansion of Sacu is
not necessarily the preferred model towards SADC regional integration. The
present focus is to facilitate the attainment of the SADC Customs Union in
pursuance of regional economic integration.

Chair, it is fair to say that perhaps more than at any other time the issue
of regional integration has really received very focused and high level
attention on the part of the heads of state and therefore on the part of
the region. And we are going to be working in ways that will ensure that we
can advance the regional economic integration agenda. Thanks.

Mr S SHICEKA: Chairperson, the follow-up is on the issue of looking at
regional integration, which is something that has been welcomed. However,
if we look at the ports of entry of our country which are porous, then the
issue of migration happening even within the country into the urban areas
is very high and the economic infrastructure is unable to cope with it.
Because South Africa is an island surrounded by a sea of poor countries,
how are we going to manage that? Are we preparing ourselves as a country to
ensure that we deal with these issues so that this dispensation that we are
looking at and looking for, is able to assist and ensure that we manage our
affairs; not only at that level, but also in terms of security and the
management of our ports of entry if we have this dispensation? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, I wouldn’t want to necessarily
regard the view that South Africa is an island in a sea of poverty as
absolutely correct. I think if we look closely around us, we will find
countries that are doing relatively well, even within our own region. Take
a country such as Zimbabwe which, until the recent economic challenges, was
actually doing quite well, economically speaking. Botswana has been doing
relatively well over a sustained period. So I think we need to temper that
a little bit. Indeed Lesotho, which is surrounded completely by South
Africa, is an LDC, and so we just have to have a bit of a nuanced view to
that.

When coming to the issues about our ports of entry, any regional
integration programme necessarily has to address issues of infrastructure,
and not just your hardcore economic infrastructure such as your power
generation and all of these things, but also even the infrastructure that
relates to the ability to manage the movement of goods and people.

And so part of what we have looked at as a possibility and as part of the
work that we are doing as this task team is - as we worked towards
deepening regional integration, freeing up trade more, and looking at
moving towards a customs union - whether we wouldn’t need actually to
establish a fund that would solely focus on the kind of infrastructure that
we would need to build as a region in order to manage those issues of
movement of goods and people.

So indeed, we would have to attend to that issue. I think that at the
moment we probably do not have a comprehensive approach to this issue in
the sense of an approach that sees us working across all sides of the
borders that countries share. We would have to address this matter if we
are to successfully achieve the objectives of regional integration.

Mr E M SOGONI: House Chair, the Sunday Times also said that South Africa is
surrounded by a sea of poverty, and the Minister says it is not necessarily
correct; but just a follow-up to this question is: are there conditions for
these relations perhaps that are there in terms of, for example, political
conditions that in order for SADC to achieve these goals, there should be
some other political issues that SADC countries should address? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, I see that the member also
touches on this condition of South Africa being an island in a sea of
poverty, and I think that we shouldn’t also forget our own challenges as we
talk about this. If we see South Africa as successful, we must also
understand that that is not a complete statement, because we are faced by
our challenges of the second economy, levels of poverty and unemployment,
and areas that are marginalised in own country, which are very typical
challenges, of any developing country. So I am kind of re-emphasising the
point that we need to take a nuanced view to this issue.

I think that the summit of SADC that was held in Maseru in a very unique
way, actually, gave SADC an opportunity to restate its commitment to
maintaining the unity of SADC, and again in quite a unique way actually it
enabled us to reflect on the long history of SADC, and on some of the
actual tangible achievements of SADC as a community. We were reminded about
various things that we have actually done as SADC starting with the unity
that was achieved that enabled SADC as a region to confront the monster
that was apartheid; and today we talk of a free South Africa, and the
challenges that face Lesotho at a particular point when the political
system just experienced particular differences at a given point in time.
The question is: How could we in SADC as a region deal with these issues?
Today we speak of a Lesotho, which is stable state, and has got a political
and electoral system, which has given the country the kind of stability
that it is enjoying today.

So from that it became quite clear that there is actually quite a strong
political, emotional and even sentimental attachment to SADC as a body. I
think that this is what underpinned or formed the backdrop to the work that
was given to the ministerial task team, to look at how we deal with
whatever challenges and obstacles there are on our way towards deepening
regional integration, and to try and come up with a road map.

I think what became quite clear was that we would arrive at that position
by dealing with the issues that confront us. So if multiple membership is
an issue, we should be able to talk through it, and find a way of how we
are going to deal with it.

If the existence of Sacu within the belly of SADC is an issue we must be
able to talk through that issue, and come up with a way of how we are going
to deal with it, so really I think that provided a very good basis for us
to deal with the issues that have bearing on the attainment of a deeper-
level, regional economic integration. Thank you.

Mr M J SIBIYA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister I was provoked by the
question that was asked by Comrade Shiceka here. I think I will be making
sense when I say some of the member states of SADC belong to other
continental economic groupings; for instance, I have an idea that Zambia
belongs to what we call Comesa, and Tanzania and the rest of them have the
East African community and so on.

Now in the context of the preferential trade area we were trying to create,
can we say as SADC, or can we also say as a country, that there are
measures we have put in place so as to make sure that this preferential
trade area if it happens to come about - as I hope it will - won’t find
itself trapped within some tendencies like repackaging and trading; because
as far as I know we do have as a country trade agreement with Zambia as
such. But then, with regard to the issue of repackaging, how are we, this
time as South Africa, the country, and SADC perhaps on the other hand,
dealing with these issues?

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Chair, it is quite true that if you
look at SADC there is only one country that does not belong to any other
body and that is Mozambique, because five of us belong to Sacu and to SADC;
four others belong to SADC and to Comesa, and you also have some that
belong to the Central African Organisation, so it is an issue. And it is an
issue that we, as I was saying just earlier, have to talk through. We are
exploring ways of how we could deepen regional integration, taking into
account all of these realities that we have talked about, because we have
looked at different options of how we can achieve that objective, bearing
in mind and taking into account these realities, that was an option of what
exists currently.

As Sacu, we have agreed that on a variable basis those countries that feel
ready to join a customs union can do so on a basis that the process will
proceed without necessarily forcing everybody who is a member of SADC to be
part of a customs union, as long as you will have preferential arrangements
that will exist between this emerging customs union and the rest of the
region in terms of the free trade agreement. The other option that has also
been looked at is the one that says no country can belong to more than one
customs union. So in order perhaps to ensure that we deal with those
realities of countries that may belong to more than one body, is it
possible for us to explore that at a regional level, not as customs unions,
but as two regional free trade areas? I am talking about arrangements
between the two regions.
So I am saying that these are things that we shall have to do, to explore
all possible approaches and options to achieve regional integration in a
manner that enables us, as much as possible, to preserve the unity of SADC,
and collectively work through the issues that currently define our
landscape as a region. In the end, I think it would be a uniquely SADC
solution that has taken into account these realities to give us the product
at the end of the day that will show us the way forward.  But indeed the
issue of multiple memberships is one of the major challenges of the region.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, I think those were
your last questions. I really want to thank you for having made the effort
to participate in this question session.

I would like to thank all other Ministers who are here because there is
also a serious national issue that is being discussed in the National
Assembly, about which all of us are aware, across party-political lines. I
therefore want to urge members to take cognisance of that particular
reality.

I will then very quickly ask the Minister of Social Development who is
standing in for the Minister of Minerals and Energy to deal with Question
69.

        Use of alternative energy sources to assist rural communities

    69. Mr D D Gamede asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      Whether her department is looking into assisting communities from deep
      rural areas by providing alternative energy other than electricity,
      such as (a) gas, (b) bio-fuel or (c) solar energy as a free basic
      service; if not, why not; if so, when?

                       C230E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, I thought you would say you are
releasing all of us because of the fact that it is an issue also dealt with
in the National Assembly.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I was watching the time, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, when I answered in the manner in
which I answered when you asked me whether I am here, it was mostly because
I might not be able to answer supplementary questions, but I will only be
able to answer what the Minister wrote here. Even that is very long; so, I
will do what I can.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I am aware that this
question will benefit the House. But, in the light of the constraints that
we are facing, can I check with hon Gamede whether he is really persuaded
that the Minister should go through that question? I want to be guided by
you.
The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Or I could give a written response.

Mr D D GAMEDE: Hon Chair, to be honest, I know that the Minister can answer
the question. But just for the sake of progress, the Minister can give us
the response because the relevant Minister is not in and we were going to
ask follow-up questions.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, I am informed that you
can hand in a written response to that question. So you are excused. Your
work for today’s session is over.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, sir.

                     Upgrading of road to Kgalagadi Park

74.   Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Minister of Public Works:

      (a) What progress has been made by her department to upgrade the road
      to the Kgalagadi Park between Askam and Tweerivieren and (b) when will
      this Expanded Public Works Programme be completed?
                                                   C322E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chair, I would like to thank you and the
members for your understanding. With regard to the question asked by the
hon C J van Rooyen regarding the progress on the upgrade of the road to the
Kgalagadi Park between Askam and Tweerivieren, I would like to indicate to
the House that this is a project which is funded by the provincial
department of roads and transport as well as the Department of
Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

The issue of interest to us is to ensure that, indeed, in the construction
or upgrading of this road, the Expanded Public Works guidelines are
integrated, that is, more labour-intensive work opportunities must be
created. I could have easily said, “Well the question must be directed to
the province.” But, given the interests that we have in this question, I
therefore decided that we will answer.

In terms of construction, about 30% of the work has been completed. The
details - even though I am not sure whether all of us will be competent to
comprehend - are that a total of 17,6 km of the selected layer has been
completed; 16 km of 27% of the sub-base layer have been completed; 21% of
base course has been completed; and 10,5 km have been completed and sealed.
Concerning the other technical answers, I am sure none of us would be
competent to understand exactly what those bases are, except the engineers,
but they all relate to the construction of the road.

In terms of the timeline, that is when the project will be completed, the
business plan by the province and the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism is that the project must be completed by June 2007. However,
they have indicated that there are certain challenges that they are facing,
some of which are part of the tender specifications.

Unfortunately, some of those specifications may not actually be met. Those
specifications relate to the capacity within the province and also relates
to the supplies that are not available in Kimberley. Supplies have either
to be brought in from Gauteng or Bloemfontein. So that might affect the
pace of completion by those who are constructing the road.

However, with regard to the Expanded Public Works Programme, there are 230
persons who are working under eight learner contractors and supervisors
whom we have trained so that they can get skills in the construction of the
roads. The 230 persons are actually currently employed as labourers on that
road.

Those who come from Kgalagadi or from North West will appreciate that part
of the challenge that we face in that region is the distances between
various communities. So, even to get people to work on that road you have
to mobilise them from communities that are far afield, away from the road
in question. There are unintended costs in keeping some of those people
within the vicinity of the construction site as well as costs concerning
the distances that they have to travel.
So, I want to say to the hon member, indeed, the department of roads and
transport in the Northern Cape and the Department of Environmental Affairs
and Tourism will do everything possible to ensure that the upgrade of that
road is completed within the said deadline. But if it is not met, you would
appreciate that there are these challenges that I have already indicated.
Thank you very much, hon Chair.

        Measuring the success of the Expanded Public Works Programme

    84. Ms J F Terblanche asked the Minister of Public Works:

      Whether she will make a statement on how the success of the Expanded
      Public Works Programme is measured?                           C339E


UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMISEBENZI YOMPHAKATHI: Sihlalo, ilungu elihloniphekile
uTerblanche ufuna ukwazi ukuthi, kulolu hlelo lokwakha imisebenzi olubizwa
kuthiwe phecelezi ngesilungu i-Expanded Public Works Programme, ngabe
sinayo yini indlela yokubheka kumbe ukukala ukuthi lo msebenzi ngabe
wenzeka ngendlela esasiyifuna na.

Ngifuna nje ukuchaza kabanzi ukuthi uhlelo lwezemisebenzi olwasungulwa
nguhulumeni mhlawumbe umuntu angasho ukuthi alulusha ceke. Lolu uhlelo
olusetshenziswa ngohulumeni mihla namalanga ukwakha amathuba emisebenzi.
Okuhlukile kulolu hlelo lwaseNingizimu Afrika ukuthi sibone kubalulekile
ukuthi, yize lolu hlelo lwemisebenzi luyinto ekhona, kufanele nokho thina
sinezelele igalelo lokuqeqeshwa kwalaba abasebenzayo ngoba siyazi ukuthi
lolu hlelo akulona uhlelo olubhekele ukuthi abantu bayoqashwa kuze kube
mhlawumbe bathatha umhlalaphansi, kodwa abaningi kubona kusuke kuwukubanika
isinkwa okwesikhashana. Ngokubaqeqesheka-ke sisuke sibanika amathuba ukuthi
mzukwana beyeka bakwazi ukuthi mhlawumbe bangaziqasha bona ngokwabo noma
bangathola ukuqashwa kwezinye izindawo.

Uma ngingenza isibonelo ngalokhu: Uma sibheka lolu hlelo lweZibambele
kulaba abavela KwaZulu-Natali, eminingi yale mindeni namhlanje isiyakwazi
ukuthi ingazondla nsuku zonke ngoba sebengabantu abangaqashwa uhulumeni
ngolwazi abanalo ukuze baqhubeke njalo nokulungisa imigwaqo kulezo zindawo
abahlala kuzo. Abaningi kulabo bantu ababeqashiwe ngenkathi mhlawumbe leyo
migwaqo isasetshenzwa abaqashwanga, kodwa labo abanye asebesele,
asebenolwazi, sebeyathola ukuhlomula ngokuthi uhulumeni abaqashe njalo,
babe yizikontileka ezincane zokwenza lo msebenzi. Yingakho-ke ngithi lokho
kuwumehluko kithina.

Izinhlelo-ke zokubheka ukuthi ngabe lolu hlelo luhamba ngakho yini, thina
siwuhulumeni sazibeka ukuze sibone ukuthi ngabe lo msebenzi uya ngendlela
esiyifisayo yini. Kodwa ezinye zezinto esazifaka kwaba ukubheka
nokuqinisekeisa ukuthi abesifazane, intsha nabantu abakhubazekile
bangakhohleki kule ngxenye yomsebenzi. Sabeka-ke izilinganiso zokuthi
okungengani ama-40% abantu abasebenza lo msebenzi wezandla, ikakhulukazi
ekwakhiweni kwengqalasizinda, kube ngabomama; ama-30% kube intsha; bese
kuthi ama-2% kube abantu abakhubazekile. Asikusho lokhu ngoba sithi abantu
abakhubazekile sibabukela phansi, kodwa sithi kwezinye izinhlobo
zengqalasizinda kungaba lukhuni, esimweni sokukhubazeka, ukuthi labo bantu
bakwazi ukuqasheka ngobuningi babo.

Ezinye-ke zezinto esazenza kwaba ukubheka ukuthi ngabe amathuba emisebenzi
ayadaleka yini na kulolu hlelo nokuthi azoba mangaki. Sabheka futhi ukuthi
ngabe abantu esibatholayo ukwenza le misebenzi ye-Expanded Public Works
Programme ngabe babeke baqashwa yini ngaphambilini, futhi basebenza
isikhathi esingakanani. Elinye iphuzu ukuthi, singuhulumeni, hhayi kuphela
uMnyango Wezemisebenzi Yomphakathi kodwa Ezokuthutha, Ezezindlu, ezamanzi
kanye nabanye abenza umsebenzi wengqalasizinda, ngabe ingakanani imali
esiyisebenzisela ukuthi ukwakha kwenziwe ngemishini futhi namathuba
omsebenzi avuleke maqondana nokuthi abantu kube yibona abakha leyo
ngqalasizinda.

Okunye kwaba ukubheka ukuthi uma kwenziwa le misebenzi, ngabe mangaki
amalanga esikwazi ukuthi laba bantu sibaqeqeshe ngawo. Ake ngenze
isibonelo: Uma ngabe ukwakha isikole kuzothatha izinyanga eziyisithupha,
kulezo zinyanga eziyisithupha mangaki amalanga laba bantu esikwazi ukuthi
sibathole sibaqeqeshe ngawo, kanti futhi zingaki izinsuku abazisebenzayo,
ngoba siyazi phela ukuthi uma sakha inkontileka, ngenkathi laba abanye
bakha, labo abaplastelayo bona basuke besamile? Kuthi-ke uma sekufuneka
kuplastelwe kube yilabo abaplastielayo abasebenzayo; uma sekufuneka
kufulelwe kwesinye isikhathi kube ngabanye; nomapendane njalo njalo.
Akusibo bonke abenza umsebenzi owodwa kuze kube sekupheleni. Yingakho-ke
lokhu kubala kusisiza ukuze sibone ukuthi ngempela ngempela uma sithi lolu
hlelo lwethu luyawadala amathuba emisebenzi, luyabaqeqesha laba bantu,
isikhathi abeqeqeshwa ngaso sona singakanani?

Okunye futhi ukubheka ukuthi, njengalokho sazi ukuthi sihlukene
ngokwezinhlanga nokwebala lapha eNingizimu Afrika, bangaki laba bantu
esikwazi ukuthi sibathole abenza le misebenzi ngoba lokho kuzosiza
ekubhekeni ukuthi yikuphi lapho kufuneka sigcizelele khona, kanye nokubheka
ukuthi inani abalizuzayo lingakanani ukuze bakwazi ukuxosha indlala uma
kuphela inyanga noma isonto, kuye ngokuthi leyo kontileka isebenza kanjani
nokuthi imali ingakanani.

Sizokwenza-ke lokhu siqhubeka ukuze sibone ukuthi ngabe ngempela siyazama
yini ukuthi sixoshe ikati eziko, abantu babe nendlela yokuthola umsebenzana
okwesikhashana, bakwazi futhi ukuthi mhlawumbe bawuthole njalo nje
umsebenzi ngokuqhubeka kwesikhathi nokuvuleka kwamathuba emsebenzini.
Bengithi-ke angimphendule ngaleyo ndlela umhlonishwa uTerblanche ngombuzo
awubuzile. Ngiyabonga. . (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chairperson, the hon member Terblanche wants
to know if we have a way to measure whether the Extended Public Works
Programme still runs the way we wanted it to run.

I just wish to explain broadly that this Extended Public Works Programme
which was started by government is not necessarily new. This is the
programme used daily by the progressive governments to create job
opportunities. What is different in this South African version of this
programme is that we saw it as important, whilst this programme is still
running, to add our programme of training for those who are already working
because we know that this programme is not for permanent employment, but it
is just for putting bread on the people’s tables for the time being. Our
intention for training these people is that when their contracts are up,
they may be able to find employment elsewhere or even be self-employed.

If I can give a practical example here about the programme called Zibambele
from KwaZulu-Natal. Many people, who took part in this programme, can now
support themselves because they are now eligible for employment by the
government because of the skills they acquired. And they can continue
renovating the roads in places where they leave. We understand that many of
these people are now unemployed, but with the skills that they now have,
they can now be hired as subcontractors by the government. It is for these
reasons therefore that we say this does make a difference to us.
We as government also put programmes in place to make sure that this
programme runs smoothly, as we want it to. And some of the things we put in
place were making sure that women and the youth as well as people with
disabilities are also not forgotten in this kind of employment. We said at
least 40% of people doing this job especially in the infrastructure should
be women, and 30% should be youth whilst 2% should be people with
disabilities. We do not say this because we undermine people with
disabilities, but we understand that in certain parts of infrastructure
building, it could be difficult for people with disabilities to be employed
in their numbers.

The other thing that we did was to calculate how many work opportunities
were to be created by this programme. We also checked as to whether the
people we were getting to do the Extended Public Works Programmes had been
previously employed, and the timeframe in which they worked with their
previous employers, if they had been employed. The other point here is that
as government - not only as the departments of Public Works, Transport,
Housing, Water Affairs and Forestry and other departments that deal with
the infrastructure- we sit down and look how much money do we use for these
things to be done by the machinery as compared to the work done by the
people themselves and the number of job opportunities created.

The other point that we looked at was the number of days that we employ
these people to do this kind of job for us. Let me give an example here: If
building a school, for instance, would take at least six months, in that
span of six months, how many days does it take us to get those people and
train them. The other thing is the number of days those people are going to
work for because we all know that in a construction industry when the other
people are still busy building, those who have to do plastering would be
eagerly waiting on the sidelines. When the time for plastering comes, those
who are good at plastering get a chance to do something and it is also the
same thing with roofing. The same thing also applies to painting, etc. It
is not as if it is only one group of people that does everything from start
to finish. That is why this counting helps us a lot because if we say this
programme does create job opportunities and it trains people we are at
least in a position to say what length of time it takes us to train these
people.

The other thing with this programme is also to look at the total number of
people we help. It is a known fact that here in South Africa we have
different racial groups and therefore different ethnicities. This helps us
to know where we still need to put in more effort, and also to make sure
that whatever these people get, is at least enough to eradicate poverty
either on weekends or month ends depending on how that contract works and
also the payment these people receive.
We will continuously do this so that when we look back we can reflect and
see if we are really eradicating poverty, with people at least getting
temporary jobs which may in the end lead to permanent ones as time goes on.
Well, that is the way I felt I should answer the question asked by the hon
Terblanche. I thank you.]

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I am not going to ask a question, but I
would just like to request a copy of the answer from the Minister, please.

               Rebuilding of road, and situation of toll gates

  82. Mr A Watson asked the Minister of Transport:

      With reference to his reply to Question 43 for oral reply on 5
      September 2006 with regard to toll roads in Mpumalanga, (a) when will
      the envisaged rebuilding of the N17 between Springs in Gauteng and
      Ermelo in Mpumalanga, and from Ermelo to the Oshoek border post be
      completed, (b) where will the toll gates be situated and (c) what will
      the toll fees at each toll gate amount to?
                                              C337E


The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (on behalf of the Minister of
Transport): Chairperson, in fact, I’m in exactly the same position as
Minister Skweyiya in the sense that I’m acting on behalf of the Minister of
Transport. I’ve got a written reply here, but I may not be in the position
he would have been to entertain follow-up questions. With that said, the
procedure would be the same in that I ask permission to table the reply.
Will that be your ruling, Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I think I’m tempted, hon members, to
make a similar ruling, and really plead with members that the question will
be referred to the member who asked it. Those members who are interested in
the reply can actually refer to Hansard for further perusal of the
response. I don’t think I would be fair to you, hon Mangena, in the light
of some of the constraints, if I ruled otherwise. So, you are permitted to
leave the question without responding.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, sir. I assume you are
Nguni-speaking, Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Setona): No, I’m a Sotho.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Yes, then, perhaps if we were not
in the House, I would strangle you because my name is pronounced
``Mangena’’, sir! [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Mr T S Setona) Mangena?

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mangena!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Oh, sorry, I didn’t know that!
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: But I thank you for your ruling.
I’ll table the reply.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thanks very much.

              Steps to curb high rate of illegal farm evictions

  72. Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:

      Whether she will criminalise illegal farm evictions in order to curb
      the high rate of these evictions; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                                             C290E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, through
you, I’d like to say the hon Van Rooyen is still the old activist comrade.
I know and I’m very glad about that, thank you very much.

Let me just give you the formal answer to this question. The first part of
the question asks whether we will criminalise illegal farm evictions. The
answer to that is that an illegal eviction is already a criminal offence in
terms of section 23(3) of the Extension of Security of Tenure Act of 1997,
Act 62 of 1997.

An HON MEMBER: The Esta.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Yes, the Esta. It’s
written there.

But you know, there was a time when adultery was a crime, more than 100
years ago, and it was decided that it shouldn’t be in force anymore.
Perhaps we should bring it back, but I don’t know whether it would stop
adultery. [Laughter.]

Could I say, with respect, I’ll give the third part of the answer as well.
Actually, the second part of the question technically falls away. Perhaps
it’s not whether there is a crime and whether it’s criminalised. Perhaps
one should ask whether it’s effectively criminalised, which is a long
story.

Let me just answer the third part of the question. The Department of Land
Affairs is now reviewing all land reform legislation. It’s a huge task and
a very difficult one as well, I must say. Could I just comment that,
especially with this reported high rate of evictions, we - that means the
Ministry - have now impressed on the department the utmost sense of
urgency, especially with regard to attaining the objectives of the Esta
legislation. Regarding the high rate of evictions, I will just say it’s of
grave concern.

The current effort the Department of Land Affairs is making is to look at
what the real challenges are with regard to strengthening existing
legislation. We can make many activities crimes, but it needs whole systems
to make criminalisation effective. It’s policing. In this case the police
have a huge load on them. It’s the magistrates. The law already says there
must be alternative accommodation.

There is automatic review, which is a very difficult thing that we created
by amending the legislation previously, but the effectiveness of the
support systems is lacking, because, you know, people can be evicted if you
just want to talk about being evicted. We’re worried about the result that
is being obtained at the moment, and this review is being done to identify
all the challenges in order to strengthen the existing mechanisms for,
especially, monitoring compliance and the system in this regard, and the
enforcement of legislation. That is what we must work on and it’s being
done.

The department and this Ministry, of which I am a small part, are committed
to ensuring compliance with the obligations in the Constitution, also. You
should go and read it with section 25 of the Constitution, the one about
property, but especially with subsections (6) and (9) of the property
clause, which actually says that we must – it’s in the Bill of Rights! –
ensure security for occupiers by affording them comprehensive protection if
they reside on land.

If the results – really, this review must be hurried up, especially that of
the Esta and related Land Tenure Act and others as well – of the legal
protection are inadequate we will come to Parliament to see if we have
suggestions to strengthen the legislation so that we can get better
practical compliance. Thank you, sir.

        Claim for farms submitted by Bahurutshe Land Claims Committee

  85. Mr A J L Moseki asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs:


      Whether the claim for farms that was submitted by the Bahurutshe Land
      Claims Committee on 15 December 1998 before the cut-off date has been
      attended to; if not, why not; if so, what progress has been made?
                                        C343E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much,
Chair. Hon Moseki, could I just say that it’s a pity the Minister of
Science and Technology is not here. We have difficulty these days to
pronounce and spell names correctly. Bohurutshe in the question is not
pronounced as Bohuruche.
Yes, I can answer that progress has been made. The claim was actually
lodged by Kgosi Godfrey Moilwa of Bahurutshe bagaMoilwa traditional
community. It is a big claim of 47 farms around Groot Marico, Zeerust. I
passed it on my way to the PEC meeting this weekend.

Evaluation was done for a farm called Willow Park 41 JO portion 2 and a
section 42D submission has been forwarded to the Chief Land Claims
Commissioner. There are still notices for farms - it is a very complicated
and big claim - Seekoei Valley, Weltevrede, Jagersfontein, Klippan,
Sondagspan and Ottoshoop are currently being prepared. We are finding that
some landowners are heavily disputing the land claims in this area. The
practical problem is to arrange site inspections, because all these sites
have to be inspected and there are graveyards and other remains that have
to be looked at and be identified.

Basically, the problem is that our traditional communities didn’t live on
surveyed and registered land and therefore it is very difficult to assist
the areas. These days, everything is measured out and you must decide that
this farm and that farm are included, but there are negotiations going on.

There is, for example, the Groot Marico Land Forum, which is under Agri
North West, and consists of mostly reasonable people. The commission, at
least, foresees that some cases will have to be referred to the Land Claims
Court in cases where the validity is contested. However, negotiations are
going on and this is a huge claim and it will eventually benefit about 14
000 households. I have seen one such a claim in the Limpopo and Mpumalanga
areas. It included fifty farms. It was in ten thick files, like these ring
files. It stood so high. That was one claim covering many farms. It is a
huge work and I am sure that the commission is doing its best.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I am not sure whether there will be
a need for a follow-up question. You seem to be more relaxed than all other
Ministers and Deputy Ministers who belong to the other House. Is there any
follow-up question?

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, the land claims seem to be
going at a very slow pace. Is it because many claimants are disputing or
they encounter people who are disputing their claims? As a result it is
dragging on. Would the Deputy Minister say most of the cases would
ultimately end in a Land Claims Court? If not, at what speed are we moving
at this point in time to have land delivered to the rightful owners?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, with due respect, the follow-up
question would be relevant if it is related to the question on the question
paper. The way I understood it - I don’t know, it may be that the sound
system is not good - he was asking a cross-cutting question, which is very
important that the Ministry must respond to. My understanding is that our
follow-up question should be specifically related to this, but I will leave
it up to you and the Ministry to respond to this.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chief Whip, I don’t have a
problem if the Deputy Minister wants to respond, but my reading is that it
is generic. The initial principal question was very, very focused. It was
referring to a particular community under specific circumstances and
history, but if the Deputy Minister wants to respond to the question,
general as it is, you are at liberty.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I will not give a
full response, but out of the respect that I have had for the Reverend, for
many years, I will just tell him that we can give the facts and we can come
to the select committee and give all the numbers. My impression is that it
is surely going better at the moment. It is speeding up. There is delivery,
though it is still not fast enough. I have been visiting some of these
provincial offices. There is great urgency. Some people almost work
themselves to death, but it is getting better. We can talk, but the facts
must be given to the select committee. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:55.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          MONDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Public Enterprises


          a) South African Airways Bill [B 35 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 29359 of
             3 November 2006.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
             Enterprises of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    This tabling replaces item 1 under “Tablings” on page 2558 of the
    Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 9 November 2006:

     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding Mutual
        Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Islamic
        Republic of Iran regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.


     c) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo regarding
        Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     d) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Democratic
        Republic of Congo regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme for 2005-
        2006.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni Water for the year ended
        30 June 2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2006.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast Water for the year
        ended 30 June 2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
        2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


1.    Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence on Employment of
   SANDF to the Kingdom of Lesotho, dated 3 November 2006:


     The Joint Standing Committee on Defence, having considered the letter
     from the President on the employment of the South African National
     Defence Force (SANDF) to the Kingdom of Lesotho, referred to the
     Committee, reports that it has concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Joint Constitutional Review Committee on Annual
   Constitutional Review Report 2006, dated 13 November 2006:
                  ANNUAL CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW REPORT 2006
                   COMMITTEE: JOINT CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW
                        CHAIRPERSON: DR E A SCHOEMAN

Section  45(1)  (c)  of   the   Constitution   provides   that   the   Joint
Constitutional  Review   Committee   (the   Committee)   must   review   the
Constitution at least once annually.

In giving effect to section 45(1) (c), the Committee placed several  adverts
in the media on 1 May 2006 which invited  members  of  the  public  to  make
submissions that propose amendments  to  the  Constitution.  This  year  the
Committee specifically encouraged the public  to  make  submissions  on  the
equality  clause  and   on   Chapter   9   State   Institutions   Supporting
Constitutional Democracy.

In total, 11 submissions were received from the public.

The Committee also received a submission from the  National  Assembly  Rules
Committee as well as the Free State Legislature.

The Committee requested the Parliamentary Legal Services Office to  consider
the various submissions that proposed amendments to the Constitution in  the
light of current constitutional jurisprudence.

Hereunder  are  brief  summaries  of  the  submissions  received   and   the
Committee’s views and recommendations thereon.

A: REFERRAL FROM THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY RULES COMMITTEE - THE LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION AS CONTAINED IN 57(2)(D) OF THE CONSTITUTION
The National Assembly Rules Committee requested the Committee to consider
the appropriateness of “the recognition of the leader of the largest
opposition party in the Assembly as the Leader of the Opposition” as
contained in section 57(2) (d) of the Constitution.

Recommendation

The committee deliberated this matter extensively and has communicated its
decision to the National Assembly Rules Committee for further
consideration.


B: REFERRAL FROM  THE  FREE  STATE  LEGISLATURE  -  SECTION  105(2)  OF  THE
CONSTITUTION RELATING TO THE NUMBER OF SEATS IN A PROVINCIAL LEGISLATURE

The  Free  State  Legislature  submitted  that   section   105(2)   of   the
Constitution be amended so  as  to  increase  the  size  of  the  respective
legislatures to inter alia allow them to conduct  more  efficient  oversight
and ensure public participation.

Recommendation
The Committee has written to all provincial legislatures inviting them to  a
meeting to be convened in the first term of 2007 to hear their views on  the
matter.

C: SUBMISSIONS FROM MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

1: SUBMISSIONS ON THE EQUALITY SECTION

1.1 Section 9(2)

It was submitted that whereas section  9(2)  of  the  Constitution  provides
that equality requires that legislative and other measures must be taken  to
protect or advance persons or categories of persons disadvantaged by  unfair
discrimination,  there  are  still  inequalities   in   the   provision   of
educational services between the Provinces as equality in education has  not
been progressively and equally achieved across all provinces.

The Committee was of the  view  that  the  petitioner  did  not  propose  an
amendment to the Constitution but was instead of the view that there was  an
infringement of the right to education (as contained  in  section  29)  read
together with the right to equality and as such the remedy in this  instance
is judicial rather than a constitutional amendment.

Recommendation
The Committee was of the  view  that  the  petitioner  did  not  propose  an
amendment to the Constitution.

1.2 Section 9(4)

It was submitted that section 9(4) of the Constitution  be  amended  whereas
section 9(4) stipulates that no person may  unfairly  discriminate  directly
or indirectly against anyone and that national legislation must  be  enacted
to prevent or  prohibit  unfair  discrimination,  “it  does  not  create  an
obligation on provinces to enact  legislation  that  prevents  or  prohibits
unfair discrimination”.

The Committee noted that in terms  of  item  23(1)  of  Schedule  6  to  the
Constitution, the national legislation envisaged in section 9(4) had  to  be
enacted within 3 years of the date on  which  the  final  Constitution  took
effect and that Parliament, in accordance  with  section  9(4)  has  already
enacted the Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act of 2000 (PEPUDA).

Furthermore, the Committee  was  also  of  the  view  that  the  legislation
referred to in section 9(4) is an area  of  exclusive  national  legislative
competence as it is not listed in Schedule 4 to the Constitution as an  area
of concurrent national and provincial legislative competence, nor is  it  an
area of exclusive provincial legislative competence in terms of Schedule 5.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that section 9(4) of  the  Constitution  be
amended as the legislation  envisaged  in  section  9(4)  has  already  been
enacted  and  its  scope  falls  within  an  area  of   exclusive   national
legislative competence.

1.3 Section 9

It was submitted that section 9 of the Constitution be  amended  as  “it  is
unfair to declare some forms of discrimination as fair”.

The Committee noted that the Constitution was based on  the  achievement  of
substantive equality and noted that  cases  such  as  Brink  v  Kitshoff  NO
1996(6)  BCLR  752  (CC),  emphasized  that  given  the  past  patterns   of
discrimination, the Constitution prescribes that  remedial  action  must  be
taken to achieve substantive equality.

Recommendation
The Committee does not recommend that  section  9  of  the  Constitution  be
amended so as remove provisions which allowed for “fair  discrimination”  as
to do so would prevent any remedial or restitutionary measures to  be  taken
to address past patterns of discrimination.




1.4 Section 214(2)


It was submitted that section 214(2) of  the  Constitution  be  amended  and
linked to the equality section to ensure  that  that  the  determination  of
each province’s equitable  share  of  the  budget  must  be  linked  to  the
equality provision to prevent unequal service delivery in the provinces.

The Committee noted that section 214 of the Constitution stipulates that  an
Act of Parliament must provide for the equitable division of revenue  raised
nationally among the national, provincial and local spheres  of  government,
the determination of each  province’s  equitable  share  of  the  provincial
share of that  revenue,  and  any  other  allocations  to  provinces,  local
government or municipalities from the national government’s  share  of  that
revenue, and any conditions on which those allocations may be made.

The Committee was of the view that the Constitution currently  sketches  the
broad outlines of the complex  intergovernmental  fiscal  system  which  the
three distinct but inter-related spheres of government must  adhere  to.  At
the same time the Constitution also contains an  extensive  Bill  of  Rights
which includes social  and  economic  rights  and  in  terms  of  which  the
intergovernmental fiscal system must ensure  cooperative  service  delivery.
Furthermore, the Constitution is founded on human dignity,  the  achievement
of equality and the advancement of human rights and freedoms and  the  state
must respect, protect promote and fulfill the rights in the Bill  of  Rights
(section 1(a) and section 7). Thus notwithstanding that an  order  of  court
will have fiscal or intergovernmental implications, where  rights  contained
in  the  Bill  of  Rights  are  infringed,  the  Committee  noted  that  the
Constitution permits a court to order an appropriate remedy.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend the amendment of section 214(2) as such  an
amendment is superfluous.

1.5 Section 100


It was submitted that in the light of  the  unequal  provision  of  services
between the provinces, that section 100(1) of the  Constitution  be  amended
to ensure that where a province cannot or  does  not  fulfill  an  executive
obligation in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or  legislation,  the  national
executive must intervene to ensure equality.


The Committee noted that  the  proposed  amendment  would  impact  upon  the
current system of co-operative  government  as  provided  for  in  terms  of
Chapter  3  of  the  Constitution  which  recognises  that   government   is
constituted as  national,  provincial  and  local  spheres  that  that  such
spheres are distinctive, interdependent and interrelated. The Committee  was
of the view that section 100 is an exceptional measure and  that  the  right
to intervene is inter alia subject to the provisions of  41(1)(e),  (f)  and
(g) which require all levels of government  to  respect  the  constitutional
status, institutions, powers  and  functions  of  government  in  the  other
spheres, not assume any power or function except those conferred on them  in
terms of the Constitution and to exercise their powers and  functions  in  a
manner  that  does  not  encroach  on  the   geographical,   functional   or
institutional integrity of government in another sphere.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment to section  100(1)  as
it would significantly alter the system of co-portative government  and  the
independence of provincial spheres of government as it currently exists.

1.6 Schedule 4 of the Constitution

It was submitted that Schedule 4 to the Constitution “be amended  so  as  to
provide a legal space for intervention by national  departments  with  clear
warnings to provinces on areas where their competence  may  be  “temporarily
revoked” so as to ensure equality in the provinces.

The Committee noted that Schedule 4 lists areas of concurrent  national  and
provincial legislative authority and  does  not  pertain  to  interventions.
Furthermore, as section 100 already  provides  for  interventions,  such  an
amendment will be superfluous.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment to Schedule 4  to  the
Constitution as section 100 already provides for interventions.

2. SUBMISSIONS ON CHAPTER 9: STATE  INSTITUTIONS  SUPPORTING  CONSTITUTIONAL
DEMOCRACY (CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS)

2.1 GENERAL SUBMISSIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS
2.1.1 Submission on the number  of  commissioners  appointed  to  Chapter  9
      Institutions

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended  as  there  are  too  many
Commissioners appointed to each of the Chapter 9 Commissions.

The Committee noted that the Constitution does not  specify  the  number  of
Commissioners that must be appointed to each Commission as  the  composition
of each Commission is governed by the relevant national legislation.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended so  as  to
limit the number of commissioners appointed  to  each  commission  as  these
numbers are already defined in national legislation.

The Committee was of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad  hoc
Committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.

Furthermore as the matter pertained to national  legislation  the  Committee
was also of the view that  the  submission  be  referred  to  the  Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development.


2.1.2 Submission on the qualification and performance of Commissioners


It  was  submitted  that  the  Constitution  be  amended   to   define   the
requirements and qualifications of Commissioners and yardsticks  with  which
to measure their performance.
The Committee noted that section 193 of the Constitution currently  requires
that the Public Protector,  the  Auditor-General  and  the  members  of  any
Commission established in terms of Chapter 9 must inter  alia  be  “fit  and
proper persons to hold the particular  office”  and  must  comply  with  any
other requirements prescribed by national legislation. Furthermore,  section
194 provides that Commissioners may only  be  removed  from  office  on  the
grounds of misconduct, incompetence or incapacity,  on  a  finding  to  that
effect by committee  of  the  National  Assembly  and  the  adoption  of  an
Assembly resolution calling for that person’s removal. The  Committee  noted
that  these  measures  were  designed  to  protect   the   independence   of
commissioners and the Chapter 9 Institutions.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the  Constitution  be  amended  as  it
currently defines the requirements and qualifications  of  Commissioners  as
well as the  grounds  for  their  removal  should  they  not  perform  their
functions.

The Committee was also of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad
hoc Committee on the Review of State Institutions Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy to consider.


2.1.3 Merging Chapter 9 Institutions under a national government  department
      to make them more accountable


It was submitted the Constitution be amended to make Chapter 9  Institutions
more  accountable  by  merging  them  and  placing  them  under  a  national
government department.

The Committee  noted  that  section  181(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the institutions listed  in  Chapter  9  of  the  Constitution
“strengthen constitutional  democracy”  and  that  these  institutions  “are
independent, and subject only to the Constitution  and  the  law,  and  they
must be impartial and exercise their  powers  and  perform  their  functions
without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice”.  Furthermore  while  section  181(3)
provides  that  other  organs  of  state,  through  legislative  and   other
measures,  must  assist  and  protect  these  institutions  to  ensure   the
independence,   impartiality,   dignity   and   effectiveness    of    these
institutions, section 181(4) provides that no person or organ of  state  may
interfere with the functioning of these institutions.

The Committee was of the view  that  the  independence  of  Chapter  9  were
essential so that they could fulfill their roles as Institutions  Supporting
Constitutional Democracy.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended so  as  to
place Chapter 9 Institutions under the control of  a  government  department
as this would significantly diminish their  independence,  impartiality  and
effectiveness as currently provided for in the Constitution.

The Committee was of the view that the submission be  sent  to  the  ad  hoc
Committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.

2.1.4 Section 193(4) - selection of Commissioners and members of  Chapter  9
      Institutions

It was submitted that section 193 of the Constitution be amended to  provide
that  instead  of  Parliament  short-listing,  interviewing  and  nominating
members of Chapter 9 Institutions, that an  external  panel  or  independent
committee similar to the Judicial  Services  Commission  be  constituted  to
deal with the selection of all members.

 The Committee noted that currently the appointment  provisions  in  section
193 gives effect to  section  181(2)  which  provides  that  the  Chapter  9
Institutions are independent, subject only to the Constitution and the  law,
and “must be impartial, and must exercise their  powers  and  perform  their
functions without fear, favour or prejudice”. The Committee was also of  the
view that it was a matter of policy whether  members  are  appointed  by  an
external panel or independent committee similar  to  the  Judicial  Services
Commission or in terms of section 193, provided that they are  appointed  in
a manner consistent with section 181.

Recommendations:

The Committee decided to refer the above submission to the ad hoc  Committee
on the Review of State Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy  for
further consideration.

2.1.5 Chapter 9 Institutions need to  be  more  accessible  to  the  public,
      especially the uneducated and the poor

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to ensure that  Chapter  9
Institutions are more accessible to the public,  especially  the  uneducated
and the poor.


The  Committee  noted  that  whereas  section  182(4)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the Public Protector “must be accessible to  all  persons  and
communities there are no specific provisions that require  other  Chapter  9
Institutions to be accessible to the public, especially those  sectors  that
remain marginalized.

Recommendation

The Committee was of the view that while there was merit in the  submission,
it could be more comprehensively dealt with by the ad hoc committee  on  the
Review of State Institutions Supporting Constitutional Democracy.

2.1.6 Members of Chapter 9 Institutions be appointed purely on merit

It was submitted that irrespective of any other criterion, that  members  of
Chapter 9 Institutions must be appointed “purely on the basis of merit”.

The Committee noted that section 193 of  the  Constitution  stipulates  that
the Public Protector, the Auditor-General and the members of any  Commission
established in terms of Chapter  9  must  inter  alia  be  “fit  and  proper
persons to hold the particular  office”  and  must  comply  with  any  other
additional requirements prescribed by  national  legislation.  In  addition,
section 193(3) provides  that  the  Auditor-General  must  have  specialized
knowledge  of,  or  experience  in  auditing,  state  finances  and   public
administration.

The Committee also noted that section 193(2) also requires that the  members
of  Chapter  9  Commissions  must  broadly  reflect  the  race  and   gender
composition of South Africa. The Committee was of the view that while it  is
a matter of policy whether or not to  amend  the  above  provision,  it  was
necessary  that  the  Commissions  broadly  reflect  the  race  and   gender
composition of South Africa as this is essential to ensure  that  they  have
legitimacy in the community at large.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution  be  amended  in  the
manner suggested as it is of the view that  the  Constitution  and  national
legislation  adequately  provided  for  the  appointment  of   appropriately
skilled and suitable commissioners.

2.1.7 Measures to ensure the impartiality of Chapter 9 Institutions need  to
      be included in the Constitution

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to provide  for  the
impartiality of Chapter 9 Institutions.

The Committee  noted  that  section  181(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Constitution
provides that the institutions listed  in  Chapter  9  of  the  Constitution
“strengthen constitutional  democracy”  and  that  these  institutions  “are
independent, and subject only to the Constitution  and  the  law,  and  they
must be impartial and exercise their  powers  and  perform  their  functions
without fear, favour or prejudice”.  Furthermore that  the  independence  of
these institutions are additionally strengthened and  protected  by  section
181(3), which provides that other organs of state, through  legislative  and
other measures, must assist and protect these  institutions  to  ensure  the
independence,   impartiality,   dignity   and   effectiveness    of    these
institutions.  Furthermore section 181(4) provides that no person  or  organ
of state may interfere with the functioning of these institutions.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it was of the  view
that the Constitution  adequately  provides  for  the  impartiality  of  the
Chapter 9 Institutions.

2.1.8 The public needs to be informed on an ongoing basis  about  Chapter  9
      Institutions, their functions and how to contact them

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended  to  stipulate  that  “the
public  needs  to  be  informed  on  an  ongoing  basis  about   Chapter   9
Institutions, their functions and how to contact them”.

The Committee was of the view that such detail is usually  not  included  in
the Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.

Recommendation

The Committee did not support the proposed amendment as it was of  the  view
that such detail should not be included in the Constitution.

The Committee recommended  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration.

2.2   SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS

2.2.1 SUBMISSIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY
2.2.1.1     Section 187(2) - empowering the Commission  on  Gender  Equality
        to ensure appropriate redress where gender discrimination occurred

It was submitted that section 187(2)  of  the  Constitution  be  amended  to
empower the Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)  to  take  steps  to  secure
appropriate redress in cases of gender discrimination in  a  similar  manner
that section 184(2)(b) empowers the South African  Human  Rights  Commission
(SAHRC) to take steps to secure appropriate redress where human rights  have
been violated.

The Committee noted that any unfair discrimination on the  basis  of  gender
would also constitute a human rights violation and as such the  SAHRC  would
have the requisite jurisdiction to seek appropriate redress on behalf  of  a
complainant.

Recommendation

The Committee does  not  recommend  that  the  Constitution  be  amended  to
provide that the (CGE) with the power to take steps  to  secure  appropriate
redress in cases of gender discrimination  as  the  SAHRC  already  has  the
power to take such steps where human rights have been violated.


2.2.2 SUBMISSIONS ON THE PUBLIC PROTECTOR



2.2.2.1     Section 182 to be amended  to  allow  the  Public  Protector  to
       investigate violations in the private sector


It was submitted that section 182 of the Constitution be amended  so  as  to
enable the Public Protector to investigate “people and violations  committed
in the private sector”.
The Committee noted that the Public Protector is by definition a high  level
official  whose  function  is  to  strengthen  and  support   constitutional
democracy and not to adjudicate or investigate violations of the  rights  of
the general public in all matters.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  expand
the functions of the Public Protector to  generally  investigate  violations
committed in the private sector.

2.2.2.2     Term of office of the Public Protector be reduced to five years


It was submitted that the term of  the  Public  Protector  be  reduced  from
seven years to five years to reduce the possibility of the  abuse  of  power
by the Public Protector

The Committee noted that that in Ex parte Chairperson of the  Constitutional
Assembly: In re Certification of the Constitution of the Republic  of  South
Africa, 1996 (10) BCLR 1253 (CC), the Constitutional Court  did  not  regard
the seven year term of the Public Protector as problematic. Furthermore  the
Committee was of the view that given that the Public Protector  only  served
1 term it did not regard the seven year term as problematic

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  reduce
the term of the Public Protector to five years as the  seven  year  term  is
reasonable.

2.2.2.3     The Public Protector be empowered to review court decisions

It was submitted that the powers of the  Public  Protector  be  extended  to
enable the Public Protector to review court decisions

The  Committee  noted  that  section  182(3)  stipulates  that  the   Public
Protector may not investigate court decisions and that  this  provision  was
consistent with section 165 of the Constitution  which  vests  the  judicial
authority of the Republic in the courts and provides  that  the  courts  are
independent, subject only to the Constitution and the law, which  they  must
apply impartially  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice.  Furthermore,  the
Committee also noted that section 165(3) stipulates that no person or  organ
of state may interfere with the functioning of the courts.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution be amended to  enable
the Public Protector to  review  decisions  of  the  courts  as  this  would
conflict with  section  165  and  it  would  have  a  major  impact  on  the
impartiality of the courts and the  separation  of  powers  implied  in  our
Constitution.

2.2.2.4     The Public Protector must report  to  Parliament  regularly  and
       make recommendations


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to provide that  the
Public Protector “report to Parliament regularly and  make  recommendations”
on his or her findings.

The Committee  noted  that  section  182(5)  provides  that  all  Chapter  9
Institutions are accountable to the National Assembly  and  must  report  on
their activities and the performance of their functions to the  Assembly  at
least once a year. Section 182 also provides that the Public  Protector  has
the power to investigate any conduct in state affairs  that  is  alleged  or
suspected to be improper or to result in any impropriety  or  prejudice,  to
report on that conduct and to take appropriate remedial action.

The Committee was of the view that while the Constitution does  not  specify
the remedial action that must  be  taken,  section  6(4)(c)  of  the  Public
Protector Act inter alia provides that at a time prior to, during  or  after
an investigation, if the Public Protector is of the opinion that  the  facts
disclose the commission of an offence by any person, he  or  she  may  bring
the matter to  the  notice  of  the  authority  charged  with  prosecutions.
Furthermore he or she may make an appropriate recommendation  regarding  the
redress of the prejudice resulting therefrom or make any  other  appropriate
recommendation he or she deems expedient to  the  affected  public  body  or
authority.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it is of the view that  the  suggested  amendment  will  not  confer  any
additional benefits or protection nor will it  enhance  the  functioning  of
the Public Protector.

2.2.2.5     The Public Protector must devise  mechanisms  to  shorten  legal
           processes

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
Public Protector “must devise mechanisms to shorten legal processes”.

The Committee noted that while section 182(3) does  not  permit  the  Public
Protector  to  investigate  court  decisions,  the  Public   Protector   may
investigate complaints relating to delays in judicial decision-making.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it was of  the  view  that  the  role  of  the  Public  Protector  is  to
investigate conduct in state affairs or in the public administration in  any
sphere of government that is alleged or suspected to be improper  to  result
in any impropriety or prejudice and not to regulate judicial processes.


2.2.3 SUBMISSIONS ON THE SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (SAHRC)


2.2.3.1     Expanding the powers of the SAHRC to enter any  institution  and
       peruse all documents in so far as human rights are concerned

It was submitted  that the SAHRC be empowered to enter  any  institution  to
peruse all documents, including the policies of the institution  in  so  far
as human rights are concerned.

The Committee noted  that  section  184(2)  of  the  Constitution  currently
provides that the Commission  has  the  powers,  as  regulated  by  national
legislation, necessary to perform its  functions,  including  the  power  to
investigate and report on the observance of  human  rights,  take  steps  to
secure appropriate redress where human rights  have  been  violated  and  to
educate the public on human rights issues.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  of  the  Constitution
as national legislation already empowers the SAHRC and as such there was  no
need to amend the Constitution in the manner suggested.

The Committee was however also of the view that the matter  be  referred  to
the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development  and  the
ad  hoc  Committee  on  the  Review   of   State   Institutions   Supporting
Constitutional Democracy for further consideration.

2.2.3.2     The SAHRC must report regularly to  Parliament  with  regard  to
       progress in providing basic services such as health,  housing,  water
       and sanitation

It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  require  the
SAHRC  to  report  regularly  to  Parliament  with  regard  to  progress  in
providing basic services such as health, housing, water and sanitation.

The Committee noted that section 184(3) currently provides  that  each  year
the SAHRC  must  require  relevant  organs  of  state  to  provide  it  with
information on the measures they have taken towards the realization  of  the
rights in the Bill of Rights concerning housing, health care,  food,  water,
social security, education and the environment. In addition, section  181(5)
stipulates that the SAHRC is accountable to the National Assembly  and  must
report on their activities and the performance of  their  functions  to  the
Assembly at least once a year.

Recommendation
The Committee was of the view whether  or  not  the  SAHRC  be  required  to
report to Parliament on  the  measures  taken  in  respect  of  housing  and
sanitation as a matter of policy.

The Committee  recommends  that  the  matter  be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy.

2.2.3.3     The SAHRC to promote  respect  for  all  peoples  regardless  of
       their religious conviction or their lack thereof

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to require  the  SAHRC  to
promote respect for all peoples regardless of their religious conviction  or
their lack thereof.

The Committee noted that section 184(1) of  the  Constitution,  inter  alia,
stipulates that the SAHRC must  promote  respect  for  human  rights  and  a
culture of human rights as well as promote the protection,  development  and
attainment of human rights. The Committee was of the view  that  this  would
include the promotion  of  the  rights  contained  in  section  15(1)  which
provides that everyone has the right to  freedom  of  conscience,  religion,
thought, belief and opinion.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as it is of the view that the Constitution already provides that  the  SAHRC
must promote the rights contained in the Bill of Rights and  that  there  is
thus no need to specifically promote the rights contained in section 15.


2.2.3.4     Prisoners should loose their right to vote


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to provide that the  SAHRC
must ensure that prisoners must loose their right to vote.

The Committee was of the view that the  rights  of  prisoners  to  vote  are
unrelated to the functioning of the SAHRC except in so  far  as  a  prisoner
who is not allowed to vote may lodge a complaint with the SAHRC.

The Committee noted that the issue of prisoners’ rights to vote  was  before
the Constitutional Court in August and Another v  Electoral  Commission  and
Others 1999 (3) SA 1 (CC), and Minister of Home Affairs v NICRO  and  Others
2004 (5) BCLR 445 (CC). In the latter case  it  was  noted  that  given  the
history of disenfranchisement in South African, the right to  vote  occupies
a special place in our democracy and that any limitation of this right  must
be supported by clear and convincing reasons. The court  indicated  that  if
the Government sought to disfranchise a  group  of  its  citizens,  it  must
place sufficient information before the  court  demonstrating  what  purpose
the disenfranchisement is intended to serve.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment  to  the  Constitution
as the petitioners did not demonstrate or motivate why they are of the  view
that prisoners may not vote. The Committee  also  noted  that  such  a  view
conflicts with the current jurisprudence  of  the  Constitutional  Court  on
prisoners’ right to vote.



2.2.3.5     The SAHRC to hold a referendum on the death penalty


It was submitted that the SAHRC should hold  a  referendum  on  whether  the
death penalty should be reinstated.

The Committee was of the view the submission did not  propose  an  amendment
to the Constitution. Furthermore it noted that neither the Constitution  nor
legislation empowers the SAHRC to hold such a referendum.

The Committee noted  the  judgment  of  the  Constitutional  Court  in  S  v
Makwanyane and Another 1995 (3) SA 391 (CC), in which it was held  that  the
death  penalty  was  unconstitutional  as  it  inter   alia   violated   the
fundamental right not to be subject to cruel, inhuman or degrading  form  of
punishment, the right to dignity and the right to life as protected  in  the
Bill of Rights. The Committee also agreed with the  view  of  the  Court  in
respect of public opinion on the death penalty in terms of which  the  Court
held that “[i]f public opinion were to be decisive there would  be  no  need
for constitutional adjudication. The protection  of  rights  could  then  be
left to Parliament, which has a mandate from the public, and  is  answerable
to the public for the way its mandate is exercised,  but  this  would  be  a
return to parliamentary sovereignty, and a retreat from the new legal  order
established by the 1993 Constitution. By the same token  the  issue  of  the
constitutionality of capital punishment cannot be referred to a  referendum,
in which a majority view would prevail over the wishes of any minority.  The
very reason for establishing the new legal order, and for vesting the  power
of judicial review of all legislation in the  courts,  was  to  protect  the
rights of minorities and others who cannot protect their  rights  adequately
through the democratic  process.  Those  who  are  entitled  to  claim  this
protection include the  social  outcasts  and  marginalized  people  of  our
society. It is only if there is a willingness to protect the worst  and  the
weakest amongst us, that all of us can be secure that our  own  rights  will
be protected” (paragraph 88).

The Committee also noted that the reinstatement of the death  penalty  would
conflict with South Africa’s international  law  obligations  as  Parliament
ratified the Second Optional  Protocol  to  the  International  Covenant  on
Civil and Political Rights which inter alia provides that no one within  the
its jurisdiction shall be executed and that the state  is  obliged  to  take
all necessary measures to abolish the death penalty.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposal as the Court in Makwanyane  held
that the death penalty was, inter alia, a violation of the right not  to  be
subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading forms of  punishment  the  freedom,
the right to dignity and the right to life. The Committee was  also  of  the
view that the reinstatement of the death penalty would  in  all  probability
require  amendments  to  fundamental  provisions  of  the  Bill  of   Rights
including sections 9, 10 and 12, dealing with equality,  human  dignity  and
freedom and security of the person  respectively  and  that  it  would  also
conflict with South Africa’s international law obligations.


2.2.3.6     The SAHRC should impose heavier sentences on offenders



It  was  submitted  that  the  SAHRC  should  impose  heavier  sentences  on
convicted offenders.

Recommendation

The  Committee  was  of  the  view  that  no  specific  amendment   to   the
Constitution was proposed. It also noted that the  imposition  of  sentences
is not a matter to be dealt with by the SAHRC  as  it  is  either  a  matter
regulated by Parliament in terms of legislation or by  judges  in  terms  of
the common law.

2.2.4 SUBMISSIONS ON THE COMMISSION FOR THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF  THE
      RIGHTS OF CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS AND LINGUISTIC COMMUNITIES (CPPRCRLC)


2.2.4.1     The powers of the Commission be extended to enable it to  put  a
       stop to discrimination  on  the  basis  of  cultural,  religious  and
       linguistic communities


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to  empower  the  CPPRCRLC
to put a stop to discrimination against cultural, religious  and  linguistic
communities.

The Committee noted that in terms of section  185(1)  of  the  Constitution,
the primary objects of the CPPRCRLC are to promote respect  for  the  rights
of cultural, religious and linguistic communities, to  promote  and  develop
peace,  friendship  and  national  unity  among  cultural,   religious   and
linguistic communities on the  basis  of  equality,  non-discrimination  and
free association and  to  recommend  the  establishment  or  recognition  in
accordance with national legislation, of a  cultural  or  other  council  or
councils for a community or communities in South  Africa  and  that  section
185(2) further provides that the Commission has the power, as  regulated  by
national legislation, necessary to achieve its  primary  objects,  including
the power to monitor,  investigate,  research,  educate,  lobby  advise  and
report  on  issues  concerning  the  rights  of  cultural,   religious   and
linguistic communities.


The Committee was of the view that while section  185(2)  does  not  empower
the CPPRCRLC to itself investigate violations of rights, it may  report  any
matter that  falls  within  its  powers  and  functions  to  the  SAHRC  for
investigation.


Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend that the Constitution  be  amended  as  the
SAHRC already has the power to investigate any violation of human rights.

2.2.4.2     The CPPRCRLC needs to be more visible and  the  public  must  be
       informed about the rights of minorities

It was submitted that  the  Constitution  be  amended  to  ensure  that  the
CPPRCRLC becomes more visible and that it must inform the public  about  the
rights of minorities.

The Committee noted  that  such  detail  is  not  usually  included  in  the
Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that such detail should be contained in  legislation  or  policy  documents,
rather than the Constitution.

The Committee also recommends that the matter be  referred  to  the  ad  hoc
committee on the Review  of  State  Institutions  Supporting  Constitutional
Democracy for further consideration
2.2.5 SUBMISSIONS ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL (AG)

2.2.5.1      The  Auditor-General  must  be  empowered  to  act  immediately
       against  perpetrators  of  fraud  and   not   just   to   report   on
       irregularities


It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  empower  the
Auditor-General (AG) to act immediately against perpetrators  of  fraud  and
not just to report on irregularities.


The Committee noted that section 188(1) makes it clear that the function  of
the AG is to audit and report on  the  accounts,  financial  statements  and
financial management of  all  state  departments  and  administrations,  all
municipalities and any other institution or accounting  entity  so  required
by national or provincial legislation and that in terms  of  section  188(2)
the AG may also audit other state institutions that  receive  public  monies
for a public purpose.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as  in  its  view  the
task of the AG is to report on financial irregularities and  report  thereon
to the relevant authorities and thereafter it is the function of  the  South
African Police Services and the National Prosecuting  Authority  to  act  on
such information.

2.2.5.2     The AG must  make  concrete  and  practical  recommendations  to
           Parliament

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended to  provide  that  the  AG
must make concrete recommendations to Parliament.
The  Committee  noted  that  section  188(3)  of  the  Constitution  already
currently provides that the AG must submit audit reports to any  legislature
that has a direct interest in the audit.

Recommendation

The Committee is of the view that as  188(3)  of  the  Constitution  already
provides that the AG must submit audit reports to any legislature  that  has
a direct interest in the audit, the amendment suggested is superfluous.

2.2.6 SUBMISSIONS ON THE ELECTORAL COMMISSIONS

2.2.6.1      The  Electoral  Commission  must  make  more  voting   stations
       available, prescribe more stringent regulations with  regard  to  the
       registering of political parties and become more visible

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
Electoral Commission make more voting  stations  available,  prescribe  more
stringent regulations with regard to the registering  of  political  parties
and become more visible.


The Committee was of the view that such detail is not  usually  included  in
the Constitution itself, but rather in legislation or policy documents.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend amending the Constitution to  provide  that
the Electoral Commission make  more  voting  stations  available,  prescribe
more stringent regulations with  regard  to  the  registering  of  political
parties and become more visible as it  is  of  the  view  that  such  detail
should not be included in the Constitution.

2.2.7 SUBMISSIONS ON THE INDEPENDENT AUTHORITY TO REGULATE BROADCASTING


2.2.7.1     The IBA to promote locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a
       cheaper and shorter process to apply for a  broadcasting  licence  to
       benefit smaller and poorer communities


It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so as to ensure  that  the
IBA must promote locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a  cheaper  and
shorter process to apply for a broadcasting license to benefit  smaller  and
poorer communities.


The Committee noted that section  192  provides  that  national  legislation
must establish an independent authority  to  regulate  broadcasting  in  the
public interest and to ensure fairness and  a  diversity  of  views  broadly
representing  South  African  society  and  as  such  the  drafters  of  the
Constitution did not specify the functions of the IBA.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend amending the Constitution  to  ensure  that
the IBA promote  locally  produced  programmes  and  design  a  cheaper  and
shorter process to apply for a broadcasting license as such  details  should
not be included in the Constitution.
   3. OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON CHAPTER 9 INSTITUTIONS

   1. Creation of a Chapter 9  Institution  to  promote  and  safeguard  the
      rights of children

It was submitted that that  a  new  Chapter  9  Institution  be  created  to
promote and safeguard the rights of children.

The Committee noted that section 28  of  the  Bill  of  Rights  specifically
protects the rights of children and  that  the  inclusion  in  the  Bill  of
Rights of a special section on the rights of  the  child  was  an  important
development  for  South  African  children  as  they  are  among  the   most
vulnerable members of society.

The Committee was of the view that Chapter 9 Institutions  were  established
to provide meaningful support for the system  of  constitutional  democracy,
open government and good governance and as such it would not be  appropriate
to locate an institution safeguarding the rights of children  in  Chapter  9
of the Constitution.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that it would not be appropriate for  such  a  body  to  be  included  as  a
Chapter 9 Institution.

3.    THER PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION

3.1   Amendment of section 23(2)(c)
It was submitted that section 23(2)(c) of the Constitution be amended so  as
to list essential services and prevent  such  employees  from  embarking  on
industrial action.

The Committee noted that section 213 of the Labour  Relations  Act  of  1995
already defined essential services and regulated such  employees’  right  to
strike.

Recommendation

The Committee does not recommend the amendment of section 23(2)(c) as it  is
of the view that the proposal is captured in various sections of the  Labour
Relations Act.

3.2   The President to be directly elected

It was submitted that the Constitution be amended so that the  President  is
directly elected by the people rather than the National Assembly.

The Committee noted that  it  was  possible  for  Parliament  to  amend  the
electoral  system  provided  that  it  did  so  in   accordance   with   the
Constitution, the Committee  was  of  the  view  that  proposal  was  a  far
reaching one  which  would  change  our  current  system  of  elections  and
parliamentary democracy in general.

Recommendation

The Committee was  of  the  view  that  the  desirability  of  amending  the
electoral system was a far reaching policy consideration that would  require
more research and discussion before the Committee can consider the matter.

3.3   Floor-crossing

It was  submitted  that  floor-crossing  is  a  feature  of  many  so-called
“established” and “developing” democracies and as  such  was  unsuitable  to
South Africa currently.

The Committee noted the judgment  of  the  Constitutional  Court  in  UDM  v
President of the RSA and Others (1) [2002 (11) BCLR  1179  (CC)  which  held
that the that floor-crossing  provisions  were  not  inconsistent  with  the
founding values set out in section 1 of the Constitution,  with  multi-party
democracy, or with proportional representation.

Recommendation

The Committee noted that the matter was already before Parliament  in  terms
of a private member’s legislative proposal which has been  referred  to  the
Standing Committee on Private Members’  Legislative  Proposals  and  Special
Petitions by the Speaker. As such the Committee was of the view that it  was
not feasible to engage in what would amount to a parallel process.


3.4   Free quality mother tongue education


It was submitted that the Constitution be  amended  so  as  to  provide  for
“free quality mother tongue education”.
The Committee noted that section 29(2) of the Bill of Rights  provides  that
everyone has the right to receive education  in  the  official  language  or
languages of their choice in  public  educational  institutions  where  that
kind education is reasonably practicable. In order to ensure  the  effective
access to, and implementation of this right, the  state  must  consider  all
reasonable alternatives including single  medium  institutions  taking  into
account equity, practicability, and the need to redress the results of  past
racially discriminatory laws and practices.

As such the Committee was of the view that  the  Constitution  provides  for
the provision of mother tongue education at  state  cost  in  terms  of  the
guidelines set above.

Recommendation

The Committee does not support the proposed amendment as it is of  the  view
that the Constitution adequately provides for reasonable  access  to  mother
tongue education at state cost.

D. Other submissions that did not propose amendments to the Constitution

The Committee received a submission from the SAHRC which  commented  on  the
progress made in respect of persons with disabilities. While the  SAHRC  did
not propose any amendments to the  Constitution,  the  submission  indicated
that state  departments  were  not  giving  effect  to  the  rights  of  the
disabled. As such the Committee referred the  submission  to  the  Portfolio
Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development.

The Committee also  received  a  submission  from  the  CGE  which  proposed
amendments to the Commission on Gender  Equality  Act,  the  Public  Finance
Management Act and the Promotion of Equality and the  Prevention  of  Unfair
Discrimination Act. As these submissions  related  to  national  legislation
and not the Constitution, the  Committee  referred  the  submission  to  the
Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice   and   Constitutional   Development   for
consideration.

In addition the Committee also received submissions from the public which
    • complained about the administration of Chapter 9 Institutions;
    • alleged that there was unfairness in the justice system;
    • and alleged that it is  unfair  that  the  state  observes  Christian
      public holidays such as Easter.

Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance


          a) Aansuiweringsbegrotingswetsontwerp [W 32 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – art 77)


              This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
              Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 77).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)     Bill passed by National Assembly on 14 November 2006 and
        submitted for concurrence:


          a) Civil Union Bill [B 26B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


    (2)     Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for
        concurrence on 14 November 2006:


        (a)      Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30B – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


           The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour and
             Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

          a) Instrument for the Amendment of the Constitution of the
             International Labour Organisation (ILO), tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Instrument for the Amendment of
             the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation
             (ILO).

    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
             Mozambique, the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
             Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
             Commission, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Republic of
             Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of South
             Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the
             Limpopo.

3.    Report on Provincial Week

DRAFT REPORT OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES  ON  THE  PROVINCIAL  WEEK
VISIT BY PERMANENT DELEGATES TO PROVINCES

1.    Background

   Provincial Week was established after a workshop was held  prior  to  the
   official launch of the NCOP in December 1996, where  all  delegates  from
   the country’s provinces provided  their  perspectives  of  the  country’s
   newly established House of Parliament.

   The NCOP’s Provincial Week, is  one  of  the  mechanisms  established  to
   solicit provincial interest and ensure  that  provincial  delegates  keep
   abreast with developments, as well as  the  challenges  that  are  facing
   their province.


   The provincial week took place on 14-18 August 2006. During  this  period
   permanent delegates went to their respective provinces where they visited
   various sites and projects and interacted with political roleplayers. The
   objectives of the Provincial Week were as follows:


      - To interact with the provinces and report back on their  activities
        in the NCOP
      - To provide a forum  for  the  exchange  and  sharing  of  ideas  on
        progress made on service delivery
      - To meet  with  the  Premiers,  MEC’s  and  Departments,  Provincial
        Legislatures and their Speakers, Chief Whips  and  Chairpersons  of
        Committees and other stakeholders  such  as  the  local  government
        leaders including SALGA
      - To undertake an oversight visit to communities in order  to  ensure
        that they get information on the needs and challenges of the people
      - To visit  projects  that  are  implemented  by  both  national  and
        provincial governments in their provinces and the local people.


   The delegations consisted of the following people:


   Eastern Cape
   Ms B N Dlulane
   Ms D Qikana
   Mr D Mkhono
   Mr M Robertson


   Free State
   Mr N Van Rooyen
   Mr T Setona
   Mr T Ralane
   Ms E S Mabe
   Dr F Van Heerden


   Gauteng
   Ms N F Mazibuko
   Ms M N Madlala
   Mr S Shiceka
   Mr E M Sogoni
   Mr M A Mzizi
   Ms C Chen
   KwaZulu-Natal
   Ms M Oliphant
   Mr Z C Ntuli
   Mr D Gamede
   Ms A Mchunu
   Ms J N Vilakazi


   Limpopo
   Mr M J Mahlangu
   Ms H F Matlanyane
    Mr M Sibiya
   Mr O M Thetjeng
   Mr D J Botha


   Mpumalanga
   Ms F Nyanda
   Mr V V Windvoël
   Ms P Themba
   Mr BJ Mkhaliphi
   Mr BJ Tolo
   Mr W Watson

   North West
   Mr Z Kolweni
   Ms J Masilo
   Mr P Moatshe
   Mr L Moseki
   Mr J Tlhagale


   Northern Cape
   Mr C Goeieman
   Mr R J Tau
   Mr L Fielding


   Western Cape
   Mr N Hendricks
   Ms D Robinson
   Mr F Adams
   Mr N Mack
   Ms N D Ntwanambi

2.    Visit to the Eastern Cape Province

The delegation was invited to attend the Cabinet Lekgotla held on the  13  –
15 August 2006 in Wild Coast Sun in Wild Coast  which  constituted  part  of
the objective of the visit.

The purpose of the Lekgotla was  to  get  the  report  from  the  Provincial
Clusters  namely;  Governance  and  Administration,  Economic   growth   and
Infrastructure and Social  Needs,  utilisation  of  Institutions  of  Higher
Learning in the Province and progress made in the delivery  of  services  by
Municipalities

A.    Report of the Governance and Administration Cluster

Academics  from  all  the  surrounding  High  Learning   Institutions   made
presentations on their role and expectations. These institutions  form  part
of government because  they  use  public  funds  and  they  should  be  held
accountable for their actions in terms  of  their  curriculum  to  learners.
The vision  and  mission  of  the  institutions  is  to  develop  democratic
institutions.

Development and involvement in building the country

Development could be done by  developing  a  relevant  research  base  which
would help in capacitating learners.  The academics saw the need  to  assist
poor students who could not  pay  the  fees.  It  was  also  said  that  the
contribution  of  the  academics  to  the  society  could  be  developed  by
consolidating skills as  they  are  allocated  strategically  to  build  the
education sector.  Other factors  that  were  discussed  were  the  role  of
research entities in universities and rural development.


Challenges faced by Institutions of Higher Learning


    • Redefining of the rural concept
    • Absence of rural health policy units
    • Policy dialogue with government entities need to be enhanced
    • Knowledge of management policies to capacitate municipalities for them
      to be able to execute their duties/responsibilities.


Concerns raised by delegates to academics


These concerns were on how the following could be enhanced:
    • Visible actions to resolve the capacity building problem
    • Lack of illiteracy alleviation by South African Institutions
    • Coordination of Skills development and capacity building
    • Coordination of relevant curriculum that would suit the learners

Concerns about Rural development

The delegates felt that despite other developments in the rural areas,  they
still have a problem in rural electrification.  Other concerns  were  around
the following:
    • Strategies that could assist in complementation of income generation
    • Lack of community participation in the development of the country
    • Impact on the objectives of the Freedom Charter and PGDP which  seemed
      a big problem
    • Influence by institutions on government policies

Response from the academics

In responding to the concerns of the delegates, the academics advised that;
    • Curriculum revolution in school management and development  should  be
      enhanced
    • Concept of growth development strategies
    • Sharing of experiences to innovate numerosity could assist communities
      in many ways


B.    Report of the Economic Growth and Infrastructure Cluster


Concerns of the Economic Growth and Infrastructure
    • Roll out and support
    • Poverty versus inequality
    • Critique of PDGP
    • Capacity building
    • Development of SMMEs
    • Effective Rollout of Black Economic Empowerment Policy
    • National Business Initiative

Economic Growth and Infrastructure plan

The plans were tabled as follows:
    • The preparations for the Soccer World Cup 2010
    • Resolutions of the Government Summit held in Port Elizabeth
    • Employment of unemployed learners
    • Rural power, contributions and emerging business
    • Expansion of provincial dimensions of provincial problems
    • Improvement  of  communication  with  all  stakeholders  to  make  the
      province efficient
    • Provisions of the PGDP
    • Characterisation of Political economy of the working class


Challenges

    • Accelerated economic growth
    •  Macro Social Report
    • Monitoring and evaluation
    • Alignment in spatial planning
    • Economic growth
    • Involvement of the marginalized communities in economic activities
    •  Performance  of  state  campaigns  against  crime  and  international
      relations
    •  Increase in Oil prices
    • US budget and current account deficit
    • Complexities in gender




Social Needs


The cluster provided  an  updated  information  on  the  activities  of  the
Cluster and the stakeholders who are directly  involved  with  the  cluster,
the achievements to date of the Cluster’s critical priorities for  2006  and
the alignment of the  Cluster’s  critical  priorities  with  the  Provincial
Growth and Development Plan  and  the  National  Government’s  Programme  of
Action



C.    Report of the Social Needs Cluster objectives

    •  Systematic  Poverty  eradication  through  holistic,  integrated  and
      multidimensional approach to pro-poor programming by developing  human
      resource
    • Develop an infrastructure skills plan for infrastructure  projects  to
      ensure that in 5 years, the Department of Public  Works  has  adequate
      staff complement
    • Use every infrastructure project to  create  more  job  opportunities,
      monitor skills development, develop  emerging  contractors,  integrate
      HIV/AIDS in specifications
    • Train DPW Project Managers in Labour Based Practise  to  optimise  job
      creation
    • Funding for infrastructure Skills Plan for these programmes was to  be
      submitted to ASGISA & DBSA, National Skills Fund, DOL for  funding  to
      kick start the programme

Proposed Interventions


        1. Ground  work  done  around  critical  issues  contained  in  the
           National Macro-Social Report of 2006
        2. Roll-out Work Plan 2006/2007 of the Eastern Cape’s Macro- Social
           Report as outlined
        3. The proposed  compilation  of  an  updated  Provincial  Multi  –
           Dimensional Poverty Eradication Strategy: 2007 – 2014
        4. The identified challenges and proposed  strategic  interventions
           for the improvement of the functioning of the  cluster  and  its
           member-departments, in collaboration  with  other  clusters  and
           stakeholders

The Lekgotla did not take any resolutions, the reason for that was the  fact
that  the  recommendations  made  by  clusters  were  to  be   adopted   and
implemented by Cabinet and the report would be forwarded to  clusters  after
the approval of the cabinet.

D.    Meeting with the Portfolio Committee on Local Government  and  Housing
   in Bisho

The delegation could not meet with  the  Premier  because  she  extended  an
apology and the delegation only met with the Portfolio  Committee  on  Local
Government and Housing in Bisho.   The  committee  discussed  the  petitions
that were referred to them on issues pertaining  to  municipalities.   Those
municipalities were:




Buffalo City Municipality


The problem  in  this  municipality  is  about  the  request  for  immediate
intervention on an unfair dismissal of Mr. Mxolisi Tsika as a  City  Manager
at Buffalo City Municipality.




Mnquma Municipality


The petition of this municipality was around  administrative  and  Political
crisis at Mnquma Municipality.  Witnesses were called  and  testified  under
oath and a letter on behalf of one witness was sent to the committee, and  a
concern  about  this  matter  was  critically  looked  at.   The   Portfolio
Committee on Local Government and Housing  was  unhappy  on  the  manner  in
which the former Buffalo City Executive Mayor handled  the  matter.  Instead
of coming to the committee he submitted a letter from the lawyers.




Nkonkobe Municipality


The petition of Nkonkobe  municipality  was  about  the  council  resolution
pertaining to the payment of an exit package to Mr. SD Mdila, whose  service
were terminated as a City Manager.




Resolutions


The committee took a resolution that they need to subpoena the  witness  who
sent the letter from the lawyers and other municipal matters would be  dealt
with because all necessary steps have been taken regarding  their  problems.
Regarding Mnquma Municipality issue,  the  committee  needed  to  prove  the
authenticity of the report as the MEC for Local Government  and  Traditional
Affairs Mr. Sam Kwelita did not have any knowledge of the  report  that  was
in the committee’s possession, which formed part of the petition.

E.    Site Visits


The Permanent delegates and Members of the  Eastern  Cape  Legislature,  Mr.
Mnguni and Ms. Jamjam visited Nelson Mandela  Metro  Municipality  and  were
welcomed  by  Her  Excellency  the  Mayor  who  gave  an  overview  of   the
Municipality activities and problems. She outlined the role  played  by  the
municipality during the disaster, which was  caused  by  heavy  rains.   She
identified  areas  that  were  mostly  affected  and   requested   Permanent
delegates to accompany the officials to  the  sites.   In  her  address  she
highlighted that Nelson Mandela Metro Municipality was not budgeted for  the
building of new houses for this current year therefore people could  not  be
relocated.    She  acknowledged  the  integration  of  hospitals  that   are
overcrowded and under - staffed.



Families that  lost  relatives  because  of  the  floods  were  visited  and
permanent  delegates  with  the  Members  of  Provincial   Legislature   and
Councillors expressed sympathies  on  behalf  of  government.   Municipality
promised to assist where it could to try and support the families.


Areas affected by Floods


    • Soweto
    • Veeplaas
    • Kleinskool
    • Booysens Park

Permanent delegates, MPLs and Councillors visited the areas.


Recommendations


     1. Immediate intervention  by  Nelson  Mandela  Metro  Municipality  to
        assist those people that were affected by storms.
     2. Investigation of the whereabouts of  the  builders  to  rectify  the
        things that were not properly done.
     3. Relocation of squatter camps to better sites.
     4. Members to take the matter  of  housing  budget  to  Parliament  for
        intervention; this is because of  the  limited  funds  budgeted  for
        housing



Site visit to Women’s project


The women of Despatch near Uitenhage have a brick-making  project  and  they
were assisted by the Municipality to start their project.  They  received  a
brick making machine, 500 bags of  cement  and  concrete  as  a  kick-start.
They have develop themselves, they supply the contractor  that  is  building
RDP houses and they hope to expand because they have received a big  machine
that would assist them in building 7 bricks simultaneously.




Problems encountered


Payment by the Municipality  of  supplied  material  was  said  to  be  very
problematic. It takes more for them to get paid, and the Municipal  official
promised them that they would get money within seven days.


Conclusion


The leader of delegation,  Mr.  Mnguni,  MPLs  thanked  the  NCOP  Permanent
Delegates for their visit to the province and for interacting with  them  on
issues that would benefit the poorest of the poor.  He further  acknowledged
the dedication of the Nelson  Mandela  Metro  Municipality  and  recommended
that Members of Parliament should keep their obligation of working  for  the
betterment of the lives of the people of our country.

3.    Visit to the Free State Province


A.    Background


The NCOP programme made provision for members to participate in the
activities of the Legislatures. The delegation undertook a range of
meetings and visits to various places including Maluti Bus Service and the
Government Garage in Phuthaditjhaba.


B.    Activities of the Free State Legislature


Meeting with Chairperson of Committees on activities of the Legislature


A presentation was made to assist NCOP permanent delegates to get a  broader
understanding on activities of  the  Legislature  in  undertaking  oversight
over the Executive Council.  The  chairperson  highlighted  that  the  Manto
Management  consultancy  conducted  a  strategic   planning   workshop   for
Chairpersons of Committees of the Free  State  Legislature  (FSL)  in  March
2006.


As a result Committee Reports are considered and tabled on  quarterly  basis
to ascertain progress made in regard to goals set in the strategic plans.


A draft discussion document on the role of permanent delegates in  the  work
of the Free State Legislature was also presented.


Programme of the Legislature


The Chairperson of Committees  outlined  the  programme  for  the  remaining
months to the meeting.  It was indicated that Free State would host  “Taking
Parliament  to  the  People  during  the  month   of   November   2006   and
Lejweleputswa District is earmarked due to its centrality.


It was further indicated that the Free State Province  will  also  host  the
Association of Public Accounts Committees (APAC) conference  and  logistical
arrangements will be communicated  to  the  National  Council  of  Provinces
(NCOP) Permanent Delegates as soon as it is finalised.


   The meeting noted that Annual Reports from the Executive will  be  tabled
   in the House on the 20 and 21 September 2006 and  it  is  envisaged  that
   public hearings will be conducted around the province and NCOP  Permanent
   Delegates will be invited to participate.

Concerns raised

        1. The Chairperson of Committees was  commended  for  systematizing
           the work of committees. However, the report on the activities of
           the committees is too generic and not explicit on  Key  Priority
           issues of Oversight per Portfolio
        2. The research capacity of the Regis House  remains  a  challenge.
           This matter was discussed during the era of  Honourable  Speaker
           J. Mohapi but the status quo remains.

        3. Poor communication among the Members of  the  Executive  Council
           (MECs), Committee Chairpersons and NCOP Permanent Delegates  has
           a negative bearing on the NCOP.

        4. The absence of Committee on Gender is worrying as  there  is  no
           particular focus on gender matters. Provisionally the  Committee
           on Finance does it; therefore there is  a  need  to  review  the
           scope of the latter Committee.

        5. NCOP Permanent Delegates do not receive  official  documents  as
           tabled or referred to Portfolio Committees e.g. Annual  Reports,
           Strategic Plans, Budget votes etc.

        6.  Report  of  the  Public  Protector  on  the  Free  State  Youth
           Commission should be considered.

        7. The role of special delegates must be clarified when they attend
           NCOP meetings.

        8. The costs incurred with regard to the participation of the  NCOP
           Permanent Delegates on provincial matters  deserve  primacy.  At
           the moment this matter remains the onus of  the  NCOP  Permanent
           Delegates.

Proposals by the committee

        1. The Free State Legislature is advised  to  budget  less  on  the
           programme 1 – legislation of the Legislature, as there might  be
           an unintended under-spending.

        2.  NCOP  Permanent  Delegates  must  be  furnished  with   details
           regarding Strategic Plans of Committees.

        3. The Legislature must introduce mechanisms that  will  assist  in
           linking  Constituency  offices   in   the   Province   and   the
           Legislature.

        4. A need to do follow up  visits  to  municipalities,  which  were
           under performing, and those that were placed under  section  139
           of  the  Constitution  by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on   Local
           Government and Housing should be attended  to  as  a  matter  of
           urgency.

        5.  A  political  decision  must  be  taken  to  provide  normative
           guidelines on the matter of the Free State Youth Commission.


C.    Briefing on Free State Development Strategy

    Currently the Free State Government is reviewing the Plan  in  order  to
    accommodate  the  municipalities  with  regard   to   their   Integrated
    Development  Plans  (IDPs).   The  final  revised  plan  was  issued  by
    University of the Free State and sent to Chairpersons  of  clusters  for
    final inputs. The government’s overall programme for  implementation  is
    on track.

    Challenges faced by the Legislature

        1. Biggest challenge with social development is budget.
        2. Health – transferring of conditional grants  and  infrastructure
           grants, not congruent to expenditure patterns.
        3. Local Government and Housing – assistance of older women who are
           heads of households.
        4. Education – outsourcing feeding scheme, uniforms.
        5. Economic cluster – economic growth and investment  opportunities
           in the Province, align all procurement services in the province,
           realignment of the FDC as a development agency.
        6. Governance and administration – report to  be  presented  on  15
           August 2006 to NCOP Permanent Delegates to confirm  progress  in
           this regard.
        7. The government will  administer  Justice  and  Crime  Prevention
           Cluster –Child Protection Act – Child  Care  Center  in  Qwaqwa,
           Welcome the Child Care Center.

      Critical issues

        1. Free State Growth and Development Plan is fully aligned  to  the
           budget format and tasks are added to the Department  but  budget
           is not adjusted in this regard.
        2. Interaction between the three spheres of government is  critical
           to address the issue of duplication.
        3. The fact that Xhariep Municipality underspent on  the  Municipal
           Infrastructure Grant (MIG) is of serious concern  and  that  the
           Portfolio Committee responsible for  the  Local  Government  and
           Provincial Treasury must intervene to address the matter.
        4. Filling of critical posts especially research  in  the  economic
           unit is ongoing but remains a challenge.
        5. Celebration of women's month by  the  government  must  also  be
           reflected in the reports of the government in regard  to  gender
           issues.
        6. Interaction with other provinces is being planned.
        7. There is a problem of human  trafficking  especially  women  and
           children. Though there are no statistical data on  this  matter,
           the province is currently grappling with illegal immigrants.
        8. Under-spending by municipalities, especially on  Local  Economic
           Development as opposed to their unabated  loans  at  DBSA  is  a
           worrying factor. In this regard the Premier promised  to  ensure
           that under-spending municipalities are  not  loaning  any  money
           from the DBSA.

D.    Meeting with Maluti Bus Service


The mission of the company is to provide safe and reliable service to the
public. Regular meetings between the company and the Department of Public
Works, Roads and Transport are held. These relations helped to resolve
misunderstandings between the company and Bethlehem Taxi Association.
Currently the company has 35 buses operational and 4 stand-by busses and
they render services to QwaQwa residents, Harrismith and Bethlehem areas.

Some of the challenges faced by the  company  are  fuel  increases  and  the
state of the roads in which they are operating that  impacts  negatively  on
their transport.  This results in losing huge amounts  of  money  in  fixing
other models that they use, e.g. Volvos and MAS.

The company is proud of the excellent service they are  rendering  to  their
beneficiaries and has service points at Setsing  Complex  in  Phuthaditjhaba
and Harrismith.  The service points open on Friday to Tuesday from 4am.  The
company has appointed an  expert  who  deals  with  refurbishment  of  their
systems, which they use to assess the safety of their vehicles.

Issues of concern

   1. Verification of the amount and the formula  of  subsidy  they  receive
      from the Provincial Department of Public Works, Roads and Transport;
   2. The names of the shareholders and owners of the company could  not  be
      verified;
   3. Free State Development Corporation has 40%  shares  of  which  10%  is
      meant for community or workers and 30% is envisaged for taxi  industry
      in the districts and the remaining 60% belongs to Scopel  21,  trading
      as Maluti Bus Service;
   4. The lack of transformation as no  female  representative  was  present
      during the meeting;
   5. It was also not clear as to  who  are  the  trustees  of  the  alleged
      community trust fund account, which was opened by the company.
   6. Since the company  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  Provincial
      Department  of  Public  Works,  Roads  and  Transport,  no  money  was
      deposited into the community trust fund  account  as  part  of  social
      investment initiatives; and
   7. One bus, which  is  accessible  to  people  with  disability,  is  not
      sufficient and all busses should be designed to be  user  friendly  to
      people with disabilities.

Committee proposals

   1. A meeting should be held between the  committee  and  the  Free  State
      Development Corporation to look into some of the concerns;
   2. Committee must have a meeting with  the  board  of  directors  of  the
      company;
   3. Committee must have a meeting with the Provincial Department of Public
      Works, Roads and Transport;
   4. The company should look into the issue of transformation  as  well  as
      adhering to Batho Pele principles;
   5. The company should look into the state of  the  busses  and  how  this
      impact on the communities;
   6. The  company  should  look  at  self-sufficiency  and  how  to  become
      sustainable; and
   7. A copy of the contract with Provincial  Department  of  Public  Works,
      Roads and Transport as well as audited financial statements since 2000
      should be made available to the Committee for perusal.

E.    Government Garage – Satellite Office at Phuthaditjhaba

This was a follow-up site visit to the one  undertaken  in  Bloemfontein  on
June 2006, to Government Garage, head office.
Regarding the details on  the  activities  of  the  Government  Garage,  the
management indicated that their report is congruent to the one presented  at
the head office. However,  they  promised  to  answer  questions  on  issues
peculiar to the satellite office.
It became evident during this site visit that the  Phuthaditjhaba  Satellite
offices of the Government Garage remain operational and effective.  However,
the Committee was dismayed by the redundancy of 62 public servants that  are
still in the employ of the Free State Government but without any job to  do.
These  employees  were  supposed  to  be  redeployed  to  other   government
departments in accordance with the provisions of Resolution 7. This  implies
that only 28 of the 90 employees constitute  the  staff  complement  of  the
Satellite office.

The  Committee  further  committed  itself  to  convene  meetings  with  the
Department to ascertain critical issues causing the  delay  in  implementing
the Resolution 7.

F.    Meeting with Portfolio Committee on Education,  Sport  and  Recreation
    on formulation of a negotiating mandate on  the  Second  FIFA  Amendment
    Bill

Public hearings were completed  around  the  bill  and  issues  were  raised
around the issue of Merchandising Mark. It was  agreed  that  this  was  not
part of the bill and should be taken up in another  meeting.  The  committee
agreed to have a negotiating mandate on the bill.

G.    Meeting with the Free State Department of Education on allegations  in
    “Die Son Nuusblad” on the Information Technology Bid

The newspaper made the allegations  after  the  IT  tender  was  awarded  to
certain companies. A member of the Portfolio Committee on  Education,  Arts,
Culture, Science and Technology made a request to the committee  that  these
allegations should be investigated.

Allegations made were the following:

     1. Department of Education has awarded IT contracts  of  approximately
        R40 million to businesses that are  having  misleading  names,  not
        credible and specializing in IT  services,  e.g.  construction  and
        catering services;
     2. There were deviations in the tender process;
     3. The companies which were awarded the  contract  are  not  going  to
        produce or work up to standard; and
     4. Some businesses apparently belong to the same family.

The  department  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  State  Information
Technology Agency (SITA) to assist  with  the  appointments.  SITA  did  not
comply with the cut-off date and the department in terms of resolution  17.1
and 17.6.1(a) of  the  State  Information  Technology  Act  88  of  1998  as
amended, decided to procure on their own.

The department conducted  security  screening  for  all  companies  and  the
preliminary investigation revealed the following:
     1. Although most  companies  used  local  addresses,  they  are  based
        outside the province;
     2. Some of the directors of these companies are based overseas;
     3. Some of the prime contractors are sub-contracted to themselves  for
        same and different products and as a result competition is  limited
        to themselves and current Procurement Transformational Policies are
        being thwarted;
     4. Some of the Directors are “fronts”;
     5. The preliminary findings were sent to National Intelligence  Agency
        (NIA) for extensive investigation; and
     6. Care should be taken that this matter is still sub judice.

A decision was taken in the meeting that it is  not  the  responsibility  of
the officials of the department to answer to the  committee  and  that  this
matter should be taken up with the relevant MEC.

H.    Meeting with the Provincial  Geographical  Names  Committee  (PGNC)  –
    Free State

The PGNC was established by the  MEC  for  Arts  and  Culture  in  terms  of
section 2 (2) (a) of the  South  African  Geographical  Names  Council  Act,
1998. Their function is to act as a liaison between the  community  and  the
South African Geographical Names Council  (SAGNC)  and  is  responsible  for
advising local authorities and working  with  them  in  ensuring  that  they
apply the principles of the SAGNC to the names of their jurisdiction.

The PGNC face challenges of lack of  support  from  the  municipalities  and
government departments, funding, local committees that do not  function  and
lack of full time personnel.

I.    Meeting with South African Local Government  Association  (SALGA)  and
    National House of Traditional Leaders (NHTL) – Free State


The purpose of this consultative session was to  enhance  working  relations
in pursuit of government responsibilities.  In  this  regard  reference  was
made to the public participation conference,  which  was  recently  held  in
Gauteng. At this conference it was agreed that SALGA should  participate  in
activities of the legislative committees – especially on matters  inevitably
affecting the municipalities.

It was further proposed that at least one member of SALGA should be part  of
the meetings of Portfolio Committee on Local Government and Housing as  well
as other Portfolio Committees where needed.

The  delegation  of  SALGA  was  informed  that  at  national  level,   they
participate  in  the  plenary  but  not  in  Committees.  The  principle  of
Separation of Powers  should  always  be  considered  when  involving  other
spheres of Government.

Proposals from SALGA
     1. Standing and Orders of the  Free  State  Legislature  and  NCOP  be
        amended to include the participation of SALGA in  the  business  of
        both Houses.
     2. It is not helpful to be invited to the sittings of  the  House  but
        not be allowed to participate in the debates.
     3. The regulations on Supply Chain Management must  be  applicable  to
        all spheres of government.


J.    House of Traditional Leaders

Traditional Leaders do not feel comfortable to  participate  effectively  in
ward committees. They have  questions  as  to  at  what  level  should  they
participate in  the  meetings,  who  is  responsible  for  their  travelling
allowance and there is no direction as how and when should they  participate
in the business of government.
Free State is the only province that is not  legislated  to  have  permanent
NHTL.  In this regard, the Premier is responsible  to  address  the  matter.
The NHTL is not clear as to whom to report to with regard to  quarterly  and
annual reports.

K.    Proposals by the committee


     1. Create a permanent and functional framework with regard  to  working
        relations within the 3 spheres of government.
     2. Quarterly meetings must be convened.
     3. Consider amending rules and orders to accommodate SALGA.
     4. MEC Mafereka must be invited to the meetings  as  the  custodian  of
        House of Traditional Leaders (HTL).
     5. Participation of NHTL in government should be clarified.
     6. Public education should be enhanced and championed by the HTL.
     7.  A  meeting  must  be  convened  between  HTL  and  SALGA  regarding
        participation in ward committees.
     8. A technical committee must be established to  deal  with  issues  of
        compliance and should be assisted by the Legal Advise Section.
     9. In the next meeting, it  will  be  reported  on  progress  regarding
        resolutions taken on the 17th August 2006.

All names of the nominees for  the  technical  committee  should  reach  the
office of the Chairperson of Portfolio Committee  on  Local  Government  and
Housing by Thursday, 24 August 2006.

4.    Visit to the Gauteng Province

   A. INTRODUCTION
   The delegation focused on two areas namely, safety and security and local
   government. The objective was to ensure that the principle of cooperative
   governance as provided for by chapter three of the  Constitution  of  the
   Republic of South Africa is realised. The  joint  oversight  visits  were
   undertaken by the NCOP, Community Safety and Local Government Committees,
   referred to as the delegation.

                     B. BACKGROUND



   The NCOP was hosted by two Portfolio Committees responsible for Community
   Safety  and  Local  Government  in  Gauteng  i.e.  Local  Government  and
   Community Safety. The delegation held an initial  briefing  meeting  with
   the two Portfolio Committees to clarify the purpose of the visit agree on
   the Programme and refine the Focus Areas  from  the  originally  proposed
   framework by the leadership of the NCOP and the Legislature.   The  Focus
   Areas as agreed largely constituted the basis for engagements.

   C. APPROACH

   The delegation held joint meetings and oversight  visits  with  both  the
   Local Government  and  Community  Safety  Committees  in  Gauteng.  Local
   Government meetings/oversight visits were held with various stakeholders,
   including the Gauteng Local Government Department and SALGA.


   The delegation further conducted  oversight  visits  to  selected  police
   stations in Gauteng. The criteria used in the selection of  the  stations
   were to look at  the  best  and  worst  performing  stations  within  the
   Province. In this regard, the following stations  were  selected:  Reiger
   Park in Boksburg (Ekurhuleni), Mamelodi (Tshwane), Wierda Brug  Centurion
   (Tshwane), Midrand, Moroka (Johannesburg) and CCTV facility in Tshwane.

   D. LOCAL GOVERNMENT




   The following focus areas became the basis for discussion:

   1) Report On the general state Of municipalities
        a. Provision of housing by municipalities
        b. Indigent policy

        c. Supply chain management

        d. Review of powers and functions

        e. Challenges of electricity and water supply

        f. Challenges regarding receiving free basic services
   2) Progress Report on the financial management  and  accountability
      focusing on:
        a. Implementation of  the  Municipal  Finance  Management  Act
           (MFMA) by municipalities.
        b. What support or progress is being  made  in  ensuring  that
           municipalities receive unqualified audit reports.

   3) The situation in Merafong

   4) Progress around the implementation of the Gauteng City  Region(A
      Single Metropolitan System of Municipal Governance for Gauteng)
   5)  Challenges  in  the  implementation  of  development   planning
      applications in relation to the Environment  Impact  Assessments
      (EIAs)
   6) Progress in relation to the focus areas of Project Consolidate.

   7) Progress report in relation to preparations for  the  2010  FIFA
      World Cup by the Province and municipalities.



Meeting with the Gauteng MEC for Local Government



The following summary captures the deliberations with the  Gauteng  MEC  for
Local Government, by focus area:



Report On the general state of municipalities




The MEC described the overall state of local government in Gauteng  as
‘sound’, based on the following assessment:

    • Immediately after the  2004  Municipal  elections,  all  Gauteng
      municipalities successfully completed and submitted IDPs in line
      with the relevant legislative and statutory requirements;

    • All vacancies for municipal  manager  posts  have  been  filled,
      except in 3 municipalities:  Westonaria,  Kungwini  and  Lesedi.
      These  vacancies  persist  largely  due  to  the  difficulty  of
      attracting suitable candidates to smaller  municipalities  where
      lower salary bands are applicable for municipal  manager  posts.
      The Department will  propose  a  protocol  whereby  metropolitan
      municipalities should not be allowed to recruit/poach from local
      municipalities.

      The Department is in the process of undertaking extensive work
      regarding capacity-building for Section 57 Managers.


    • Regarding free basic services,  most  municipalities  have  made
      strides regarding the provision of  free  electricity,  although
      some challenges regarding targeting still persist.

    • With regard to the provision of free water, the success has been
      more varied, with  some  having  achieved  universal  provision,
      whilst others not.



The MEC did however register  a  number  of  ongoing  challenges,  for
example the challenges of Revenue-collection, billing, lack of payment
by the people  who  can  afford  but  evade  payment,  including  some
government departments and parastatals.

The MEC further noted that one of the greatest challenges is posed  by
the lack of alignment of plans by other  spheres  of  government  with
MIDPs.   This  imposes   an   undue   service   delivery   burden   on
municipalities, as planning by these spheres which has  a  bearing  on
municipalities, happens largely in isolation and without consideration
of the commitments of municipalities as contained in their MIDPs.

The MEC referred the delegation to the Report on the 5-Year Review  of
the State of Local Government (circulated), which comprehensively  and
systematically evaluates  the  challenges  and  successes  of  Gauteng
municipalities since 2000.

Overall, she however emphasised the generally healthy state of Gauteng
Municipalities.

Financial management and accountability


The Department has entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  Provincial
Treasury on how best municipalities can be supported  in  implementing
the MFMA.  This agreement outlines the agreed roles,  responsibilities
and functions of the 2 departments in implementing  and  managing  the
provisions of the MFMA.  The agreement also  outlines  the  objectives
and principles which will guide  the  supporting  role  that  the  two
departments will be assuming in the transitional phase  and  permanent
phase of implementing the MFMA.

Work has already started in implementing the  agreement  that  includes  the
following:
      • Supervision over local government
      • Failure to approve budgets by a municipality
      • Unauthorized, irregular or fruitless and wasteful expenditure
      • Comments on the establishment of Municipal Entities, where  National
        Treasury and the Department must  recommend  whether  municipalities
        should go ahead and establish.
      • Deviation from Supply Chain Management policies
      • Issues raised by the Auditor-General in audit reports
      •  Reporting  of  transgressions  on   councillor   remuneration   to
        Provincial
      Legislature
      • Discretionary and Mandatory interventions



Establishment of Advisory Committee




An Advisory Committee on Municipal Finance (ACLGF) was established to
assist the Department in dealing with the financial challenges facing
municipalities.  The focus area of investigations was on financial
management, borrowing, revenue management (billing and debt management,
credit control) and compliance with the MFMA.  The draft report pronouncing
on the state of local government finance is complete and will be presented
on the 18 August 2006.   It is expected that the ACLGF will also input on
proposed intervention strategies to address identified financial challenges
of municipalities.


Deployment of chartered accountants to local and district municipalities to
assist with financial management Challenges




The Department, in conjunction with the South African Institute of
Chartered Accountants (SAICA) has deployed 14 chartered accountants to
local and district municipalities to:


            •  Review  and  evaluate  the  internal  control  systems   and
              processes  in  place   at   the   municipalities   and   make
              recommendations to  facilitate  proper  financial  management
              with a view to ensuring the issuing by the Auditor-General of
              clear audit reports in future in accordance with a  checklist
              to be provided by SAICA.

            • Review the Auditor-General's  reports  up  to  the  2004/2005
              financial years in relation  to  the  municipality  concerned
              with a view to clearing  up  items  raised  by  the  Auditor-
              General.

            • Assist with the transfer of skills to the relevant personnel,
              including  the  chief  financial  officer   (CFO)   of   each
              municipality  with  a  view  to  building   capacity   within
              municipalities to manage their own financial affairs.

            • Provide assistance and support to municipalities with  regard
              to the completion of the annual financial statements for  the
              2006/2007 financial years.

            •  Assist  and  provide  support  to  municipalities  with  the
              completion of monthly, quarterly and annual financial reports
              as  required  in  terms  of  legislation  inclusive  of   the
              requirements of the Department and the  Gauteng  Treasury  as
              and when required.

            •  Assist  and  provide  support  to  municipalities  with  the
              completion of financial compliance  reports  as  required  in
              terms of legislation inclusive of  the  requirements  of  the
              Department and the Gauteng Treasury as and when required.

            • Make  recommendations  regarding  training  of  personnel  to
              enable the  municipalities  to  manage  their  own  financial
              affairs.

            • Advise and assist with the implementation of the strategy  of
              the ACLGF.

Progress around the Implementation of the Gauteng City Region




The GCR is at present a concept.  As such, no concrete  strategies  in
support of the GCR concept are being embarked upon at municipal level.
 However, the MEC emphasised the  features  of  the  GCR  perspective,
which once officially adopted, will  require  some  of  the  following
sectoral and  cross-sectoral  interventions,  with  direct  impact  on
municipalities:

      • Municipalities will remain as independent  entities.  However,
        they will be required to collaborate and co-operate with  each
        other.

      •  A  single  transport  authority,  which  would  regulate  all
        transport-related matters, both public and private across  the
        province would be established.

      • An  overarching  public  safety  strategy  and  plan  for  the
        province will be adopted.  (To date a draft provincial  safety
        strategy and plan has been developed under  the  custodianship
        of the Gauteng Department of  Community  Safety.   This  is  a
        document  produced  after  extensive  consultation  with   all
        sectors, including local government);

      • There will be improved planning across spheres of  government,
        including spatial development planning, rezoning,  etc.  which
        should involve both the Province and Municipalities; and

      • There will be improved branding and marketing of Gauteng as  a
        global  city-region,  promoting   co-operation   rather   than
        competition   between    Gauteng    municipalities,    greater
        integration of MIDPs across municipalities.



The development of the  GCR  will  be  marked  by  growing  levels  of
Integration across the province in the above respects.

Overall, the principle reiterated  was  that  development  and  growth
should be government-led and government-regulated, to prevent  further
sporadic and uncurtailed development by the private sector, and  as  a
means to ensure better access to economic opportunities for the people
of Gauteng.

Challenges in the implementation of the Development  Planning  Act  in
relation to the Environment Impact Assessments (EIAs)

The Department  is  not  directly  involved,  although  the  DACE  is.
However, the MEC indicated that the balance has not yet been  achieved
between developers  having  to  endure  an  extremely  protracted  EIA
process and the need to ensure development  does  not  proceed  in  an
unregulated manner.

A challenge  for  the  DACE  is  the  limited  staff  capacity  within
municipalities, especially staff  responsible  for  drafting  reports.
Poor  quality  reports  requires  DACE  to   conduct   much   of   the
investigation that should have formed part of the reports  themselves.
This is at least one  major  factor  contributing  to  the  delays  in
processing EIAs within DACE.


Progress in relation to the focus areas of Project Consolidate



The Department’s Municipal Support Programme  includes  municipalities  that
fall under Project Consolidate. A short term  capacity  needs  analysis  was
done and this led to the establishment of a Technical Assistance Team  (TAT)
to  provide  technical  support  such  as  civil  engineering  and   project
management to municipalities that are in dire need of this expertise.

Technical Assistance Team (TAT): Engineering Capacity



So far, 19  senior  engineers  and  34  students  and  graduates  have  been
deployed in the following Project Consolidate municipalities:







      |Municipality        |No. of Engineers |Students and     |
|                    |Deployed         |Graduates        |
|Emfuleni LM         |4                |9                |
|Kungwini LM         |5                |7                |
|Mogale City         |5                |9                |
|Randfontein         |2                |4                |
|Merafong LM         |3                |5                |
|Total               |19               |34               |



The senior engineers also provided coaching and in-house mentoring to  staff
responsible  for  infrastructure  projects.   The   rollout   of   technical
assistance teams (TAT) in five new non-projects consolidates  municipalities
(Metsweding, West Rand and Sedibeng Districts, Nokeng and  Westonaria  Local
municipalities). The TAT will also include students and  graduates  as  well
as in-house staff that will receive mentoring and coaching as  part  of  the
capacity building initiative.

The implementation of a high-level technical assistance team (TAT)  will  be
providing services at two levels. These two levels of  intervention  in  the
first instance relate to ensuring that its capacity and technical skills  is
utilised optimally to  turn  around  municipalities  into  viable  entities.
Secondly, the TAT will ensure that a simultaneous  process  of  transfer  of
skills takes place through a workplace  skills  program  and  a  performance
management contract/agreement.

Progress report on the Preparations for the 2010 FIFA World Cup by the
Province and Municipalities

The Department is not integrally involved with  the  preparation.   The  MEC
reported  mainly  on  the  structures   and   process   for   managing   the
preparations.

Structure: There is a 2010  inter-departmental  structure  and  a  programme
manager responsible for the overall co-ordination.  Sub-committees would  be
established on Disaster Management, etc. HODs and  Sports  Recreation,  Arts
and Culture should report to the Political Committee, which will  report  to
the Premier and Executive Council.

Process: An audit has been done by the Department of Sport  and  Recreation,
Arts  and  Culture  (SRAC)  in  the  province   of   commitments   made   by
municipalities.  Role-players convened over the past weekend  and  developed
a  clear  programme  with  resource  implications  for  the   Province   and
municipalities.
Provision of Housing by Municipalities:



The MEC indicated that Municipalities  are  not  evading  responsibility  by
providing only land and not accepting responsibility  for  delivery  of  top
structures. The province is responsible for building houses and  for  paying
contractors.


Breach of Section 106 or Section 139


No municipality was investigated for breach of the two Sections.


Indigent Policy


Does the Policy include funerals for the Indigent?

The policy includes funerals for  the  indigent.  However,  the  process  of
qualification  is  long  and  it  is  usually   quite   some   time   before
beneficiaries receive payments for  funeral  expenses.   The  Department  is
reviewing the Indigent framework in relation to Indigent burials.


Supply Chain Management



The problem relating to the supply chain management does not seem to  be  as
relevant to Gauteng as municipalities are required to pay  suppliers  within
14 days.

Review of Powers and Function




The Department is undertaking a Review  of  Powers  and  Functions,  a
comprehensive review to make recommendations on the upward or downward
adjustment of Powers and Functions.




A Single Metropolitan System of Municipal Governance for Gauteng

The 5-year review  indicates  that  District  municipalities  are  not
financially viable  and  barely  able  to  survive,  if  not  for  the
equitable  share  allocation  from  national  government.    Moreover,
municipalities are worse off since the abolition  of  RSC  levies  and
over time some of their powers have been eroded.

Gauteng Province envisages a single system of metropolitan governance.
 This will also serve to even out disparities  in  levels  of  service
delivery across municipalities in the province, especially between the
metropolitan municipalities on the one hand  and  district  and  local
municipalities on the other.

The Department has initiated discussions with the Demarcation Board on
the question of a single system of local governance.



Challenges relating to electricity supply




REDs: Municipalities are in the process of restructuring.   Of  the  3
metro REDs, 2 metros, Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni, will  be  ready  by
the end of 2006.  Tshwane will be ready by the end of March 2007.  The
neighbouring districts will be incorporated under the Tshwane RED.

The Department is recommending that all non-metro REDs be part of  the
proposed National RED, or that all non-metro REDs fall into the  metro
REDs.

Challenges in relation  to  receiving  free  electricity  through  the
prepaid supply system




Most  municipalities  have  reportedly  made  strides  regarding   the
provision of free  electricity,  although  some  challenges  regarding
targeting still persist.

It appears to be a system error  resulting  in  exclusion  of  prepaid
users from accessing free electricity.



Progress regarding Merafong




The matter is before the Courts.  Judgement is reserved and the  Court
is yet to make a pronouncement on the matter.  In  the  meantime,  the
Department has a Service Level Agreement (SLA) with the other province
regarding service  delivery  in  Merafong.   The  budget  for  certain
functions like educator salaries lies with Gauteng.   North  West  has
managing responsibility. Overall, the area seems to have stabilised.



Growth and Development Summit

      The  Department  is  assisting  District   Municipalities   with
      preparations for holding the Growth and Development Summit later
      this year.



Meeting with SALGA, Gauteng

Report from the Chairperson: SALGA, Gauteng.

      ▪  State  of  Municipalities:  Overall,  the   process   of   Gauteng
        municipalities becoming fully functional  following  the  Municipal
        elections  has  proceeded  much   faster   than   in   2000.    All
        municipalities have established Section 79 Committees.  The process
        of appointing municipal managers has proceeded with  the  necessary
        speed.

      ▪  Free  Basic  Services:  There   is   a   disturbing   trend   that
        organisations are advising people not to register as Indigents,  as
        they may forfeit some free basic services.  With the supply of free
        basic electricity, some municipalities are successful and some  are
        not.

      ▪ Provision of Electricity: power outages remain  a  huge  challenge,
        especially in the larger  municipalities,  where  there  are  ever-
        growing numbers of people.

      ▪ Provision of Water: the management of water  becomes  a  key  issue
        as municipalities pay for water ahead  of  revenue  collection  for
        water services.

      ▪ In some instances, Departments are negligent and does not  pay  for
        services like bills of schools.

      ▪  Indigent  Policy:  Limited  capacity   for   Monitoring   of   the
        Implementation of the Indigents Policy and ensuring only bona  fide
        beneficiaries actually benefit.

      ▪ There is a further related challenge of capacity  in  the  Auditor-
        General’s   Office,   which   is   a   general   complaint   across
        municipalities.  In the case of the West Rand, the municipality was
        unable to spend the grant intended  for  addressing  infrastructure
        and service backlogs due to the land (intended for  the  Cradle  of
        Humankind) being under  private  ownership.   The  district  cannot
        impose services on private land.

      ▪ Municipal  Public  Accounts  Committees:  All  municipalities  will
        have public Accounts committees.

      ▪ Gender representation  in  municipalities:  there  is  50/50  split
        amongst Councillors and MMCs in ANC-led municipalities.

      ▪  Representation:  Challenge  to  ensure   ward   committees   truly
        represent sectors, e.g. ‘Business Sector’.

      ▪ Ward Committees:

    •  Most  municipalities  are  near  completion  with  the   process   of
      establishing ward Committees and agreed that ward committees should be
      formed by end of September

    • Regarding the structure of ward Committees, all  ward  committees  are
      still being established on the basis of sectors.

    • The fact that Johannesburg has been mandated to move away from Section
      80 Committees does not imply movement away from sectors.

    • There is limited capacity at the level of  Ward  Committees  and  Ward
      Councillors.  SALGA is  mooting  for  all  municipalities  to  support
      working groups: Municipal managers should work  with  Deputy  CEOs  of
      SALGA in this regard (add senior  municipal  managers  not  supporting
      SALGA).

    • Full-time ward  councillors  and  CDWs  are  pivotal  to  communities.
      Councillors use their own funds  to  support  their  work.   SALGA  is
      mooting for full-time Ward Councillors  to  be  remunerated  as  well.
      There is a general  issue  of  support  to  Councillors,  which  needs
      attention.

    •  Councillors  are   often   berated   by   National   and   Provincial
      Parliamentarians when visiting their localities.  There is a need  for
      greater ‘sensitivity’ in this regard.

         ▪ Preparations for 2010 Soccer World Cup:  There  is  no  specific
           programme within SALGA for 2010.  However, SALGA reported on  an
           initiative which will be required of host municipalities  –  the
           establishment  of  public  viewing  places,  with  shelter   and
           catering,  to  allow  for  viewing  by  fans,  both  local   and
           international who might not be able to afford the ticket prices.

         ▪ GCR: SALGA perceives a  need  for  better  coordination  between
           municipalities and provincial government in this regard.   SALGA
           is however working with the provincial  government  to  identify
           legacies that are to  be  to  the  longer-term  benefit  of  the
           province.

         ▪ Johannesburg is piloting the  principle  of  the  separation  of
           powers between the executive and the  council.  The  section  80
           committees will not be chaired by MMCs. They will be chaired  by
           ordinary councillors.

         ▪ SALGA proposes that measures  including  the  possible  rotation
           of staff be considered to allow for sharing of capacity.

         ▪ Local government Capacity

There is ongoing capacity-building for both Staff and politicians. SALGA  is
capacitating  CFOs,  together  with  National  Treasury  and   the   Gauteng
Department of Local Government.

SALGA’s own internal capacity  is  however  acknowledged  to  be  an  issue,
especially in the context of demands  for  inputs  and  participation  being
received  at  short  notice  from  various  other  stakeholders   like   the
Legislatures.

Issues SALGA proposes be taken forward by the NCOP



    ▪  The  cost  of  implementing  the  Property  Rates  Act  needs  to  be
      evaluated / assessed.  At  present,  one  of  the  challenges  is  the
      shortage of people to conduct valuations.

    ▪ There is  a  need  for  constant  engagement  between  SALGA  and  the
      NCOP/Portfolio Committee to report progress on  issues  raised  during
      the engagements. SALGA has committed to extending an invitation to the
      NCOP to attend its meetings.

    ▪ Lack of legislative compliance amongst municipalities is  sometimes  a
      question of capacity, rather than defiance.
Recommendations


    ▪ SALGA, the NCOP  delegation  and  the  Portfolio  Committee  of  Local
      Government should meet on a quarterly basis. The relevant chairpersons
      will facilitate the meetings.
    ▪ NCOP delegation should have a follow  up  meeting  with  the  MEC  for
      Local Government.
    ▪ A meeting should be held with the  Portfolio  Committees  of  Finance,
      Local Government and ACE regarding development applications and EIAs.
    ▪ The department of Local Government  should  develop  a  framework  for
      support to municipalities by SALGA and sector departments.


D. SAFETY AND SECURITY

MEETING WITH THE PROVINCIAL COMMISSIONER AND AREA COMMISIONER

Deliberations  with  the  Provincial  Commissioner  formed  the   basis   of
engagements with the SAPS  and  oversight  visits  to  the  selected  Police
stations. The deliberations focused on among others:

The six months Crime Prevention plan


The Commissioner indicated that Operation Iron Fist was undertaken  as
part of a response to the MEC’s Six Months Crime Prevention Plan,  and
that  all  police  stations  were  required   to   immediately   start
implementing the operation. It was further mentioned that a number  of
successes were already recorded in this regard.

Resources


Though there has been an increase  in  resources  annually,  resources
posed a challenge in  the  fight  against  crime.  Transportation  for
members of the SAPS was for  example  cited  as  one  of  the  biggest
challenges,  as  this  impacts  on  their  performance.  However,  the
Commissioner  emphasised  that  the  available  resources  were  being
utilized efficiently and effectively.

Restructuring of SAPS with respect to Area Offices


There is no information on the state  of  the  restructuring  process;
however the Commissioner  indicated  that  the  information  would  be
available by end of September 2006.


Progress in relation to the training of detectives & prosecutors


Training for detectives is  an  ongoing  process.  This  includes  the
provision of refresher courses as well as sending detectives abroad to
learn from other countries. There is also a new training programme  of
mentoring,  in  which  new  recruits  are  mentored   by   experienced
detectives. Each new recruit is assigned to a particular detective.


Implementation of the Intelligence driven policing model


The Commissioner acknowledged the significance of intelligence  driven
policing in the fight against crime. The SAPS is working hard  through
its intelligence team to ensure that this is enhanced.

Cooperation between the law-enforcement agencies


There is a good working relationship between the SAPS  and  other  law
enforcement  agencies.  Senior  management  meet  regularly  to   plan
jointly. The Commissioner also indicted that  Metro  police  are  also
part of Operation Iron  Fist,  and  that  councillors  are  playing  a
significant role in mobilising people around the operation.

Interaction with Prosecutors in dealing with cases


The relationship between the SAPS is good. Management from both  sides  meet
frequently to discuss issues  of  common  interest.  Also,  there  has  been
consultation with the Prosecutors on Operation Iron Fist to ensure that  the
courts are prepared for the influx of suspects.

Challenges

    • Poor support from the Department  of  Home  Affairs  in  dealing  with
      illegal immigrants.
    • Insufficient resources to effectively  respond  to  the  challenge  of
      fighting crime.

Recommendations

The SAPS  at  National  level  should  ensure  that  relations  between  the
Department of Home Affairs and the SAPS are established.


   D. OVERSIGHT VISITS TO POLICE STATIONS


1)    Mamelodi Police Station
Response to the MEC’s Six Months Plan

The station managed to develop a programme in response to the MEC  six
months plan. This programme includes the following:
    ▪ The drug  task  team  works  together  with  schools  forum  and
      engage learners and teachers with an aim of  creating  awareness
      on the danger of drugs and other crime related  activities.  The
      Ward Councillors are also participating in this programme.
    ▪ Crime prevention: the station conducts  patrols  twice  a  week,
      in which reservists and Community Police Forums participate.


Resources


Mamelodi Police Station currently has  323  personnel  and  the  ideal
structure is 420. The station recruited 76 reservists who assist  with
the daily operations of the station, especially with the Iron  Fist  6
months  crime  prevention  plan.  Reservists  are   given   allowances
accordingly.

Relations between the stations and the community & CPFs


There is a good working relationship between the Police  and  the  Community
Policing Forum,  such  that  the  CPF  developed  their  own  programmes  to
complement  the  Iron  Fist  plan.  The  programme  includes  among  others,
Operation Bonakgala, Sms-Thetha project and Patrol groups.

Cooperation between detectives, intelligence services & prosecutors in
crime prevention


Participants  in  the  Criminal  Justice  System  were  consulted   on
operation Iron Fist in order  to  get  support  and  cooperation.  The
station is able to maintain daily communication with  prosecutors  and
there’s cooperation with all four courts that service Mamelodi  police
station.

Challenges


    • There are not enough personnel.
    • The station has been experiencing problems with  regard  to  resources
      especially vehicles.
    • There are shortcomings on the  relationship  between  SAPS  and  Metro
      Police, due to inadequate number of staff  available  from  the  Metro
      Police.
    • The Station faces problems when  they  have  to  transfer  victims  to
      social welfare offices  for  further  evaluation  due  to  demarcation
      issues.
    • The court  system  and  the  South  African  Police  Services  do  not
      complement each other, e.g. the priority of cases in terms convictions
      and withdrawals is not the same.
    • Long passages, unoccupied houses,  long  grass  &  poor  numbering  of
      streets and houses, poor and lack of street lighting are a problem.
    • The station commissioner does not  participate  fully  in  the  budget
      process.
    • Not all the needs of the station are catered for in the final budget.



Recommendations


    • That the station be repositioned from the state it  was  under  during
      the time of the visit.
    • That the station  and  senior  management  at  SAPS  engage  with  the
      relevant structures in order to ensure a close relationship with Metro
      Police Department.
2)    Wierda Brug Police Station



State of readiness of the station in relation to the implementation of
the 6 months plan


The station managed to develop a programme in response  to  the  MEC’s
six months plan. The drug task team works together with Schools forum.
The members of the station participate on  school  visits  to  educate
learners on issues of crime and the dangers of school bullying.




Functioning of the police stations (what are the  level  of  resources
the station requires to function at full capacity, the  current  level
and how those resources are utilized)


The Police Station has one hundred and thirty five (135) Personnel  of
which twenty eight (28) of them are civilians, servicing a  population
of ± 600 000. The ideal structure of the station is  one  hundred  and
seventy four (174). The station is expecting new members at the end of
October 2006 from the students who are currently in training.

Relations between the police stations, the Community & CPFs


There is a good working relationship between the Police  and  the  Community
Police Forums, and there’s improvement in the attendance  of  meetings.  The
station is strengthening its working relationship with various  stakeholders
in combating crime.

Challenges
   Major challenge is the Olivenhoetbosch area which has a higher crime rate
   compared to the other areas. Olivenhoetbosch area is  located  18km  from
   the police station and this poses a challenge when they have to attend to
   crime scenes; and the community also  travel  long  distances  to  report
   crime,  leading  to  some  crimes  not  being  reported.  There  are  new
   developments within the area and resources are not adequate to cater  for
   the entire area. The fast growing population serviced by the station  was
   also noted, and this would strain the already limited  resources  at  the
   station.

The delegation noted the following:

    • The good relationship  between  the  station  and  the  community  was
      acknowledged and encouraged, noting that this would greatly impact  on
      the fight against crime.

    •  The  involvement  and  empowerment  of  female  officers  at   senior
      management level.

    • There is a need  for  a  satellite  station  at  Olievenhoutbosch  and
      permanent mobile stations for all areas.


    • The station is located in an area that is developing rapidly


    • The Victim Empowerment Centre is fully functional and is  run  by  two
      trained co-ordinators with 15 trained volunteers.


    • The station is expecting more vehicles.

Recommendations

That the police station establishes satellite stations  in  the  areas  that
are far from it for easy access of services by members of  the  public,  and
that these stations must be  properly  managed,  and  that  the  process  of
building a satellite station be speedily facilitated.

3)    Midrand Police station

State of readiness of the station in relation to the implementation of
the 6 months plan
The station has a programme in place that incorporates  the  6  months
plan. The detectives are working  on  operation  Letsema  as  well  as
observation duties with  CIAC  members.  Reservists  are  utilized  on
weekends for operations. The station also formed  a  tracing  team  as
part of the operation.

Functioning of the police stations (what are the  level  of  resources
the station requires to function at full capacity, the  current  level
and how those resources are utilized)


The Police Station has one hundred and  seventy  one  (171)  personnel
with thirty six (36) reservists, utilizing 45 vehicles. The station is
currently serving± 250 000, based on the 2001 census statistics.

Relations between the station, the Community & CPFs

There’s an improvement on the relationship between the station and the
Community  Police   Forum,   and   cooperation   between   detectives,
Intelligence & Prosecutors  in  crime  prevention.  There  is  a  good
working relationship with prosecutors, e.g. there are weekly  meetings
between the station and the prosecutors.

Challenges
    • The station is understaffed
    • Escape Routes
    • Long grass
    • Lack of Street lights
    • Lack of interest from community
    • Rapid development
    • The growing population
    • Street numbers not properly on gates
    • Influx of illegal immigrants
    • No support from JHB Metro.
    • Transportation for police members
    • Heavy traffic
    • Lack of flying squad vehicles

Comments

    • The delegation noted the following:
    • The station has holding cells categorised according to gender, type of
      crime and age.
    • Illegal immigrants are placed in their own cells- arrested for serious
      and petty crimes.
    • Contractors employing illegal immigrants without providing  them  with
      accommodation.
    • There is no Morpho-touch attached to the station.

Recommendations

    • Senior Management should engage with the City Council with  regard  to
      new  developments  in  the  area  in  order  to   allocate   resources
      accordingly.
    • The Area Commissioner should ensure that there’s  a  Morpho-Touch  for
      the station as there was none during the visit.
    • The station management should look into  empowering  women  at  senior
      level as this is a legislative requirement.

4)    Moroka Police Station

State of readiness of the station in relation to the implementation of
the 6 months plan

The station has a plan  that  complements  operation  Iron  Fist.  The
station is holding two major operations per week to address  crime  in
the area, priority days begin from Thursdays  until  Sunday  mornings.
Crime Prevention Unit  members  are  sometimes  deployed  in  civilian
clothing to combat street robberies. Police hold stop and  search  and
road blocks every week and chopper operations are conducted  once  per
week to address property related crimes. The station has established a
drug task team dealing with drug related crime.


Functioning of the police station (what are the level of resources the
station requires to function at full capacity, the current  level  and
how those resources are utilized)


Moroka Police Station has 399 personnel with 90 vehicles allocated  to
it.  The station recruited 136 reservists. There are seven (7) sectors
which include two (2) hostels; each sector has  a  sector  manager  to
ensure effective policing and to improve response time to complaints.


Relations between the station, the community & CPFs
Sector Crime Forums, Pastors and Councillors’ Forums have  been  established
and they are fully functional to  deal  with  crime  in  the  station  area.
Sector managers visit  local  churches  on  Sundays  to  discuss  crime  and
sensitize the community on how to combat crimes.  Schools  also  participate
in combating crime initiatives.

Cooperation between detectives, Intelligence &  Prosecutors  in  crime
prevention


A team of two police officials  are  deployed  to  ensure  proper  and
continuous relationship and communication with prosecutors.


Challenges

    • No proper management of Hostels- some of the rooms are vacant such
      that they become crime spots. Some houses within the hostels are child
      headed and become drug dens.
    • Budget is allocated according to the 2001 census figures
    • Shortage of personnel due to promotions
    • Increase of liquor stores and Taverns
    • Taxi owners park their taxis at petrol stations at night
    • Insufficient security measures at residential premises
    • The objectives of the court are different from that of the station

Comments

The delegation noted the following;
    • That there’s team work in the station
    • The station developed a system to ensure that dockets are not lost
    • The Victim Empowerment Centre is functional and headed by a female
      officer and one (1) trained volunteer
    • The station is able to retain trained reservists

Recommendations

The station should look into engaging the Liquor Boards on the licensing  of
taverns.

5.    Reiger Park Police Station

State of readiness of the station in relation to the implementation of
the 6 months plan


The station managed to develop a programme in response  to  the  MEC’s
six months plan. This programme includes the following:
    ▪ The gangsters have formed a peace forum.
    ▪ The station conducts patrols twice a week,  in  which  Community
      Police Forums participate.


Functioning of the police stations (what are the  level  of  resources
the station requires to function at full capacity, the  current  level
and how those resources are utilized)


The station is a satellite station. It is very small and buildings are
not user friendly and are temporary structures. With the current staff
complement, they are managing but they would like to  have  more.  The
station has a victim empowerment unit.

Relations between the stations and the Community & CPFs
There is a good working relationship between the Police  and  the  Community
Police  Forum,  such  that  the  CPF  developed  their  own  programmes   to
complement the Iron Fist plan.


Cooperation between detectives, Intelligence &  Prosecutors  in  crime
prevention


        There is a good working relationship with the Boksburg  police
        station.

Challenges

    • Poor infrastructure
    • Poor attendance of CPF meetings
    • Delayed response from the MEC’s office regarding the issue of  handing
      over of guns by the gangsters.
    • High unemployment rate which leads to crime
    • Too many liquor stores and churches
    • Shortage of personnel

Recommendations

The erection of a new police station should be speeded up.



   E. Oversight Visit to  Tshwane  Metro  Police  Department’s  CCTV  camera
      Facility

The CCTV cameras were installed in 2005 within the Tshwane  CBD.  There  are
68 cameras operating and plans are already in place to  expand  the  project
to other areas of the city. By September 2006,  areas  such  as  Marabastad,
Belle Ombre and Brooklyn would be covered. The Tshwane  Metro  Police  Chief
indicated that the city was engaging with business  to  solicit  support  on
this project. It was also indicated that the city was envisaging  installing
the cameras on the entry points in the city.

Comments

There has been a significant decline in crime in the inner CBD as  a  result
of the CCTV cameras, and these crimes have been pushed outside  of  the  CBD
precinct.


There seems to be good cooperation between the  Metro  Police  and  SAPS  in
this programme  e.g.  SAPS  members  work  jointly  in  the  monitoring  and
response to incidents of crime.

Recommendations

The delegation recommends that the CCTV cameras should not  only  cover  the
CBD but the residential areas as well.


   F. General Recommendations

The delegation recommends that:

    • The SAPS should ensure that  women  empowerment  at  senior  level  is
      implemented.
    • The SAPS at National level should ensure that  relations  between  the
      Department of Home Affairs and the SAPS are established.
    • All municipalities should consult with the SAPS with regard to all
      developments applications.
    • The MEC should ensure that the relationship between the SAPS and the
      Metro Police is strengthened.
    • Gender equity within the SAPS should be prioritised.
    • Resources should be deployed to the Intelligence component of the
      Police Services.
    • Municipalities should develop local crime prevention strategies which
      will include grass-cutting, elimination of long passages, street
      lights, and rehabilitation or destruction of dilapidated houses.
    • There should be a strengthening of CPFs and Sector Forums.
    • There should be a sharing of best practices between best performing
      and poor performing police stations.
    • There should be a strengthening of networks between stations in the
      same areas.
    • Management within the SAPS should be trained on public speaking.
    • The budgeting process should be democratised.
    • Morpho-Touch should be allocated to all Police Stations in the
      Province.
    • There should be a stipend for Counsellors in the Victim Empowerment
      Centres.
    • Stats SA should coordinate with government departments when preparing
      for census, in particular the SAPS.
    • Resources should be deployed according to population figures
    • In future, when preparing for the NCOP week a task team should be
      formed consisting of all role-players.

5.    Visit to the KwaZulu-Natal Province
   A. Objectives



   The main objectives of the of the visit were to:-


    • Look at the activities of the Province.


    • strengthen  relations  between  the  provincial  legislature  and  the
      National Council of Provinces (NCOP).


    • Ascertain progress in the preparations for the  World  Cup  2010,  the
      readiness of the municipalities and the working  relationship  between
      the various stakeholders in the province.


    •  Determine  the  understanding  of  all  the  stakeholders   and   the
      departments of the 2010 World Cup.


    • Establish how decisions taken by the national government impact on the
      Provincial government.



   B. Meeting with stakeholders




   The delegation met with representatives from various stakeholders such a
   KWANALOGA, the Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs,
   the traditional leaders and municipal managers.


   C. Inputs by the Stakeholders


      (i)   Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs


   The mandate of the department is  to  support  municipalities  to  manage
   their affairs. However, there is not much  that  has  been  done  by  the
   Department with regard to the preparations for the 2010 Fifa World Cup.


   (ii)           KWANOLOGA






   Ms Molapo, Deputy CEO SALGA KZN made the presentation on  behalf  of  the
   organization. She said that there had been some  recent  developments  in
   KWANALOGA. On the 8th of June 2006  there  was  a  provincial  conference
   where a new executive committee was elected. One of the key objectives of
   the executive committee is to deal with stakeholder relations.


   KWANALOGA has good relations with the Provincial  Legislature  and  other
   stakeholders. It has been given an opportunity to comment on  legislation
   and  takes  part  in  a  number  of  bodies  such  as   interdepartmental
   committees. It is also a member of the Premier’s Co-ordinators Forum.


   With regard to preparations for the  2010  World  Cup,  three  years  ago
   KWANALOGA spearheaded the KWANALOGA games. The  intention  was  that  all
   sport codes should participate. It has identified some  football  players
   to  be  trained  who  can  also  be  fed  into  the  2010  soccer   team.
   Interprovincial games can also feed in through 2010 World Cup.


   The City of Durban (Ethekwini)  municipality  has  started  comprehensive
   preparations for the 2010 World Cup. Arrangements are also being made  to
   assist district municipalities through the office of the Premier,  making
   funds available for the  2010  World  Cup.  KWANALOGA  is  reconstituting
   itself to assist all  the  61  municipalities  to  ensure  that  the  key
   performance areas or objectives are achieved.


   (iii) Portfolio Committee on Sports


   Hon. Khuzwayo made a presentation on behalf of the  Provincial  Portfolio
   Committee on Sports. The Committee conducted public hearings from 1  –  4
   August 2006, which started at Ugu, Durban and Metro,  Zululand Ulundi and
   then to New Castle. On Friday 11th August 2006 the Sports  committee  met
   to consider the inputs.


   The main concerns from the communities were :


             • Whether the communities will benefit from  the  2010  Soccer
               World Cup.


             • Whether the 2010 FIFA Bill would allow people from other
               countries to bring things such as medicines from their
               countries.


             • Whether FIFA will be  controlling  the  country  during  the
               world cup.


             • That some of the municipalities were not consulted  The
               people felt that the committee should visit all the
               districts and hear the views of the people.


             • Traditional leaders were not consulted or involved in the
               preparations for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. They feel
               neglected as all the development seem to be focusing on
               urban areas such as the building of stadiums. People from
               the rural areas have to pay a lot of money to go and watch
               these games in town.  The people would like to see these
               matches played in rural areas such as Empangeni, Kwa
               Mthethwa, etc.





   (iv) Traditional Leaders’ Input


   The traditional leaders came to the meeting not  knowing  the  agenda  or
   purpose of the meeting. However, they felt that the Department  of  Sport
   as the key role player should call all stakeholders and  synchronize  the
   programme and each stakeholder should be aware of the  role  they  should
   play or their responsibility.  The traditional leaders will  go  back  as
   the House of Traditional Leaders and plan how to approach the  2010  FIFA
   World Cup.


   G. Challenges faced with regard to the 2010 preparations


   (i)      In  KZN  the  2010  issue  is  approached  in  a  disjointed  or
        uncoordinated manner.


    ii) There  is  a  steering  committee  from  the  Department  of  Local
        Government and Traditional Affairs, in the office  of  the  Premier
        and also other Provincial Committees.


   iii) The focus in all the discussions and preparations is  on  2010  and
        not  beyond.   Furthermore,   the   stakeholders   focus   on   the
        infrastructure   like   stadiums   and   not    other    associated
        infrastructure such as roads and hospitals.


    iv) The other loophole in the preparations is that  the  South  African
        Football Association (SAFA) has not been engaged.





   Recommendations






   On the issue of 2010 World Cup, there should be a  more  focused  meeting
   between the affected committees and the  various  stakeholders  soon,  to
   discuss issues.


   The chairperson of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Local  Government  and
   Traditional Affairs in the provincial  legislature  should  coordinate  a
   meeting with the chairpersons of the Portfolio Committees  on  Sport  and
   the Premier Portfolio Committee as soon as possible to  try  and  address
   the challenges and improve communication between the stakeholders.





   E. Meeting with the Speaker, Chief Whip, Chair of Chairs and  Whips  from
      all parties





      Hon. Oliphant outlined the following objectives of the visit:


      (a)    The  National  Council  of  Provinces  (NCOP)  in  this  year’s
          provincial  week  decided  to  send  permanent  delegates  to  the
          provinces to try and synchronize the  relations  and  to  try  and
          tighten up loopholes that may be there.


      (b)   With regard to the FIFA Bill before the NCOP, the delegation has
          learnt that the province has  conducted  public  hearings  on  the
          Bill.   The  delegation  would  also  like  to  know  whether  the
          leadership of the Legislature is monitoring that process.


      (c)   He appealed to the leadership of the legislature that whenever a
          S76 Bill is debated in the NCOP, special delegates  should  attend
          those sessions to give an explanation or an idea on  the  decision
          of the province  whether to vote for, against or abstain.


      (d)   Furthermore, when there are debates on budget votes or issues of
          public interest in the NCOP, the MECs and the leadership are  also
          requested to attend.


      (e)   In exercising oversight over the Executive, the  purpose  should
          be to assist the Executive and not to focus on the achievements.


      (f)   The province is also requested to monitor the implementation  by
          Provincial Departments of legislation passed by Parliament. One of
          the reasons  for  that  is  that  if  such  legislation  has  some
          loopholes,  the  legislature,  through  permanent  delegates,  can
          recommend amendment of such legislation.


      (g)   The province is  also  encouraged  to  familiarize  itself  with
          section 76 legislation, whenever such  legislation  is  tabled  or
          introduced in the National Assembly. This will enable the province
          to be able to effectively deliberate by the time  the  legislation
          comes to the NCOP because it will be familiar with its content.






   Concerns raised by the Province






       a) The provinces are invited to attend debates in the NCOP,  but  are
          then given only five or ten minutes in debates.


       b) Timeframes for the Bills from NCOP to the provinces is a matter of
          concern. Provinces are not given sufficient time  to  process  the
          Bills.  Sometimes they do not follow the Cycle, but are just fast-
          tracked.


       c) When presenting submissions or mandates to NCOP Select Committees,
          the  provinces  are  told  there  is  no  time  to  discuss   such
          submissions.


       d) The NCOP does not provide provinces with the supporting  documents
          that they receive  from  the  departments,  and  submissions  from
          stakeholders.


       e) Clash of periods  of  considering  departmental  budget  votes  by
          Parliament and Provincial Legislatures.


       f) The Parliamentary Portfolio and Select Committees visit  provinces
          without checking the program of the provinces’ committees.


       g)  Many  of  the  meetings  between  the  permanent  delegates   and
          provincial members of the legislature do not progress in terms  of
          addressing or correcting the problems.


       h) There is also  a  problem  in  the  province  where  some  special
          delegates go to the NCOP and present their parties’ views  instead
          of those of the province.


       i) Cancellation of meetings (such as  joint  rules)  are  problematic
          such that they amount to a waste of time and money for provinces





   Recommendations





     a. Whenever there are briefings in the provinces on  legislation,  the
        MEC, or if he/she is not  available,  the  provincial  departmental
        officials should attend to assist and brief the provinces  as  they
        receive the information in the MINMECs.


     b. Coordination and programming of activities should be reinforced  in
        order to strengthen communication.


     c. There is a need to improve on the manner of functioning


     d. Regarding oversight visits, the province should make sure that when
        joining national committees there is a measurable outcome.


     e. There must at least be a special delegate that permanently  attends
        the Joint Programme Committee meetings in Parliament.


     f. The MECs’ are requested to  attend  NCOP  debates  where  they  can
        participate rather than attend National Assembly (NA) debates where
        they just sit in the gallery.




F.    Meeting with Premier and Cabinet: Cecil Emmett Hall

The permanent delegates met with the Premier and the Cabinet on Wednesday,
16 August 2006. The Premier welcomed the delegation and the delegation
outlined the purpose of the visit.

The MECs raised the following concerns:

    ➢ The MECs do not get invitations to attend debates in Cape Town.
    ➢ Sometimes if they get the invitations, it is not clearly stated what
      is expected of them and they only become aware when they arrive in
      Cape Town that they should make a presentation.  The lines of
      communication/systems must be rectified to prevent these occurrences.
    ➢ The time allocated in the debates for MECs to make presentations is
      insufficient.
    ➢ The MEC for Sports is unable to attend the NCOP debates because his
      party does not qualify for special delegate.




G.    Meeting with Local Government and  Traditional  Affairs  stakeholders:
   Mondlo Stadium





Various stakeholders raised concerns  on  issues  of  local  government  and
traditional affairs which include the following:-


(a)   The abuse of power by some  traditional  leaders.  For  example,  some
      traditional  leaders  are  selling  land  to  municipalities   without
      consulting the persons involved.


(b)   There is lack of consultation by ward councillors on budget issues.


(c)   Ward councillors  refuse  to  work  together  with  the  elected  ward
      committees.


(d)   There is confusion among the people on where  their  loyalties  should
      lie where two chiefs claim to have jurisdiction in the same area.


(e)   Councillors  do  not  serve  the  interests  of  the  whole  community
      equally. Preference is given to their own political parties.


(f)   Eskom, together with the  Abaqulusi  municipality  refuses  to  accept
      responsibility of electrifying the rural areas of Mondlo.


(g)   The Abaqulusi municipality spends big amounts  on  projects  that  are
      not visible to the communities.


(h)    There  is  still  a  problem  of  water  and  sanitation  and  roads,
      especially those leading to the blood river and the Nquthu road.




H.    Economic development

The MEC for Economic Development addressed the people.

The following concerns were raised by the people:

a. There is no butchery in Dumbe; people had to go to town to buy meat.
b. Out of sixteen co-operatives in Mondlo, only one was recently financed.
c. No training in rural areas e.g. Ulundi
d. The instalments that are supposed to be paid to Ithala are too heavy and
   unaffordable.
e. The Health Department was requested to market the Imbumba co-operative
   as they are doing disposable nappies, toilet rolls etc.
f. How does Ithala help in cropping problems that were not in the original
   business plan?
g. Ithala demand instalment from the first month, in most cases before any
   profit is realised.
h. Certificates were promised after the training was done on co-operatives
   but they were never issued.

The MEC responded as follows:

1.    A business plan should be submitted for a butcher co-operative and
      will be financed by Ithala when a clear business plan is submitted.

3.    When doing business plans thorough research must be made.

4.    Ithala would request for the first instalment in the fourth month.

I.    Arts, Culture, Tourism: Cecil Emmet Rugby Stadium

Crafters of Zululand

Challenges:

-Lack of funds
-Mondlo area is very remote and requires an office
-People do not know where SARS office is
-Finance and training


J.    Premier’s Imbizo





Purpose of the Imbizo


The MEC for Agriculture Chief Ngubane outlined the purpose  of  the  Imbizo.
He said that the Premier and the Cabinet took a decision  to  interact  with
people and explain the programmes of government.


According to the contract with the people  they  promised  to  come  to  the
people often, not only during elections, to get  what  the  people  say  and
explain the programme of government especially  those  of  the  departments,
and to discuss everything that affect the lives of the people  being  health
and economic development, local government etc.






Issues raised by the community


The community raised the following issues:


    ➢ Escalation of crime in the area to the extent that some  people  sleep
      outside their houses to guard their cattle, sheep and goats.


    ➢ Abaqulusi municipality – does not consult people when passing  budget.




    ➢ Revival of old debts by the municipality.


    ➢ Police work with political parties.


    ➢ Lack of roads and bridges especially from Blood River to Mondlo.


    ➢ Non-availability of electricity, housing and water and sanitation.


    ➢ Farm workers are unable to  bury  their  relatives  because  the  farm
      owners refuse them the right to bury them on the farms.


    ➢ There is only one lawyer for the whole Zululand district to attend  to
      land issues who is stationed in Pietermaritzburg.


    ➢ Problem with other traditional leaders selling government land to  the
      people.


    ➢ Schools are far from farms.


    ➢ People are employed according to party allegiance.


    ➢ There is no clinic in Ward 15. People have to walk long  distances  to
      the clinic.


    ➢ HIV/AIDS volunteers need resources/equipment.


    ➢  People  applied  for  grants  in  social  development  in  2004,  the
      scorpions took files, never heard anything until now.


    ➢ High rate of teenage pregnancy at schools specifically by educators.


    ➢ Ulundi Parliament buildings are not used.


    ➢ Closed teachers’ colleges should be re-opened.


    ➢ There is no arts centre in Mondlo.





Input by Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi


Prince Buthelezi, Inkosi of the Buthelezi clan and Undunankulu  kaZulu  made
a presentation on behalf of the traditional leaders. In his presentation  he
commended the Premier for the invitation to the imbizo. He also  highlighted
the problems faced by the traditional leaders  in  the  province.  The  main
problem is absence of communication between the Premier and his Cabinet  and
the traditional leaders after more  than  two  years  since  the  provincial
government acceded to power in the province.


The traditional leaders tried to secure a meeting with the Premier  and  the
MEC for Local Government and Traditional Affairs  but  without  success.  In
some cases the traditional leaders met with the President of the country  to
raise their concerns and the  President  sent  Minister  of  Provincial  and
Local Government, Minister Mufamadi and Inkosi Mzimela to  see  the  Premier
concerning the issue of traditional leaders. The  traditional  leaders  were
concerned about the unavailability of the Premier.





Response by the Premier


In his response the Premier mentioned that there were water projects in  the
province. The goal is that by December 2008 every household in the  province
will have access to water. By  the  year  2012  every  household  should  be
electrified. The Premier also thanked Dr Buthelezi for attending the  Imbizo
which showed his respect for the provincial government.


The  Premier  promised  that  there  will  be  peace  in  KwaZulu-Natal.  He
requested all parties in the province  to  unite  and  go  to  Chief  Albert
Luthuli’s 40 years celebrations as a united force. The Premier  promised  Dr
Buthelezi that he was going to find some time in his busy schedule  to  meet
him for further discussions.


K.    Evaluation and Assessment of the Provincial week

On day five the permanent delegates met with the Deputy Speaker, the Chief
Whip, the Chairperson of Chairpersons, the whips from all parties and the
Standing Committee on NCOP.

The purpose of the meeting was to evaluate and assess the trip and the
success of the meetings held with various stakeholders. During the
evaluation it was agreed that there is a problem of lack of communication
and coordination between the stakeholders especially the NCOP and the
Legislature. There is also no proper coordination between various
stakeholders in preparation for the 2010 FIFA world Cup.

The other challenges raised were that  Parliamentary  Committees  both  from
the National Assembly and the NCOP decide to visit provinces without  taking
into consideration the programmes of the provincial committees. The  members
agreed that these challenges should be addressed and corrected.

6. Visit to Limpopo Province

   The delegates met with  relevant  stakeholders,  including  the  clinics,
   NGO’s, home based care facilities and various  projects.  The  delegation
   set out to ascertain the following:

               • whether any progress has been made in service delivery;
               • the challenges faced at the various projects visited;
               • to get feedback from the communities on whether things have
                 improved for them.


   A. Issues that arose from  the  two  meetings  held  with  the  Executive
      Council and Members of the Provincial Legislature

   During these  meetings,  which  were  chaired  by  the  Hon  MJ  Mahlangu
   (Chairperson  of  the  NCOP),  he  re-iterated  the   need   for   better
   communication and co-operation between the Provincial Legislature and the
   permanent delegates of the Province.


   The Hon Mr MJ Mahlangu stated that it is  of  paramount  importance  that
   Members of the Provincial Legislature and permanent delegates function as
   a single unit, ensuring that the interests of the Province  are  properly
   represented  especially  when  it  comes  to  legislation  affecting  the
   Province.


   Hon MJ Mahlangu acknowledged that it is not always possible  for  Members
   to meet in person  due  to  travelling  constraints,  informing  everyone
   present that the NCOP is currently  busy  setting  up  a  media  /  video
   conferencing network facility. This will  enable  Members  and  Presiding
   Officers to liaise and consult with the  Provinces  on  a  regular  basis
   without inconveniencing anyone.


   It was further suggested that this type of meeting between the  permanent
   delegates and the Provincial Legislature should  be  held  twice  yearly,
   discussing  issues  affecting  the  Province  and  how  the  Province  is
   represented in Parliament.

   Concerns raised by Permanent Delegates
        • Permanent delegates serve on different committees in the NCOP  and
          should be kept informed by the province on issues, decisions taken
          in provincial committee meetings and the views / opinions  of  the
          Province on matters.
        • Permanent delegates should be  involved  in  Provincial  Committee
          meetings, public hearings and other activities in the Province.
        • Proper co-operation should be afforded to Permanent delegates  not
          belonging to  the  ruling  party  when  they  come  to  brief  the
          Provincial Committee.
        •  There  should  be  proper  co-ordination   of   Legislative   and
          Parliamentary programmes.
        • Questions raised to the Executive by permanent  delegates  in  the
          NCOP should come from the province, as they are  representing  the
          province.
        • Special Delegates should be  present  in  the  NCOP  when  matters
          affecting the province are being debated, also  bringing  subjects
          for debate.


 Concerns raised by the Province


        • Documents and all relevant information from  the  NCOP  should  be
          made available to the Province on a continuous bases.
        • Any provincial visit to the Province should not  be  done  at  the
          last hour, resulting in criticism to  the  province  for  not  co-
          operating.
        • The two Houses of Parliament should inform  each  other  regularly
          when it comes to visits to the province, as in  some  cases  there
          are duplication of visits. This in turn has a negative  effect  on
          the budget of the province as these  duplicated  visits  were  not
          budgeted for.
        • The Province does not have committees  for  all  departments,  but
          should still be kept informed on matters affecting  the  province.
          There is a need for delegates in the NCOP to  consult  and  engage
          Chairperson of provincial committees on issues.
        • There is a need for  proper  communication  and  co-ordination  of
          Legislative and Parliamentary programmes.
        • There is a need for the province to  be  more  involved  and  give
          input when it comes to Section 75 bills, as this does  affect  the
          province. The province should be notified  timorously  when  Bills
          are discussed in meetings and in the House.
        • There should be  a  steady  and  continuous  flow  of  information
          between  the  NCOP   Presiding   Officers   and   the   Provincial
          Legislature.
        • Parliament should be more  sensitive  towards  issues  within  the
          province and not criticise the Province during public hearings for
          non-performance without knowing all the facts.


 Outcome of meetings

 The need for better communication  and  co-ordination  was  noted  by  all
 present with the following recommendations:

        • Members in both the NCOP and Provincial  Legislature  should  have
          the relevant contact details of their counterparts, informing them
          immediately of any developments affecting the province.
        • As challenging as it may be, MECs  must  attempt  to  attend  NCOP
          Provincial Caucus or send someone to represent them so  as  to  be
          informed.
        • NCOP delegates should when necessary inform the Province about the
          caucus agenda so that the MECs are better prepared when  attending
          caucus meetings.
        • Permanent delegates should also be able to request briefings  from
          provincial committees on matters before  Parliament  that  affects
          the Province.
        • Basic documents should be made available on  a  continuous  bases,
          enabling the relevant parties to respond and  raise  questions  in
          the House.
        • Better use should be made of the liaison officer situated in Regis
          house, as that office  should  be  the  key  to  keeping  everyone
          informed on a regular base.


 B.   Meeting at the Parliamentary Village with NGOs and CBOs dealing  with
    Child Headed-Families and HIV/ Aids


 Due to time constraints Members and all  organisations  present  were  not
 able to engage each other properly, whereafter a request was made that all
 questions and requests be put in writing and submitted to  the  Provincial
 Liaisons Officer who will do follow – ups.


 Those  organisations  present  were  given  the  opportunity  to  give   a
 background of their organisation and  submit  profile  documents  to  that
 effect.


 Itshepheng Community Health Care & Aids Educators (ICARE)


 The aim of the group is to promote positive living style while  partnering
 in the fight against  HIV  /  AIDS,  teenage  pregnancy  and  drug  abuse,
 addressing the needs of the youth within the community.


 Vision


 ICARE is primarily committed to rural  regeneration,  empowerment,  social
 skills development  and  prevention  of  HIV  /  AIDS  and  other  chronic
 diseases, and support of abused victims through:


                • Provision of community health  awareness  programmes  and
                  provision of counselling;
                • Developing direct contact and support programme
                • Directly Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS) programme
                  to TB patients and other chronic illnesses;
                • Motivating and promote openness to HIV  /  AIDS  victims;
                  and
                • Support to the terminally ill community members


      Mission

 ICARE strengthens the sense of partnership in order to root  out  poverty,
 poor home health care and silence of women and child  abuse  cases,  which
 contributes a great deal in the spreading of HIV / AIDS and other  chronic
 illnesses. This is achieved through health care, life skills  development,
 awareness campaigns  and  support  services  to  individuals,  groups  and
 society.

 Challenges

 There is a need for financial assistance to sustain the  programme,  which
 happens to be the first in the municipality of Fetakgomo.

 Sentahle Community Home Based Care Organisation

 The organisation was established on the 1st June 2001 and is based in  the
 Capricorn district of Polokwane. Due to the high  mortality  rate  in  the
 Province and the inability of the hospitals to cope with the  high  number
 of admitted patients, the organisation embarked on a  project  to  provide
 home based care which has proven to be cost effective.

 Objective

 The organisation is devoted to giving care and  support  to  orphaned  and
 vulnerable children,  HIV  /  AIDS,  TB  affected  clients,  child  headed
 families and poverty stricken families including:

  ▪ People suffering from terminal illness;
  ▪ Aged and frail;
  ▪ People with mental or physical disabilities;
  ▪ Drug abusers; and
  ▪ Any disadvantaged group or person in need of care

 Challenges

 The shortage of  health  care  professionals  assisting  patients  in  the
 clinic, medical supplies and funding.

 Belabela Community Co-ordination Centre for Home Based & Orphan Care

 The organisation was established in 1996 by the BelaBela Welfare Society,

 Mission

 To provide care and support to HIV / Aids infected and affected people  in
 the community.

 Activities

  ▪ Prevention and awareness campaigns
  ▪ VCT counselling and ongoing counselling
  ▪ Care for orphans and vulnerable children
  ▪ Training and Piloting of projects
  ▪ ARV treatment and roll out in the community

 Achievements

      ▪ Campaigns are rendered to Churches, Schools, etc
    ▪  More  than  17000  people  have  been  tested  and  receive   ongoing
      counselling and support
    ▪ Yearly 200 terminally ill patients receive  HBC  provided  by  trained
      community volunteers
    ▪ Presently 315  orphans  and  vulnerable  children  are  assisted  with
      educational issues, nutrition and social support
      ▪ Training and Piloting to outside  communities  in  other  Provinces
        and
      relevant training to set up their own community based programmes


 Challenges

  ▪ Keep track with demand for services
  ▪ Training of new and current staff
  ▪ Keeping in touch with community needs
  ▪ Funding and future security for the programme
  ▪ Accommodation upgrades

 C.   Projects visited

 Lepelle Nkumpi Housing Project

 The project was approved in 2005/06 with a budget allocation of  R  6  385
 800 for the completion of 200 units. To date 125 units have been completed
 with an amount of R 3 409 460 being utilised.

 Observations from the delegates

 Most of the houses visited by the delegation displayed  poor  workmanship,
 shoddy materials, cracks and opening in  walls.  A  very  serious  concern
 raised by the delegates was the fact that people were now expected to stay
 in these inferior buildings that could pose possible threats to the  young
 and the elderly.

 The relevant authorities  should  be  notified  in  order  to  remedy  the
situation.

 Lafata Agricultural Youth Project (LAYP)

 The LAYP was started in 2004 and is made up of 15 beneficiaries (7 male  &
 8 female), who were unemployed at the time but had a passion for  farming.
 The Project is funded with a government  grant  and  is  registered  as  a
 trust.

 The project is situated on a 407 hectare farm called Lisbon, which is  4km
 South West of the town called Mokopane. The  farm  was  purchased  by  the
 Limpopo Department of Agriculture through the LRAD programme at a cost  of
 R 1 050 000.

 Objectives

    ▪ To empower beneficiaries with the management and farming skills
    ▪ To create meaningful job opportunities  for  beneficiaries  and  local
      residents
    ▪  To  supply  the  local  market  with  fresh  quality  and  affordable
      products

 Accomplishments to date

     ▪ De-bushed a 55 ha area
     ▪ Drilled two additional boreholes for irrigation purposes
     ▪ Constructed 8 broiler houses with a capacity  to  carry  1000  birds
       each
     ▪ Completed a plan which has been approved for a chicken abattoir
     ▪  Completed  earth  works  for  the  construction  of  a   controlled
       environment broiler house
     ▪ Laying of water pipes for the water reticulation to  chicken  houses
       is in process
     ▪ Construction of ablution facilities is in progress
     ▪ Construction of a marketing pen is in progress

 Activities still to be undertaken

    ▪ Construction of a chicken abattoir
    ▪ Installation of a drip irrigation system
    ▪ Construction of the controlled environment broiler house
    ▪ Goat production

 Challenges

    ▪ Lack of communication between beneficiaries  and  the  officials  from
      the Department of Agriculture
    ▪ Beneficiaries who are absent from the project
    ▪ The absence of the trustees from the project

 Observations from the delegates

 The extension officers from the Department of Agriculture should visit the
 project more often and arrange for  the  necessary  skills  training  that
 members of the project require.

 It is highly irregular that so much money was invested into  this  project
 and yet the project has no constitution  or  founding  document  to  guide
 members of the project.  The delegation also found  it  strange  that  the
 Department has allowed the trustees of the project to be absent for such a
 long time, preventing the members from opening a bank account  to  deposit
 the proceeds of transactions.

 The delegation recommends that the Department takes the necessary steps to
 have the current board  of  trustees  dissolved  and  form  a  new  board,
 whereafter a bank account must be opened in the name of the trust.

 EPWP Fencing Project: D4045, D4295 & D1547
 This project entails the erection of an animal-proof fence on  both  sides
 of the road for a distance of 111.7 km  starting  from  the  bank  of  the
 Lepelle River and ending at Motetema Township by labour intensive methods.

 The project is situated in the Sekhukhune District Municipality  and  runs
 through the following local municipalities in  that  area:  Makhuduthamaga
 and Greater Groblersdal.

 The project started on  the  1st  January  2006  and  is  expected  to  be
 completed on the 6th October 2006. To date 191 people have  been  employed
 with the amount of R 4 000 000 allocated to the project.

 Observations from the delegates

 The delegates were happy with the progress made at the fencing site.

 Makumeke Integrated Enterprise (Vhembe)

 A baseline community study was conducted in 2002 for  problems  and  needs
 identification. The whole community was involved in this  exercise,  where
 the need was found to be employment and wealth creation.

 The enterprise combined poultry and  vegetable  production  and  currently
 occupies an area of 3ha for poultry and 60ha for vegetable production.

 Challenges

    ▪ Poor soil fertility management, resulting in low yields
    ▪ Soil erosion associated with degeneration of production fields
    ▪ Lack of knowledge as to how to break the poverty cycle

 Observations from the delegates

 Despite the challenges that the members of the project faced, they managed
 to turn the project around and make something meaningful  of  the  project
 that was able to support and feed their families.

 The delegates also noted the  dedication  of  the  extension  officers  in
 assisting the members of the project where necessary,  complimenting  them
 for their hard work and dedication.

 Murunwa Bakery Project

 The  project  was  initiated  by  the  Department  of  Health  and  Social
 Development, Nutrition Directorate during the 1996/97 financial year.  The
 project was funded with the capital amount of R 6000 in order to phase out
 food hand outs as a strategy to discourage the  dependency  on  food  hand
 outs.

 The objective was to alleviate hunger and improve the status of  nutrition
 through developmental projects and nutritional education in the  district.
 The target group  was  the  poorest  of  the  poor  in  the  disadvantaged
 villages, namely; Murunwa, Matshavhawe, Tshitavha and Tshedza.

 The project initially started as a vegetable garden and developed  into  a
 bakery with 8 female beneficiaries.

 Challenges

    ▪ High electricity bill
    ▪ Transport
    ▪ No tender to supply bread to Hospitals and Health centres for the
      current financial year.


 Observations from the delegates

 Members of the delegation were of the opinion that something was afoot  at
 this project, as responses to questions posed to the Departmental official
 were very vague. They observed the following:

    ▪ The project was not visited  on  a  regular  bases  by  the  extension
      officers
    ▪ The Department, through its extension officers  did  not  monitor  the
      project and assist them with proper bookkeeping.
    ▪ Why did the Department allow the tenders  to  lapse,  when  they  knew
      that it was up for renewal? The members of  the  project  should  have
      been properly advised.
    ▪ Why did the Department  allow  members  of  the  project  to  spend  a
      monthly amount of R 1500 on transport, whereas  the  Department  could
      have tried to assist with transport somehow?

 The delegation was informed that the projects tender to provide  bread  to
 clinics will be renewed, which was the  first  time  the  project  members
 heard of this. The Departmental Official was requested to provide  written
 proof that the tender will be renewed and that extension  officers  should
 visit the project regularly.

 Seleka Home Based Care

 The Seleka Home Based Care  was  established  in  2001  with  the  aim  of
 providing support, care  and  training  to  individuals.  The  project  is
 located around Ga-Seleka area  which  covers  13  rural  villages  namely:
 Matlhahedi, Kauletsi, Letlora, Lerupurupuing, Moong and Segale.

 The organisation is being managed to establish a Home Based  Care  project
 with and for the community, with the number of beneficiaries increasing on
 a monthly bases.

 Objectives of the project

    ▪ To provide basic care for patients at home, focusing  on  HIV  /  AIDS
      and other chronic illnesses
    ▪ To provide basic care for orphans and vulnerable children
    ▪ Train caregivers to provide quality care and support
    ▪ To provide support to TB patients and affected families
    ▪ To provide health education to the affected communities
    ▪ To provide nutritional support to patients
    ▪ To monitor the smooth running of the Drop-in-Centre (Orphan Care).

 Observations from the delegates

 The delegates were happy with the progress of the home Based Care Centre
 and very impressed with the facilities being built and services rendered.

 They were glad that the community was being serviced by such a well
 organised Home Based Centre, reiterating that people’s lives are being
 changed for the better.

 Vongani Child and Youth Care Development Project

 Vongani Youth and Child Care Development Project was established  in  2001
 and registered in 2002 as a  Non  Profit  Organisation.  The  project  was
 established after the problems of teenage pregnancy  and  school  dropouts
 were identified. The organisation was focussing more on issues related  to
 child and youth care activities i.e. Children’s rights and Youth  at  Risk
 Programme.

 During  2002  a  need  was  identified  for  information  about  a  Victim
 Empowerment programme, addressing  the  issue  of  child  abuse,  domestic
 violence and substance abuse. Vongani is now doing  referrals,  debriefing
 and continuous counselling to homes through home visits.

 Objectives

    ▪ To have a One Stop Centre
    ▪  To   strengthen   partnerships   with   communities,   organisations,
      institutions in civil society and the government sector.
    ▪ To support the community through home visits
    ▪ To educate the community about  chronic  diseases  including  HIV  and
      AIDS
    ▪  To  promote  the  establishment  of  entertainment   facilities   for
      children and youth
    ▪ To respond to all forms of violence and  empower  women  and  children
      and come up with effective strategies to deal with  victims  of  crime
      and perpetrators
    ▪ To offer training in skills development for youth and women
    ▪ To promote awareness, knowledge  and  understanding  amongst  children
      and youth

 Challenges

    ▪ Proper capital funding for vehicle and building structure
    ▪ Retention of professional and skilled staff

 Observations from the delegates

 Due to time constraints the delegation was not  able  to  properly  engage
 members of the project. They were, however, given an opportunity to give a
 background of their project and submit profile documents to that effect.

 Lepellane Catchment Project

 The Lepellane catchment was initiated during 2004/05, as a result of water
 shortages at the lepellane irrigation scheme since 1990. As  a  result  of
 water shortages, 250 small scale irrigation  farmers  could  not  continue
 with  production.  The  catchment  area  covers  34  villages  under   the
 leadership and guidance of 32 Magoshi (traditional leaders).

 During an investigation it was discovered that the dam has silted  to  80%
 of its capacity, and the municipality was approached  for  assistance.  It
 was later discovered that the irrigation farmers were not the only  people
 affected, as an area of 78 000ha covering Fetakgomo and Makhuduthamaga  on
 the upper catchment area was also prone to erosion.

 After much  consultation  with  stakeholders,  different  Departments  and
 Municipalities, it was agreed that desilting the dam would not  solve  the
 problem. It was agreed to construct a conservation structure on the  upper
 lying areas before desilting of the dam could commence. The funding amount
 of R 4 100 000 for the first phase was granted during 2005/06.

 Institutional Arrangements

 A committee of 10 members was established on 23 April 2005  comprising  of
 five members from each of the  two  municipalities,  with  a  project  co-
 ordinator from each municipality. Two members of the  District  Land  care
 committee serve as advisors to the committee.

 Awareness creation

 As a result of members attending two  Planning-for-Development  workshops,
 the Lepellane committee was able to host  awareness  campaigns  throughout
 the catchment.


 During 2005/06 the committee succeeded to create awareness at 24  villages
 (9 in Fetakgomo and 15 in Makhuduthamaga).

 Soil conservation

 23 Gabions of different sizes were constructed.
 Fencing

 A  26km  fence  for  the  division  of  grazing  from  arable  lands   was
constructed.

 Bush Encroachment

 45 hectares of Fern trees in the grazing areas  have  been  brought  under
control.

 Partnerships

    ▪ Department of Public Works
    ▪ Two Local Municipalities
    ▪ Department of Water Affairs
    ▪ Department of Economic Development, Environment and Tourism
    ▪ Agricultural Research Council (ARC)
    ▪ Department of Education
    ▪ Tompi Seleka Agricultural College
    ▪ Green Growth

 Future Plans

    ▪ Desilting of the dam
    ▪ Construction of Gabion Structures for soil conservation
    ▪ Construction of waterways
    ▪ Construction of contour banks
    ▪ Planting of Vertivae and Sisal
    ▪ Construction of storm water banks
    ▪ Construction of fences
    ▪ Control of bush encroachment
    ▪ Capacitate beneficiaries
    ▪ Create jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme.

 Observation from the delegates

Members of the delegation commended the members of the project for their
hard work and dedication. It was further suggested that the project should
be discussed at a political level in order to make it a pilot project.

7. Visit to Mpumalanga Province

A. Findings

Meeting with MEC J L Mahlangu –Department of Local  Government  and  Housing
and Leader of Government Business.

The permanent delegates outlined briefly the objectives of the visit as to:
      - check the problem of in-complete houses, and how the department  is
        dealing with those who could not finish the work.
      - assess how far is the department with  the  eradication  of  Bucket
        system in the Province
      - raise a concern over the minimal participation of MECs  in  IGFR  –
        Public Hearings Budget Debates in the NCOP.

MEC JL Mahlangu responded as  the  Leader  of  Government  Business  to  the
issues raised by the Delegation. He admitted that the  attendance  was  poor
in Budget Debates due to clash of programs, NCOP’s  programme  with  one  of
the Province.

The leader of Government  Business  also  explained  that  MECs  invited  by
Select committees to account are constitutionally not obliged to honour  the
invitations.  He also raised his dissatisfaction in the manner in which  the
NCOP handles this matter.  It was agreed that  further  discussions  on  the
matter would be pursued.

Department of Local Government and Housing

Three senior officials from the Department accompanied MEC JL Mahlangu.  The
MEC mentioned that there  were  17  840  incomplete  houses  and  +-  6  000
completed. The rebuilding of incomplete houses is costly. The Department  of
Housing has allocated R108 173 320 towards this program.  Small  contractors
who were involved in unfinished work and those who fraudulently made  claims
are facing legal action  and  were  off-loaded  from  the  system.   Due  to
incompetence of small contractors, the Department appointed big  contractors
to do the work and the small contractors are subcontracted.

Eradication of the Bucket System

The Department has eradicated the  Bucket  System  in  most  municipalities.
The outstanding area is in Delmas where there is a shortage of land and  the
Department was negotiating for land to be made available for  people  to  be
relocated.  Municipal workers who serviced the  buckets  in  the  past  were
redeployed to do maintenance work for the new toilets.

Visit to Albert Luthuli Municipality – Silobela Township -Carolina

The Delegation visited Silobela Township to observe the eradication  of  the
Bucket System.  Complete eradication  of  the  bucket  system  in  Silobela.
Toilets are waterborne and water is recycled for  consumption  and  purified
water flow back to the river nearby.   Health  inspectors  visit  the  place
regularly.

Ekulindeni

One of the areas where bucket system toilets has been eradicated.There  were
330 VIP toilets; they are structured in a way that they could  be  converted
into waterborne sewerage system in future.

Municipality                                 No of Toilets completed
|Dipaleseng                        |1146                              |
|Lekwa                             |1201 requested and identified 973 |
|Msukaligwa                        |1090                              |
|Albert Luthuli                    |5140                              |
|Govan Mbeki                       |3383                              |
|Delmas                            |350                               |


Meeting with the Head of  Department  (HOD)  of  Sport,  Culture,  Arts  and
Recreation, Mr EJ Magagula.

The delegation outlined the objectives of the Provincial  Week,  as  amongst
others, to: assess readiness of the province regarding  the  up-coming  2010
World Cup.

The HOD responded that FIFA has allocated R2, 2 Billion to SAFA.   FIFA  had
already established offices in the  country.   Dr  Jordan  CEO  has  briefed
officials.  The Province has interdepartmental committee of  six  (6)  MECs.
Department has come up with Sectoral  Structure.    In  the  office  of  the
Premier, the DDG has also been appointed to manage all  business  pertaining
to 2010 World Cup.   The Department has appointed  a  Director  specifically
to deal with 2010 World Cup preparations in  the  province.   Swaziland  and
Mozambique have been roped in to participate.

The building of a stadium should commence on 1 September 2006 and there  are
two schools that need to be relocated.  The Province held  a  Soccer  Indaba
with all stakeholders so that they could  input  into  the  preparations  of
2010 World Cup.

CHALLENGES

Generally, the province is faced with the challenge  of  resources  for  the
building of Sports facilities.  The actual challenge  is  that  funds  meant
for  sport  facilities  are  not  ring-fenced,  they  are  lumped  into  the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) and they  are  often  used  to  finance
other pressing MIG projects and thereby sport facilities lose out.

With regard to the development of  the  game  of  soccer,  the  Province  is
looking at having at least two (2) players  in  the  Bafana-Bafana  team  by
2010.  It  has  introduced  Mayoral  Cups  in  all  municipalities  so  that
children can start immediately to be involved in sport.   Each  Municipality
has a Sport Facility for which they are trained to look after.

Compounding the problem of accommodation is  the  question:  what  will  all
these facilities be used for after the World cup.   The  Province  needs  to
come up with tourism packages and intensify participation in sport.

Accommodation is the problem in the Province.  There are  often  not  enough
facilities to accommodate patrons attending massive  events.   Part  of  the
solution might be that people  need  to  come  up  with  Bed  and  Breakfast
establishments.

Meeting with the Head of Department (HOD) of Education and his team

The NCOP Delegation outlined briefly the objectives of the Provincial  Visit
as to:
      - assess challenges in Scholar Transport
      - check the readiness for Matric examinations
      - assess the implementation of  no-fees schools policy as  stated  in
        the recent legislation
      - check implementation of School Nutrition program
      - check infrastructure in schools (whether there are learners  taught
        under trees).

CHALLENGES IN SCHOLAR TRANSPORT

The Department  acknowledged  that  there  are  problems  with  the  scholar
transport in the province. There is a  phenomenal  escalation  of  costs  in
this program resulting from fraudulent claims by some service  providers  in
collusion with certain officials.  In 2001/02 the  budget  was  R10  million
and when the costs escalated to R59 million in 2005 the cabinet  decided  to
investigate and appointed Price Waterhouse Coopers to do the probe.    There
was over-claiming of more or less R6 Million.  The  Department  investigated
and some officials  were  found  guilty  and  disciplined.   The  Department
introduced a Supply Chain Management that replaced the  Tender  Board.   The
scholar transport had 435 routes and  51  are  expiring  by  December  2006.
They transport 54 000 learners.  The Department paid out R176  Million,  R17
million are unpaid claims and the sum is R193 Million.

The routes went out on Tender and there was a demand  for  temporary  routes
and that caused problems.  Letters were sent out to extend temporary  routes
and it opened up for fraud.  More routes are to be cancelled as  schools  in
farms are closing down due to  decline  of  learner  numbers.   The  service
providers who won tenders then claimed that  the  department  promised  them
not to tender until 2007 and now are taking the Department to court.

After  submitting  the  interim  report,  the  Cabinet  resolved  that   the
investigation should go in-depth  and  pinpoint  culprits  as  well  as  the
extent of loss suffered by the Department due to the fraudulent  activities.
 The appointment of Price Waterhouse Coopers was extended for  this  purpose
and the Department is still waiting for the progress  report  due  in  three
months time.  The Department promised that by March 2007  tenders  would  be
in place.

READINESS FOR MATRIC EXAMINATION

About the improvements of Matric results, the Department has formed  a  unit
called Ayihlome Ifunde for all under- performing schools.  It is new and  is
still employing staff.  There were 157 schools that had a  pass  rate  under
50%.  After investigation it was found that Management in  schools  was  the
problem.  Departmental officials were  deployed  to  assist  principals  who
were not coping but there were still problems because they  also  had  their
jobs to do.  The Department had liaised with the University of  Pretoria  to
offer orientation  to  450  teachers  of  the  Province  because  they  lack
mastering of content.  Learners are attending  Saturday  classes  and  extra
classes during school holidays.

INFRASTRUCTURE AT SCHOOLS

The Department of Education has a  turnaround  strategy  for  infrastructure
service delivery 2006/07.  It has a backlog of  approximately  4000  classes
and up to 7 500 when includes unsafe  and  unsuitable  structures.   In  the
MEC’s budget speech that it will deliver 709 classrooms,  1291  toilets  and
provide 85 schools with water and provide 40 schools with electricity.

Meeting with the Speaker, YN Phosa and Deputy Speaker BJ Nobunga

The Delegation briefed the  Speakership  about  the  aim  of  the  visit  as
follows:
      - Functioning of Regis / Constitution House needs to be strengthened,
        especially the capacity of the  Liaison  Officers  who  are  mostly
        doing  administration  and  not  assisting   politically   and   in
        processing bills
      - A researcher is needed at the Regis/ Constitution House because  of
        the vacancy caused by resignation
      - The New six weeks cycle
      - Uniformity on Provincial Mandates
      - Questions and Motions
      - Leadership in Regis/ Constitution House
      - Opening of Legislatures
      - Clarity on coordination between the NCOP and the Legislature
      - NCOP office in the Legislature

RESPONSES AS FOLLOWS:

CONSTITUTION HOUSE

Constitution House needs to be beefed up  as  Liaison  Officers  are  tasked
with administration.  Research capacity is not only needed  in  Constitution
House but in the Legislature as well.  Legislature needs to  prioritise  the
appointment of a researcher, as it is a very essential resource.

It was mentioned that Provincial Whips are the  leaders  of  the  Provincial
delegations.   They  are  supposed  to  work  with   Liaison   Officers   to
communicate with the province.

SIX WEEKS CYCLE

The province welcomed the six weeks cycle as they will be  able  to  conduct
public hearings effectively.

QUESTIONS AND MOTIONS

Legislature leadership needs to look at the proposal on how to  conduct  the
process and procedures to deal with questions and motions.
      Below are some of the matters which permanent delegates need  to  take
      up:

In the meeting with the Finance and Fiscal Commission (FFC)  it  was  stated
that Mpumalanga Province carries financial burden as  trucks  carrying  coal
pass through Gert Sibande Region and destroy  roads.  80%  of  entrances  to
Kruger National Park are in the province and  people  who  grew  up  in  the
province and have spent their productive years  in  Gauteng  Province,  come
back to the province  when  they  are  on  pension  and  that  also  affects
financial growth of the province.

PROVINCIAL MANDATES

Uniformity is needed when it comes to  Provincial  mandates.    Speakerships
were not aware about the Draft Mandate Bill that was before the NCOP.

The province is experiencing  problems  with  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism
(JTM) as State Law Advisers tag  bills  as  Section  75  whereas  they  have
provincial interests e.g. in the Cross Border Bill,  the  province  was  not
pleased because they were not given an opportunity to  hold  Public  Hearing
as the Bill was tagged Section 75.  Some  bills  came  from  the  department
tagged. The Province felt the need to play a role in the tagging  processes.


Bills that take long in the National Assembly, and come  to  the  NCOP  with
the request to be  fast-tracked  do  not  do  justice  to  the  NCOP.    The
province feels that there must be a  horizontal  communication  so  that  if
there is a problem in tagging as it happened to the 2010  FIFA  Bill,  which
resulted in splitting the bill, it could be avoided.

The Speaker raised a concern that permanent delegates  are  not  visible  in
the province, however, clarification was made  that  primary  responsibility
and duties are in the NCOP as provided in constitution.

The committee further agreed that  in  important  events,  inter  alia,  the
State of Nation  Address,  Provincial  (GDS)  permanent  delegates  need  to
attend. The Speaker was concerned about  the  financial  implications  as  a
result of the preparations of TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE that it  draws
a lot of money in the budget.

MEETING WITH CHAIR OF CHAIRS MR CNM PADAYACHEE AND COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS

NCOP permanent delegates outlined briefly the objectives  of  the  visit  as
follows:
      - New six weeks cycle
      - Uniformity on Provincial Mandates
      - Question and Motions
      - Correlation of matters affecting the NCOP and the legislatures
      - Public Hearings

CHAIR OF CHAIRS MR PADAYACHEE AND CHAIRPERSONS

NEW SIX WEEKS CYCLE

The province welcomed the new six weeks cycle, as people will be engaged  in
the law making process. An indication is needed when the Bill is  tabled  in
the NCOP so that committees can prepare themselves.

MANDATES

It was of concern that mandates are an issue  but  the  discussion  will  be
held over until the draft  bill  on  Mandates  is  dealt  with  by  all  the
provinces.

PUBLIC HEARINGS

The Legislature felt that Public Education is needed to educate  the  public
about issues before Public Hearings.  Public  participation  became  minimal
when dealing with bills because the public don’t have information.

MEETING WITH THE PREMIER, MR TSP MAKWETLA

The Premier mentioned that is important for the NCOP and his office to  meet
regularly.  The Premier mentioned that according to  the  Constitution  NCOP
Permanent Delegates represent the province in the NCOP therefore,  there  is
a dire need to meet constantly.

The Premier  mentioned  that  the  NCOP  has  a  responsibility  to  conduct
oversight over the National Departments.  Therefore,  it  is  important  for
NCOP delegates to conduct proper oversight over these  departments,  as  the
Province has no mandate.

The provincial legislature also has a responsibility  to  conduct  oversight
on provincial departments.  The Premier further mentioned that  it  was  not
appropriate for the NCOP to engage in a follow-up visit to KwaMhlanga  since
the MECs of various provincial departments and top  officials  are  required
to be present as well.  He also mentioned that the NCOP follow-up visit  has
financial implications to the province.

The Premier reported that he has written a letter to the Chairperson of  the
NCOP requesting postponement of NCOP follow-up  visit  to  KwaMhlanga  until
certain issues are clarified.

B. RECOMMENDATIONS:

The Department needs to provide the delegation with the report on the
Soccer Indaba that took place in the province.

8. Visit to the North West Province

A. Introduction

In order to ascertain that the North West NCOP  Permanent  Delegates  ensure
that their province plays an integral role in the activities  of  the  NCOP,
they will have to be continuously kept abreast with the developments in  the
North West Province through programmes such as the NCOP Provincial Week.  In
this context the provincial week  programme  had  afforded  the  North  West
Permanent Delegates an opportunity to interact with various communities  and
departments within the Province by  listening  to  the  views  and  also  to
exchange and share ideas on progress  that  has  been  made  around  service
delivery issues and  challenges  confronting  the  North  West  Province  in
fulfilling its mandate. All meetings  that  were  attended  by  Members,  as
guided by the NCOP provincial week programme were created in the context  of
establishing the collaborative approaches in seeking solutions and  devising
mechanisms that will address the needs of the North West people.

B. Objectives of the North West Provincial Week

The objectives of the Provincial week were:

a) To enhance dialogue and interaction between the NCOP and the people.
b) To provide an opportunity for the NCOP to communicate  its  programme  of
  action and the progress being made.
c) To listen  to  people  about  problems  needing  attention  and  identify
  blockages in implementation of policy areas that may need review.
d) To enable the NCOP direct access about what people  say  and  feel  about
  government and service delivery, and also to listen  to  their  grievances
  and advice about the pace and direction of government work.

C. Day One: Monday 14 August 2006 Meeting at Provincial Legislature

The  North  West  Permanent  Delegates  met  with  the  Chief  Whip  of  the
Legislature and Chairpersons of  Portfolio  Committees,  in  an  attempt  to
strengthen  the  provincial  week  objectives.  Members  adopted  tools   of
oversight as mechanism to be used to conduct effective oversight  throughout
the provincial week. The  leader  of  the  delegation  outlined  the  actual
purpose of interacting with the Chief Whip and Chairperson of Committees  as
harmonising the provincial week objectives  with  Provincial  Interests  and
perspectives  as  viewed  by   Provincial   Stakeholders   like   Provincial
Component, the structure of traditional leaders and  leaders  of  the  Civil
Society. The delegation then went further and introduced the draft  document
titled “The Provincial Week as a Strategic Mechanism for  Strengthening  the
Representation  of  Provincial  Interests  in  the   National   Council   of
Provinces”.

There were in-depth deliberations and engagements on the  document,  whereas
the trust and the spirit of the draft was adopted with slight amendments.

D.    Meeting with Zeerust Police Station Management

Background

Zeerust Police Station is situated in the North West Province, about 150  km
from Botswana in the town of Zeerust, which falls  under  Ramotshere  Moiloa
Local Municipality. The biggest service area  in  Zeerust  is  predominantly
rural area consisting of farms and villages. The population in this area  is
estimated at an average of 39 000 people. The influx of  visitors  from  the
neighbouring countries, including Bangladesh, China and India  is  estimated
at an average of 3900. Area demarcation average is 294 km per square  metre;
most of the areas are farms. The  Zeerust  Police  Station  like  any  other
police station in South Africa, derives its mandate  from  the  constitution
which involves the prevention,  investigation  and  combating  of  crime  in
general in order to ensure  the  safety  and  security  of  everyone  within
Zeerust.

During the meeting the following issues were raised:
    • Armed robbery
    • Common robbery
    • House breaking
    • Assault
    • Car theft
    • Theft

Currently there is no satellite police station in the station’s
jurisdiction area.

Challenges

The Zeerust police station management indicated that the station was  facing
a number of challenges, which hinder progress that the station  was  working
towards achieving. These challenges are as follows:
a) Shortage of police vehicles.
b) Shortage of police officers.
c) Inadequate supply of police resources.
d) Ghost  police  officers  that  are  remunerated  monthly  despite  having
resigned from the service.
e) Shortage of competent detectives.
f) Unavailability of females holding cells.
g) Lack of adequate working space.
h) Stock Theft.

|PERSONNEL STRENGTH             |VEHICLES                                 |
|UNIT                   |ACTUAL  |NEED    |       |NEED                 |
|Crime Prevention/      |10      |62      |5      |7 LVD VANS, 3SEDANS, |
|Sector Policing        |        |        |       |3 CONDORS, 2 VANS 4X4|
|Community Service      |20      |20      |Actual |4 LVD VANS, 1 SEDAN  |
|Centre                 |        |        |       |                     |
|Detective Service      |10      |8       |4      |1 Condors, 2 LVD, 1  |
|                       |        |        |       |Minibus Bus, 1 Closed|
|                       |        |        |       |Van, 3 SEDANS, 2 VANS|
|                       |        |        |       |4X4.                 |
|Finance                |3       |2       |-------|1 SEDAN              |
|                       |        |        |--     |                     |
|Logistics              |3       |3       |-------|2 VANS               |
|                       |        |        |---    |                     |
|Registry               |2       |1       |-------|1 SEDAN              |
|                       |        |        |---    |                     |
|Designated Firearm     |3       |1       |2      |2 SEDAN              |
|office                 |        |        |       |                     |
|Crime Information      |2       |1       |-------|---------------------|
|Analyse Centre (CIAC)  |        |        |---    |                     |
|Human Resource         |2       |1       |-------|---------------------|
|                       |        |        |---    |----                 |
|Data Typists           |2       |4       |-------|---------------------|
|                       |        |        |---    |----                 |
|Typists                |2       |2       |-------|---------------------|
|                       |        |        |---    |-----                |
|Dog Unit               |7       |3       |4      |1 2X4 D/ CAP, 2 4X4  |
|                       |        |        |       |S/CAP with Canopies, |
|                       |        |        |       |1 X 2X4 CAP          |

Crime Prevention

There are currently ten police members and one clerk  and  the  station  has
implemented sector policing, which is not done adequately due  to  personnel
shortage. Six sectors are implemented with ten members in each sector and  2
LVD vehicles as most of the areas are  farms  and  roads  are  not  in  good
conditions. The 10 members work in  shifts  per  sector,  twenty  hours  for
better service delivery.

Community Service Centre (CSC)

There are currently 20 police members at this centre, namely one  commander,
16 members divided into four shifts, 2 members for court duties and  one  in
exhibit stores. At least two members with one vehicle attend  to  complaints
and two members remain in the CSC. Two members  are  posted  outside  to  do
patrols and arrest suspects. It is very  difficult  to  meet  the  community
needs with few resources.

Detective Service

The detective service is currently under staffed. There 10  police  members,
namely a commander and 9  investigating  officers  with  4  vehicles.  Under
normal circumstances the investigating officers each  carry  40  dockets  on
hand but currently each is carrying more than 90 dockets. This situation  is
really frustrating the detectives and it hampers service delivery.
Dog Unit

The  dog  unit  is  currently  serving  the  areas  of   Madikwe,   Zeerust,
Lehurutshe, Groot Marico and Swartruggens,  which  are  predominantly  rural
areas. There are only 7 police members, namely 1  commander  and  6  members
with 3 vehicles.  The  dog  unit  is  a  specialising  unit  with  different
sections, namely narcotics,  explosives,  patrol  and  track  dog  handlers.
Service cannot be delivered when the above needs  are  as  limited  as  they
are.

Public Service Personnel

Four data typists are needed to work a four-hour  shift  at  each  Community
Service Centre.  Two typists and  7  administration  clerks  are  needed  to
serve all station sub components  and  two  grounds,  infact  men  are  also
needed to keep the station’s premises clean at times.

Buildings

|CURRENT SITUATION              |NEED                            |
|                               |                                |
|Cells                          |Cells                           |
|There are three cells for      |Detention facility for women and|
|general detention for males    |juveniles.                      |
|only. The cells hold a capacity|Special detention for: e.g. TB  |
|of 20 in total. But due to lack|patients and mentally ill       |
|of space, those cells currently|persons.                        |
|hold 38 inmates.               |Facility to hold dangerous      |
|                               |suspects e.g. armed robbers and |
|                               |rapists.                        |
|                               |                                |
|                               |Office Space                    |
|Office Space                   |Crime Prevention Office         |
|None                           |Dog Unit Offices                |
|                               |Designated Firearm Office       |
|                               |Special room to accommodate     |
|                               |witness.                        |

   Members’ input

   Members noted that to enable the Zeerust police station to adhere to  the
   greater challenge of stabilizing  and  normalising  crime,  with  limited
   resources, Crime Zones must be earmarked.  During  this  meeting  it  was
   noted that crime prevention in Zeerust must be  based  on  principles  of
   policing and should be a partnership between the community and the  SAPS.
   Sector policing must be used to increase the visibility and accessibility
   of police officers, particularly in areas that have high levels of crime.



   Members stated that they had not come to this police  station  to  police
   the police officers but their visit will enable them  to  understand  the
   challenges facing the SAPS of Zeerust and this will  help  them  to  seek
   solutions during the debate in Parliament. During  this  meeting  members
   further noted that the SAPS  has  to  be  fully  aware  of  the  mammoths
   challenges it faces and have to make progress towards meeting challenges.
   It was noted that the strategic direction of SAPS in Zeerust must  remain
   focus on organised crime, serious and violent crime, crime against  women
   and children and improving basic service delivery,  as  these  priorities
   reflect the needs of the community

      E.    Meeting with Groot Marico Police Station Management

   Groot Marico police station is situated 40  km  away  from  the  town  of
   Zeerust and  located  in  the  small  town  of  Groot  Marico,  which  is
   surrounded mainly by rural areas. This meeting sought to enhance dialogue
   and interaction between the NCOP and the Police and to allow  members  to
   listen to police officers who articulated on challenges and blockages  in
   implementation of policy areas that need attention  and  review.  Similar
   challenges as at Zeerust Police Station were identified.

   Members acknowledged that police officers  are  working  hard  to  combat
   crime and further stated that police officers must continue to discourage
   the occurrence of all crimes through the provision  of  a  proactive  and
   responsive policing service that must prevent the  priority  crimes  rate
   from increasing. The provision of Community Service Centres (CSC) must be
   intensified and must be regarded as the  Centre  that  must  satisfy  the
   community.

   The management of Groot  Marico  police  station  reported  that  despite
   having limited detectives their police  officers  were  working  hard  to
   contribute to the successful prosecution of crime  by  investigating  and
   gathering all related evidence, and preventing the  detection  rate  from
   decreasing. Members commended the police to gather evidence, ensure  that
   accused persons and witness are present at criminal  trials  and  present
   evidence at criminal trials. Members learnt that the  most  common  crime
   that is often committed by perpetrators is housebreaking and stock theft.
   Due to understaffing and lack of police vehicles, the Groot Marico police
   officers are often not able to assist in the prevention of  stock  theft,
   which has undermined the confidence  of  communities  in  the  legal  and
   police system. Members further noted that the  crime  combating  strategy
   must be applied and must be intensified at all  times.  The  police  must
   continue  to  execute  the   crime   combating   strategy   because   its
   implementation is impacted on negatively by the prevailing,  unfavourable
   socioeconomic conditions in Groot Marico. These socioeconomic conditions,
   such as wide-scale poverty,  lack  of  access  to  basic  services,  etc,
   contribute to the root causes of crime, thereby increasing the likelihood
   for the perpetration of crime.

   The station has 7  holding  cells  for  males,  females  and  foreigners.
   Members have noted with concern that foreigners that are detained in this
   police stations are kept in cells for longer than  they  should  stay  in
   cells.

   F. Meeting with Lehurutshe Magistrate Board

   Problem areas

   During the meeting the following issues were raised:

      ▪ The Court Building is dilapidated despite the recent renovations.
      ▪ There are no extra courtrooms within the  Magistrate  Court.  There
        is a lot of confusion around the precinct  of  the  court  and  the
        public can’t differentiate between the criminal and civil court.
      ▪ There is a shortage of courtrooms.
      ▪ An application for a new court to be built in Mosana  in  Supinstad
        was made.  The  Board  is  still  awaiting  an  approval  from  the
        Department of Justice.
      ▪ Ministerial  boundaries  are  not  yet  solved.  The  public  still
        travels a long distance to reach the Lehurutshe Court.
      ▪ The court offices do not have Internet and email connection.
      ▪ The magistrates use the Jutastat to enable themselves  to  get  the
        information on major conviction from other courts.
      ▪ There is a cash hall where the public  pay  maintenance  fees.  The
        cash hall building is extremely small and it does not have safes to
        lock up maintenance money.
      ▪ The court hall and rooms are not bullet proof.
      ▪ R2 million was allocated to renovate the court but money  has  only
        been used to make paintings of offices. The renovations  are  still
        incomplete.
      ▪ There is  a  shortage  of  security  personnel  and  the  available
        security personnel are not armed.
      ▪ The needs of this  Court  were  sent  to  the  higher  office.  The
        Lehurutshe Magistrate Board felt that the Justice  Department  does
        not take it as seriously as the District Court because its approval
        regarding the application containing its  resource  needs  is  long
        overdue.
      ▪ The Court does not have a Court Manager.
      ▪ There are no recording machines.
      ▪ There are insufficient Social Workers to deal  with  social  grants
        applications.
      ▪ There is a shortage of computers.
      ▪ Staff  is not empowered to operate computers.
      ▪ There are security risks as holding cells are adjacent  to  offices
        of Magistrates.

   Members’ Input

   Members noted the presentations of the Magistrate Board and undertook  to
   hold the  Provincial  Department  of  Public  Works  accountable  to  the
   Provincial Portfolio Committee on Public Works, regarding the R2  million
   spent on renovating the Lehurutshe Court District Court Building.

  G.  Meeting with the Chief and the Community of Supingstad

  The following persons were present at the meeting:

      i) Chief of Supingstad
      ii) Ward Councillor
      iii) Local Councillors
      iv) Speaker of local municipal council
      v) NCOP North West Permanent Delegates
      vi) Community of Supingstad.

   Meeting with the Chief

   Members and the local government representative met the Chief of
   Supingstad. The Chief highlighted the following:

    ▪ After the 2005 local government elections the  Speaker  of  the  local
      municipality and the local councillors came to introduce themselves to
      the Chief and the Traditional Leaders in order to  forge  healthy  and
      holy relations that are informed by co-operative governance.
    ▪ This co-operative governance is still in existence and  the  Chief  is
      in full support of the local councillors.
    ▪ There is a  lack  of  indispensable  skills  amongst  ward  and  local
      councillors. The Chief stated that during the first meeting with local
      government representatives he had proposed that  a  capacity  building
      workshop be  arranged  for  traditional  leaders,  councillors,  where
      Speaker should discuss their role as Traditional Leaders.

   H. Public Meeting with the Supingstad Community

   The following challenges facing the community were identified:

    ▪ The current fixing of the road  poses  a  significant  danger  to  the
      community. Due to the reckless fixing of the road by the contractor  a
      car accident had occurred on the road, which had  taken  a  resident’s
      life. The contractor did not co-operate with the deceased  family  and
      the community at large and  this  has  caused  animosity  between  the
      community  and  the  contractor  because  police  are  alleged  to  be
      conniving with the perpetrator.
    ▪ A water  shortage  problem  and  lack  of  infrastructure  denies  the
      community its basic right to the free basic service. The community  is
      dependent on borehole water.
    ▪ The community in this village  complains  about  what  they  call  the
      dictatorial and arrogant behaviour of their Chief.
    ▪ Lack of sufficient public transport to town and  other  parts  of  the
      municipality from this village is one of the unending demands and  not
      much has been done to respond to this need.
    ▪ The police station is very far from  this  village  and  it  would  be
      better if the police  station  earmarked  for  Nietverdient  could  be
      erected in Supingstad.
    ▪ Crime such as drug, alcohol and other substance abuse seems to  be  on
      the rise.
    ▪ There is a high rate of unemployment and poverty.
    ▪ There is a lot of stock theft.
    ▪ There are border gate problems between the border of Botswana and
      Supingstad. This has caused the theft of stock by Botswana residents,
      because the border gate/fence is dilapidated.
    ▪ Only one Clinic is available and no ambulance is  available  for  this
      clinic.
    ▪ Volunteers from organised and  recognised  community  projects  to  be
      remunerated with  stipends  to  assist  them  to  make  ends  meet  to
      alleviate poverty.
    ▪ There is a need for local transport and buses to ferry  the  community
      to the nearest local town. The  distance  from  this  village  to  the
      nearest town is 75 km and the community pays R80.00  taxi-fare  return
      to Zeerust town.
    ▪ A shopping complex that is nearer to Supingstad will be built.
    ▪ RDP houses are needed.
    ▪ Additional Schools  such  as  Primary,  Middle  and  High  School  are
      needed.
    ▪ There is lack of fences in the agricultural fields.


   Responses and Recommendations


   The presenters responded to questions and concerns raised from the floor
   as follows:


    ▪ The NCOP delegation was requested  to  inform  the  Health  Department
      about the unavailability of an ambulance, through the report that will
      be submitted in Parliament.
    ▪ The community was informed that it should apply for RDP houses.
    ▪ In an attempt to strengthen co-operation between  government  and  the
      community in terms of reducing unemployment, the community was advised
      to form organised community clubs and open businesses to  assist  them
      to make ends meet.
    ▪ Councillors stated that they  would  report  the  matter  of  lack  of
      water  to  the  local  Department  of   Water   Affairs   within   the
      municipality.
    ▪  The  Chief  should  make  an  application  to   the   Department   of
      Agriculture to request fencing.
    ▪ On unavailability of local transport such as  the  taxis  and  busses,
      the speaker of council mentioned that he would take the matter up with
      the municipality.
    ▪ Members mentioned that they met with the police the previous  day  and
      requested the police to  curb  the  high  rate  of  stock  theft.  The
      response from the police was that  they  do  not  have  enough  police
      vehicles to assist the community of  Supingstad  accordingly.  Members
      further advised the community to strengthen its co-operation with  the
      police through its Community Police Forum (CPF).
    ▪ The speaker mentioned that the plan to build a  new  shopping  complex
      had been submitted to the municipality and the Speaker and  the  Chief
      of Supingstad should make follow-ups.

      I.    Meeting with North West Deputy Speaker

   Honourable Mr G Madoda, Deputy Speaker apologised for the absence of the
   Speaker, Honourable Ms T Modise who was reported to be attending a
   conference in America.

   Framework for Provincial Week

   The NCOP North West Provincial Whip mentioned that  the  provincial  week
   has been challenging for the NCOP. The Provincial Whip stated  that  last
   year the  provincial  week  did  not  achieve  the  desired  results  and
   emphasised that there is a need to develop a consolidated  framework  for
   provincial weeks and further proposed that all stakeholders must  support
   these efforts. The leader of the delegation reintroduced  the  Provincial
   Week concept paper for further engagement whilst amendments  made  during
   day one with the Chief Whip was endorsed. In addition, it was agreed that
   two months prior to the actual Provincial Week the NCOP  Provincial  Whip
   with two Permanent delegates will be invited  to  the  Province  so  that
   jointly they could develop a workable  and  appropriate  Provincial  Week
   Programme.

   The Provincial Speaker, Chief Whip, and Chairperson  of  Committees  will
   facilitate the development of  the  desired  programme.  It  was  further
   proposed that the Provincial Week should serve as a window of opportunity
   for inviting National Government Agencies and Parastatals. This would  be
   a means to interact with MPLs and Provincial SALGA leaders for  a  better
   understanding and information sharing on service delivery related issues.

   Both Chief Whip and Deputy Speaker reiterated  that  the  NCOP  Permanent
   Delegates are first and foremost representing the Provincial Interest  as
   a unit from the Legislature. As such they are  expected  to  set  a  good
   example in their performance and dedication in fulfilling  and  executing
   their duties in the NCOP.  Furthermore they were happy to learn that  the
   NCOP Programme makes provision for Permanent Delegates to meet  and  take
   stock of their performance as a unit representing the provinces.  However
   they both encouraged the Provincial Whip to keep the Province informed of
   all developments pertaining to their mandate.

   Legislature, NCOP Work and Co-ordination


   The Provincial Whip proposed that the legislature must have the NCOP desk
   to co-ordinate  issues  of  communication  between  the  Legislature  and
   National Parliament. The Deputy Speaker stated that the  legislature  has
   adequate budget  for  its  Portfolio  Committee  Chairpersons  to  attend
   briefings  in  Parliament  when  invited.  Members  mentioned  that,  the
   negotiating and final mandate from North West Province always reaches the
   NCOP late and asked for an improvement on the matter.


      • The next Provincial Week must be planned well in advance,
        preferably two months ahead.
      • It was further suggested that,  the Department that drafted the
        Bill must accompany members to the Legislature for briefings that
        must take place on Thursdays not on Fridays.




   J. Unannounced or Surprise Visit at Bophelong Hospital


   The following questions were asked  and  responses  provided  during  the
   discussion with the Hospital Management:

   1. Is there is a proper Waste Management System in place with  regard  to
      TOP?


      The hospital does have a Waste Management System in place. One of the
      challenges of the Waste Management System are the  sewage  system  and
      stagnant water.


   2. Does the hospital experience any revisits by patients?


      5% of patients revisit the hospital. The hospital  serves  90  to  100
      patients per month. The hospital also helps patients from Botswana  to
      terminate pregnancy, because termination of pregnancy is  not  allowed
      in Botswana.


   3. What is the average waiting time at the admission desk?


      The average waiting period is 4-6 hours and this is due to small space
  and
      an improper filing system.


   4. Does the hospital  experience  any  Emergency  Medical  Service  (EMS)
      problems with regard to response time?


      Yes, the Emergency Services take longer to respond.


   5. Does the hospital have a generator in case of blackouts?


      Yes, the hospital has a generator for back up.


   6. Does the hospital have any learnerships and interns and if yes is  the
      hospital in a position to absorb these learners?


      Yes, the Hospital has learnerships and they are allocated  in  Finance
      and IT. The issue of learnership is centralised in the Head Office and
      doctors from the Head Office have been deployed as interns  to  render
      health services. Absorbing these learnerships is still a challenge and
      the hospital has to have a vacant post to absorb the learners.


   7. Does the Department of Home Affairs have a space or office for  online
      birth registration?


      Yes, it has space in the Maternity Department.


   8. Are there any vacant positions and if yes how many post are vacant?
      The hospital has 305 vacant posts.


   9. Has the hospital has been fully accredited  through  the  Council  for
      Health Service Accreditation of South Africa  (COHSASA)  accreditation
      programme?


      The hospital is in the process of being accredited as  a  hospital  in
      order to enhance rendering quality service that is in line with  Batho
      Pele principles.


  10. What is the size of the population served by the hospital?


      The hospital serves 3.5 million of the North West population.


  11. How many beds are available in the hospital?


      The hospital has 1500 beds.

After the meeting with the hospital management members toured the hospital
and visited each ward. Members were in general impressed by the conditions
of the hospital.

k.    Meeting with Mmabatho Police Station

Members raised the following issues during the meeting:

    ▪ The nature of crime and the crime that is on the rise.
    ▪ Response time on crime that occurs.
    ▪ Community participation in Community Police Forum.
    ▪ Sector Policing strategy.
    ▪ Are there any highly trained police to deal with domestic violence?
    ▪ Stock theft.
    ▪ Police vehicles.
    ▪ Reservists.
    ▪ Investigation capacity.
    ▪ Conditions of holding cells.
    ▪ The strength of the station in terms of Human Resource Personnel.

The police station management responded to the questions raised by members
as follows:


The station has a Crime Prevention Unit and it prioritises its crime as
follows:
     1. House breaking
     2. Robbery
     3. Assault
     4. Theft
     5. Rape


The station has 7 vehicles that are used in  crime  emergency  response  and
has 19 police officers in  the  prevention  unit  and  104  reservists.  The
station is also assisted by  the  participation  of  the  community  through
community police forums.  The  investigation  capacity  of  the  station  is
extremely vigorous and robust because it had police officers that  underwent
training courses in investigation. The station reports 50 to  90  cases  per
month and juveniles between the ages  of  15-21  years  mostly  commit  this
crime. They mostly steal electrical appliances. Crime that is  on  the  rise
is housebreaking, theft and robbery.


Overcrowding of cells

The station has 7 holding cells and they are often overcrowded  because  the
crime prevention officers arrest many people  who  commit  crime  and  these
holding cells are also used to accommodate people from  Mafikeng,  Mokgobung
and Itsoseng because these areas do not have holding cells.  Another  aspect
that causes overcrowding is because the  justice  system  is  very  slow  in
terms of expediting the facilitation of the  court  cases  of  the  accused.
Each cell is certified to accommodate 20 people but 50 people  are  held  in
one cell and foreigners are mixed with the local  people.  The  station  has
separate cells for women.


Human Resource

The station has a total of:
148 Police Officers.
112 Male Police Officers.
36 Female Police Officers.


The station has adopted  a  cop  programme  at  public  schools  and  police
officers do unannounced visits at schools. The station has  37  vehicles  in
total.
10 vehicles are in good condition.
7 vehicles are in semi good condition.
20 vehicles are not in good condition and have exceeded 12 000 km.
The station has a cordial relationship and work together with the home
affairs officials.


Challenges facing the Police Station

    • Shortage of detectives.
• Demoralised police officers, on go slow  performance   because  they  were
  not promoted to higher ranks.
• Police officials who are booked medically unfit  for  longer  periods  and
  their absence from work affect the performance of the station.

L.    Meeting with Motsealore Secondary School

This school is situated in the Khunotswane village in Zeerust  APO.  It  was
established in 1982. The school had an enrolment of 389 registered  learners
in the 2006 academic year. It has 17  educators  and  receives  section  21-
quintal subsidy from the government. The school receive R25000 a quarter  as
a section 21 school.
During the meeting the following challenges/issues were identified:

    • The MEC of Education, Mr Tselapedi who saw the appalling conditions of
      the school, visited the school. The MEC instructed the Provincial
      Education Officials to renovate the school accordingly.
    • Learners are overcrowded in classrooms.
    • Only 9 out of 10 classrooms are operational for teaching and learning.
    • The tenth classroom is used as a computer centre.
    • The condition of the 9 classrooms is very poor and risky.
    • Floors are damaged.
    • Roofs are leaking.
    • Lack of consumable water and sanitation.
    • No first aid kit.
    • Members were informed during the meeting with Education Regional
      Officials that the school made its application for renovation in 2004.
      The school is on the priority list and the construction of school
      toilets will take place soon.
    • The school has a governing body that is not active.
    • The school still uses the old bucket system.
    • The school received 10 donations of cement from PPC.

M.    Recommendations

   Police Stations


      • The capacity of Zeerust Police  Station  and  Groot  Marico  Police
        Station must  be  enhanced  by  recruitment  of  additional  police
        officers.
      • The enlistment of additional  personnel  must  be  complemented  by
        simultaneous expansion of the police vehicle  fleet  and  equipment
        supplies of IT infrastructures.
      • All Police Reservists must be employed  on  a  permanent  basis  to
        boost the police stations because they are dedicated and  committed
        in executing their duties.
      •  The  Select  Committee  on  Safety  and  Security  must  call  the
        Provincial Commissioner of Police in the North West  in  accordance
        with Section 69 of the Constitution to account on the conditions of
        Zeerust and Groot Marico Police Stations.
      •  Salaries of police officers who have resigned  but  still  receive
        salaries must be stopped with immediate effect.


   Lehurutshe Magistrate Court


      • Court staff must be trained to enable them to deal with the demands
        of the new human rights culture.
      • At Lehurutshe a Court Manager must be appointed immediately and
        must be accorded basic delegation rights to manage court
        operations, such as procurement of consumables such as stationery
        for the court to operate unhindered.
      • The Internet cables must be installed within the court offices to
        enable court staff to utilise Email and for research purposes.
      • Court Staff must be trained to use computers.
      • The Select Committee on Justice must exercise Section 69 of the
        Constitution and call the Department of Justice to account on the
        R2 million that was spent to refurbish the Lehurutshe Court.


   Bophelong Hospital

      • The 305 vacant positions must be filled immediately because the
        shortage of hospital staff compromises service delivery.
      • The hospital should be granted accreditation.
      • The hospital should be granted more budgets to expedite service
        delivery.


 Motsaalore Secondary School
 The following renovations are recommended:
         - Floor Repairs
         - Ceilling
         - Leaking roofs
         - Painting
         - At least 8 classrooms must be constructed.

The school must be provided with the following:
         - Science laboratory.
         - Library.
         - Toilets for both learners and Educators.
         - Administration Block to house the Principal’s Office, Deputy
           Principal and Heads of Departments.
         - Home Craft centre.
         - School Hall.
         - Store rooms.
         - Erection of fence.
         - Telkom line.
         - Staff room.

The Portfolio Committee on Education of the North West Legislature should
call the North West Provincial Education Department to account for the slow
pace of renovating Motsaalore Secondary, and should also instruct the
Department to fast track the renovations at the school.

The municipalities around the school must be engaged in terms of assisting
the school with sports facilities.

Free flow of information in the context of co-operative governance, must be
monitored by the Office of the Speaker.

The principal and council must participate to assist the region with
developing the community.

The School Governing Body and the principal should participate in the Ward
Committee.




N.    Conclusion


   The provincial week is an indication that the NCOP North West Permanent
   delegates take their mandate of representing their province in Parliament
   seriously. These permanent delegates represent the interest of their
   province at national level. The provincial week programme was designed to
   allow the permanent delegates to go to their provinces to interact with
   people in the interest of promoting public participation and carrying out
   the oversight function.
   Due to the Provincial Cabinet Lekgotla that also took four days, the NCOP
   delegation could not be able to meet either the Premier of the Province
   nor the leader of Governance. However the Premier blessed the Provincial
   Week Oversight Visit.


O.    Challenges


   The following areas have been observed and earmarked as challenges:


      • Communication gap and co-ordination between NCOP, N/A and
        Provincial Legislature on activities.
      • Response time by Province to NCOP and N/A special invitations.
      • Public Participation and sourcing of Provincial mandates.
      • Police reservists dedicated to community police service must be
        considered for appointment.
      • In the light of fast growing population and politicised community,
        police resource allocation must be reviewed.
      • Rural communities require more cluster approach co-ordination on
        service delivery.
      • Police Station Cells in rural areas require renovations and must
        have female facilities.
      • The old order demarcation in the Judiciary System “(Bop & SA)
        around Mafikeng and Zeerust is imposing an untold frustration to
        poor and underesourced communities who are compelled to travel or
        walk longer distance to access SAPS and the Department of Justice.
      • The SAPS Personnel have no confidence in a system currently used to
        managing promotion from a lower rank up, because those who
        undermine transformation eagerly manipulate it.
      • Court Offices in Zeerust are not only congested and inferior but
        they leave Magistrates open and vulnerable to attacks by suspects
        at any hour of the day.
      • Magistrates complain that the renovation underway by Public Works
        hardly address the above-mentioned concerns.
      • The newly introduced incentive for health skilled workers to rural
        health centres is giving rise to unintended consequences because
        key skilled personnel leave the semi-urban hospitals without
        replacements.

9.    Visit to the Northern Cape Province

   The Northern Cape permanent delegates of the National Council of
   Provinces and the Northern Cape Provincial legislature conducted
   oversight visits to the numerous sites. The delegation wanted to
   ascertain the following:


a) whether any progress has been made in service delivery;
b) the areas that the different sides felt were still challenges;
c) to get feedback from the communities on whether things have improved for
   them.

   The delegates held meetings with relevant stakeholders, including the
   municipalities, schools, hospitals, and visited an army base.

   A. Meeting with officials from the 93 Ammunition Depot

   The 93 Ammunition base was built in 1941 for the  British  Navy.  It  was
   decided to build the base in Jan Kemp due to it being  centrally  located
   in  the  country.  It  is  the  second  largest  depot  in  the  Southern
   Hemisphere. In 1996, it was decided that the depot should be closed.  The
   base went through restructuring from 1997 – 2000 and the intention was to
   close it in March 2005.
   The base currently stores ammunition that  can’t  be  used  for  military
   operations and needs to be destroyed. A peace treaty was signed  in  1996
   making it unlawful to dump ammunition in the  sea.  There  are  currently
   only two places in the Northern Cape where ammunition  can  be  blown  up
   i.e. Vastrap and  the  93  Ammunition  Depot.  The  93  Ammunition  Depot
   currently stores about 75% of condition D ammunition inside the base.

   A colonel, Mr Van As, who is in  charge  of  the  depot,  felt  extremely
   stressed due  to  him  not  receiving  the  necessary  support  from  his
   superiors. The colonel said that he felt that his superiors did not trust
   him due to the fact  that  he  is  a  white  male  and  his  loyalty  was
   questioned. The colonel expressed the following concerns:


      • With the limited amount of explosives that the depot  can  detonate
        it will take another 35 years before the whole pile  of  ammunition
        currently at the base is destroyed;
      • The colonel is only authorised to spend up to R1000 of the  budget,
        anything more than this requires paperwork and  he  felt  that  the
        bureaucracy has a negative impact on his work;
      • The project became a political ball because the SANDF is  not  sure
        on how to address the issue of destroying the ammunition;
      • As part of the arms deal process, Germany was going to  supply  the
        necessary  technical  skills  and  expertise  to  break  down   the
        ammunition in a safe environment. A place had to be  identified  to
        erect the  plant  that  should  be  funded  by  the  South  African
        government. A choice had to be made between De Aar  and  Jan  Kemp,
        and this issue  has  gone  back  and  forth  without  coming  to  a
        conclusion. Whilst no decision is being made on erecting the plant,
        the category D ammunition is growing, making it an urgent  need  to
        erect the plant;
      • Some ammunition cannot be moved due  to  its  explosive  nature.  A
        serious concern was raised that should the ammunition detonate,  it
        would level all areas from Vryburg to Kimberley;
      • Recommendations were made to the SANDF on  the  volatility  of  the
        base, but it seems the colonel is being ignored. According  to  the
        Occupational Health and Safety Act that deals with  explosives,  no
        areas should be  erected  within  or  near  bases  that  deal  with
        explosives. An informal settlement is bordering the base and should
        anything happen at the base, the people living  there  will  be  in
        danger;
      • Conditions at the base are deteriorating as staff are  demoralised;
        the fire brigade service at the base is not  operational;  and  the
        doctor on the base resigned. The lightning conductors  need  to  be
        replaced at a cost of R500 000 per conductor.  No  money  has  been
        allocated from the SANDF to replace these conductors
      • The colonel felt that he was in a constant  battle  to  get  things
        done and that his superiors were making his job difficult.


   B. Meeting with officials from the Warrenton Public Primary School

   The Warrenton Public Primary school has a shared food security  programme
   that provides food to scholars. It has a school garden to train people on
   the importance of good nutrition, and has a procurement strategy  to  use
   SMMEs at community level to supply the products.


   The Department of Education transferred money to the school to start  the
   shared food  security  programme  by  forming  a  school  governing  body
   committee that will oversee the functioning of the programme.  The  local
   community must then ensure that it acts  in  the  best  interest  of  the
   scholars. The Department  assists  by  providing  advocacy  training  for
   parents and teachers. The Department has certain guidelines that must  be
   adhered to, which  include  that  a  feeding  calendar  must  be  drafted
   indicating when food will be distributed as well as the menu that will be
   served;  there  should  be  a  budget  that   indicates   the   financial
   transactions; and the district should indicate how many  times  a  school
   was visited in a certain period.

   Issues that were raised in the meeting


   The Department indicated that the programme  is  time  consuming  as  all
   invoices must be checked physically for correctness.
   The women of the area get training on basic food hygiene and they receive
   a stipend of R500 per month. After successfully completing the  12  month
   training programme, a certificate is issued. This  allows  people  to  be
   able to enter the formal job market once they completed the training.


   Challenges


   Some school children took the food that was given at school home to share
   with their siblings. There are no kitchens at some  schools  and  classes
   need to be used to prepare the  food.  Due  to  the  high  administrative
   demand, there is a need to appoint people to deal with the administrative
   side of the programme. There is no medical aid provision  made  for  when
   one of the kitchen staff gets injured and in certain instances  there  is
   no compliance with the Occupational Health and Safety  Act.  The  subsidy
   for learners is not enough as not all school days are catered for. It has
   become evident that scholars only attend school when it  is  feeding  day
   and are absent when no feeding takes place. The programme is  a  definite
   necessity but the R1 subsidy per child  a  day  is  not  sufficient.  The
   vegetable gardens are not doing well due  to  the  demand  to  water  the
   gardens and the huge cost involved in doing that.
   The school requested the delegates to assist in raising  the  huge  water
   charges that the school must pay with the  municipality.  A  concern  was
   raised that schools are charged like a business for water use.


   Observations by the delegates


   There is a need to broaden the scope of the programme and  to  have  more
   money allocated for it. The Department should ensure that local  citizens
   are trained to be able to form co-operatives to  tap  into  the  economic
   potential. The hygiene of the food  should  be  above  board  and  people
   should ensure that  scholars  receive  proper  food  and  nutrition.  The
   delegates re-iterated that the primary concern should be to  ensure  that
   scholars are fed a good quality meal. Some concerns that were  raised  by
   the parents and staff must be addressed but these should be secondary  to
   the feeding of the scholars.

   C. Meeting with the Phokwane Municipality

   The Municipality has a high unemployment rate that is estimated  at  43%,
   with the agriculture and government sector the main employers. The labour
   force is largely unskilled and poorly educated. The free  basic  services
   are provided to  4395  indigents.  The  municipality  has  a  backlog  on
   services per household for housing at 4093, water at 3708, sanitation  at
   3699, electricity at 4755, high mast at 88, refuse removal  at  4382  and
   roads at 79 km.

   Service delivery challenges

   Water

   There is a  need  to  upgrade  the  bulk  supply  infrastructure  in  Jan
   Kempdorp. The municipality foresees eradicating the backlog by year 2013.
   There is a need to provide water to the farm  areas  and  to  save  water
   through fixing leaks and burst pipes. The municipality  needs  to  ensure
   that it maintains current and newly developed infrastructure.

   Electricity


   There is a problem between Eskom  and  the  municipality  about  lack  of
   coordination. The network capacity needs to be  improved  to  accommodate
   the  ever  increasing  new  connections  due  to   informal   settlements
   mushrooming. The municipality is still unsure how the  REDS  will  affect
   their functioning as electricity provision is currently  a  huge  revenue
   base.

   Refuse removal


   There is a need to relocate the Hartswater landfill to a place  where  it
   is  positioned  right  where  it  does  not  create  health  problems  to
   residents. The  maintenance  of  the  four  landfills  is  vital  as  the
   municipality  currently  has  insufficient  equipment.  Due  to  lack  of
   equipment  the  municipality  is  struggling  to  ensure  cleanliness  in
   townships.

   Housing


   Some contractors deliver shoddy  work  and  use  inferior  material  when
   erecting houses. There is currently a shortage of land  to  be  used  for
   housing developments and some land belongs  to  tribal  authorities.  The
   migration from  farms  to  towns  places  an  additional  burden  on  the
   municipality to provide sufficient housing.

   Land


   There is a shortage of land to be used  for  housing  projects  and  some
   agricultural land cannot be easily converted for other purposes. With the
   assistance of the Department  of  Land  Affairs  an  audit  was  done  to
   ascertain what land belongs to the municipality. Some farmers  wanted  to
   sell their farms but wanted exorbitant prices for it. A process has  been
   put in place with the Department of Land Affairs to see how much land can
   be acquired.


   LED


   The unavailability of land is threatening economic growth  in  the  area.
   There is a need to resuscitate factories and  cooperatives  that  existed
   before in Phokwane. Some products will need to be processed in  the  area
   and not transported to other areas for processing. There is a need to tar
   the road between Hartswater and Christiana.


   Financial Viability


   The municipality is financially stable but if the  economy  doesn’t  grow
   the municipality may soon become financially unstable due to the  growing
   number of indigents. The current debtors to the  municipality  amount  to
   R23 902 860. The municipality did not apply  the  credit  control  policy
   strictly due to discrepancies in the indigent policy.  A  contractor  was
   appointed to correct the indigent register and to collect the outstanding
   money on behalf of the municipality.
   Observations by the delegates

   The delegates expressed concern at the fact  that  only  17.5  %  of  the
   budget is allocated for infrastructural development  whereas  the  salary
   bill amounts to over 30% of the budget. The municipality  was  instructed
   to investigate how to use the agricultural richness of the  area  to  the
   benefit of the whole community. The municipality has shown a need  to  do
   away with the backlogs but the pace needs to be intensified.

   D. Meeting with the Northern Cape Housing Federation: An affiliate of the
      S.A. Homeless People Federation

   The Northern Cape  Federation  is  an  NGO  that  believes  that  through
   lending, saving and repayments of the  Housing  Savings  Scheme,  it  can
   create responsible communities that care for one another. The  Federation
   acts on behalf of communities to negotiate for land from  the  provinces.
   People are then encouraged to build their own houses through the  Peoples
   Housing Project (PHP). This venture allows for people to get  skills  and
   to build bigger houses due to labour cost being minimal.

   Challenges

   1) Municipality

   The Municipality made land available  but  then  said  it  did  not  have
   budgets to service the land. The municipality did not come to the Housing
   Federation to inform them of decisions that were taken. The  municipality
   caused the project to halt due to allegations that the Housing Federation
   was including people on the lists illegally. There is  however  confusion
   with the municipality that wants R4 per square meter and as  the  housing
   federation was not informed  of  this;  no  payments  were  made  to  the
   municipality.

   2) Involvement of Councillors

   The Mayor indicated  that  the  land  should  be  given  to  the  Housing
   Federation for free and that the Federation should not be charged for it.
   On 6 March 2005 a councillor informed people who were  not  beneficiaries
   on the list of the Housing Federation that they could  move  to  the  new
   development. People occupied the land illegally and a court interdict had
   to be obtained to remove them from the area. The Premier  intervened  and
   indicated that the evictions should  not  happen.  The  municipality  was
   supposed to give alternative land to the squatters within 5  days.  There
   is  no  communication  happening  between  the  mayor  and  the   Housing
   Federation.

   3) Suppliers and materials

   Dumisane African Trading is one  of  the  suppliers  that  were  paid  in
   advance and did not deliver the material as requested. The material  that
   is on the premises of the Federation is getting rusted due to the project
   being at a standstill.

   4) Concerns from Housing Federation


   The following issues were highlighted as serious concerns:


   Officials and other people that were supposed to  assist  the  Federation
   have now become its biggest challenge. The  new  councillor  appointed  a
   ward committee to take over the housing project from the Federation.  The
   project could have been finalised if  no  interference  was  experienced.
   Every year wasted on the project means more cost and  request  for  extra
   funding for the project.


   The Housing Federation requested the delegates to  remove  the  stumbling
   blocks to allow it to complete the project and to address  the  issue  of
   councillors making the project a political toy and hampering progress  on
   the project.

   5) Observations by the delegates

   A meeting should be held with the Department of Housing, the municipality
   and the Housing Federation to sort out the beneficiary lists.
   The  delegates  were  concerned  with  undue  influences  being  used  by
   councillors to deter organisations / people that  work  with  government,
   from fulfilling their  mandate.  The  Housing  Federation  completed  the
   beneficiary lists and now the Department wants to allocate beneficiaries.
   This  is  where  the  problem  lies  and  it  needed  to  be  sorted  out
   immediately.

   E. Site visit to Sol Plaatjie housing project

   The site was supposed to have 960 houses built, but only  550  have  been
   completed to date. It seems as if the project will only be  completed  in
   September or early October. Some of  the  households  that  were  visited
   complained about the quality of houses, damp walls, cracks / openings  in
   the walls and shoddy material that was used.

   Observations by the delegates


   The delegates were disturbed with the quality of  the  bricks  that  were
   used by the contractor. There was also concern with  the  fact  that  the
   project has been delayed and that impacted on the costs. A  very  serious
   concern from the delegates was the fact that people were now  staying  in
   inferior buildings that could pose health problems to the young  and  the
   elderly.

   F. Meeting with the Lerato Park Community

   The community raised the following concerns:


      • There are no lights in Lerato Park and the area is  dark  early  in
        the evenings. People fear for their safety.
      • The people still use the bucket system and once collected  it  does
        not even get cleaned. These dirty buckets are  returned  to  people
        and they then have to clean these buckets themselves.
      • The water pump is not working and the elderly must then request the
        youngsters to collect water for them. The  water  pump  is  also  a
        distance away from people’s houses.
      • Most  people  are  unemployed  and  only  worked  when  there  were
        contracts for projects. Once these  projects  were  finalised,  the
        people could not find employment again.
      • Different delegations came  to  the  area  but  no  development  is
        happening in Lerato Park.
      • Due to  the  absence  of  road  infrastructure  in  the  area,  the
        ambulances cannot even collect the sick in the area.
      • Speed humps should be erected on the main road to safeguard  people
        crossing the road.
      • A report back should be given, because people feel  that  they  are
        not informed after these visits have occurred.


   The Department and the Speaker responded as follows:


   The  Department  took  aerial  photos  of  the  area  to  identify  where
   development will take place. A city planner has been  appointed  and  the
   post of project manager  has  been  advertised.  The  infrastructure  for
   services will happen shortly and after that the housing development  will
   start. The community was involved in the IDP  process  to  indicate  what
   they wanted. A crèche has been erected in Lerato Park and a map has  been
   posted to inform them about the plans for the area.


   Observations by the delegates


   The delegates took note that there  are  plans  for  the  development  of
   Lerato Park and that the community was informed about the plans  for  the
   area. The  delegates  indicated  that  ward  meetings  needed  to  happen
   regularly and that the PR Councillor should compliment the  work  of  the
   ward committees. It is important that the two organisations work together
   for the betterment of the area. The delegation expressed a view that  the
   community needs to organise itself to raise issues consistently and in  a
   coordinated matter.

   G. Site Visit to the new Barkley West Hospital

   The new Barkley West hospital is currently under construction at  a  cost
   of R34 million. It employs 105 people and mostly makes use of  the  local
   labour  market.  The  project  should  be  completed  by  June  or   soon
   thereafter. The project experienced some delays due to weather conditions
   or some unforeseen factors. The hospital will be a flagship  project  and
   one that the community will  be  proud  of.  It  is  envisaged  that  the
   hospital will have  all  medical  facilities  under  one  roof  including
   physiotherapy, a heli-pad and speech therapy units.


   Observations by the delegates


   The delegates were happy with the progress at the construction  site  and
   were glad for the  much  needed  services  that  it  will  bring  to  the
   community.

   H. Meeting at the Dikgatlong Municipality

   The Dikgatlong municipality is a category B municipality with  a  plenary
   ward  system.  The  council  consists  of  13  councillors  i.e.  7  ward
   councillors and 6 PR councillors.


   Organogram of the municipality


     1) The technical department consists  of  104  posts,  with  14  posts
        currently vacant. The gender composition includes 84  males  and  6
        females. All posts have been budgeted for.
     2) The financial department has 22 posts of which 2  are  vacant.  The
        gender composition in this department is 11 females  and  7  males.
        All the posts in this section have been budgeted for.
     3) The Corporate Services Department has  22  posts  of  which  3  are
        vacant. The gender composition includes 16 females and 3 males. One
        of the vacant posts has been budgeted for  and  the  remaining  two
        vacancies have not been budgeted for.
     4) There are 3 posts in management that are occupied by males.
   The municipality has  a  policy  on  free  basic  services  and  indigent
   beneficiaries are households with an income  of  two  old  age  pensions.
   Dikgatlong has an indigent rate of above 60%.


   The Dikgatlong municipality is  made  up  of  the  former  disestablished
   municipalities of Barkley-West, Windsorton and Delportshope. According to
   statistics S.A the population stands at 35 765 but the actual  population
   figure according  to  a  survey  done  by  Urban  Dynamics  indicate  the
   population figure at 68 968. The difference in the stats has  a  negative
   impact with regard to the equitable share allocation. The number  of  the
   actively employed population amounts to  5923  (which  includes  seasonal
   workers). The unemployed amounts to 5576 and the not economically  active
   stands at 11257.

   Challenges

   a) The ageing infrastructure results in regular service breakdowns.
   b) The vehicle fleet is in a poor condition and is costly to  repair  and
      maintain. Vehicles stay out of operation for long periods resulting in
      a negative impact on service delivery.
   c) Personnel at the technical  department  need  training.  Although  the
      skills plan makes provision for training, no funds could  be  accessed
      from SETA because the municipality did not pay its levies to SETA.
   d) Previously MFMA reporting was not done.
   e) Internal financial controls are poor and this directly resulted in the
      negative audit queries.
   f) Reporting of grant funding is not up to standard.
   g) Due to financial constraints the licence for the selling  of  pre-paid
      electricity could not be renewed.
   h) Critical positions in the corporate services department  will  not  be
      filled due to financial constraints.
   i) No land audit has been done yet.
   j) It is difficult to attract and retain skilled / qualified employees.

The biggest concern to the municipality is the Department  of  Minerals  and
Energy (DME). It was alleged that DME issues  licences  for  mineral  rights
but do not inform the municipality on who receive these licences.  There  is
no good working relationship between the municipality and DME.

Observations by the delegates

The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) was requested to attend  the  meeting  and
to answer some questions. The individual refused to attend the  meeting  and
this infuriated the delegates. The delegates  requested  that  a  report  be
submitted indicating the actions the municipality  will  undertake  to  deal
with the individual’s misconduct and insubordination.

The delegates indicated that  the  municipality  should  request  assistance
from DBSA in its skills development strategy.
The old infrastructure needs to be replaced to ensure that service  delivery
happens. The LED strategy  should  identify  the  key  economic  points  and
address unemployment. The IDP should be  redrafted  and  then  be  taken  to
wards for discussion.

I.    Meeting with the community from Pniel

History of the Pniel Land Claim

The community instituted  their  first  claim  in  1997  to  have  the  land
returned to them. The community met with the church  that  initially  wanted
R71 million for the land. After negotiations a  price  of  R36  million  was
agreed to. The claim was validated and up  until  December  2005  everything
was on track. On 22 December a meeting was held  with  Sugar  Ramatlane  and
Adv Matshepe and they requested that a Community Property Association  (CPA)
be formed. The community did a needs analysis and  identified  mining,  game
farming and irrigation as possible ventures that  the  land  could  be  used
for. A meeting was scheduled with Land Affairs and the community  identified
a strategic partner. Some people did not want  to  recognise  the  strategic
partner and wanted the community to accept investors of  their  choice.  The
community wanted to use people of  their  choice  and  did  not  accept  the
proposal of the investors.

The community feels that certain people are abusing their power and  getting
richer at the expense of poor communities. The permit that  was  granted  by
the church was  stopped.  The  politicians  are  not  comfortable  with  the
strategic partner chosen by the community and want to enforce their  choices
on the community.
The community informed the  delegates  that  they  are  sick  and  tired  of
politicians messing them around and  not  acting  in  their  interests.  The
region of Pniel voted 99.9% in favour of the ANC and they feel  betrayed  by
some politicians and officials.

The overwhelming plea from the community was  for  National  and  Provincial
government to intervene and to ensure that the community of Pniel get  their
land.

Observations by the delegates

The delegates requested the community to remain united and not to allow
outside forces to sow division in Pniel. The CPA was requested to hand over
all information to the Standing Committee on Local Government to address
the concerns raised.
The delegates will ensure that clarity is gained from the stakeholders and
to report back to the community.

10. Visit to the Western Cape Province

A. The interaction between the Western Cape Legislature and the NCOP

The delegates met with the Deputy Speaker and the Chief Whip. The Deputy
Speaker stated that the procedures between the NCOP and the Provincial
Legislature needed to improve. Discussions should take place before
legislation is sent to the province. Problems relating to bills are e.g.
that incorrect versions of bills are sent to the legislature.

The permanent delegates to the NCOP stated that the NCOP was trying  to  get
all Section 76 legislation introduced in the NCOP,  but  that  all  of  this
depends on the National Ministers. The  issue  would  be  taken  up  by  the
permanent delegates.


The permanent delegates also stated that some Bills were being  fast-tracked
e.g. 2010 FIFA Bill.


The Chief Whip stated that public hearings were conducted on  all  bills  in
the province and  many  of  the  problems  encountered  were  administrative
problems. He noted that the department comes up with one bill and  the  NCOP
has another version. He stated that it  would  be  important  for  permanent
delegates to link up with the department to sort  out  these  problems.  The
Deputy  Speaker  stated  that  the  Permanent  delegates  should  brief  the
Standing Committees on legislation. This should be done  on  behalf  of  the
NCOP, to brief the Standing Committee on the essence of the legislation.
The role of the Provincial whip should be clear and  any  arrangements  from
the permanent delegates’ side should be done through  the  Provincial  Whip,
even  if  it  is  an  emergency.  The  Provincial  Whip   must   clear   his
responsibilities with the NCOP.

B. Meeting with the Chairpersons and  Members  of  the  Standing  Committees
(all Members) – to identify key issues to be highlighted in the week.

The oversight visits was  divided  into  three  delegations,  consisting  of
Members of the Provincial legislature (MPL’s) and Permanent Members  of  the
NCOP (MP’s).

C. Legislature session

With regard to  the  floods  in  the  Southern  Cape,  the  Premier  thanked
everyone, including SAPS, business, EMS personnel  etc.  for  their  efforts
during the past weeks in the region. He also noted  that  the  community  of
the region assisted very well in all its efforts.  The  Premier  noted  that
the initial costing was done and the overall cost was  estimated  at  around
R353 million, which was broken down as follows: R150m  for  insurance,  R89m
infrastructure and R51m bridges and roads. The  Premier  said  that  in  the
Klein-Karoo the agricultural damage was estimated at R40m  and  growing  and
that the rail damage was estimated at R25m.


The Premier said that Cabinet would be sitting on 16 August 2006  to  assess
the figures. He noted that the region  would  not  be  declared  a  disaster
area, the reason being that it would have a negative effect on  the  tourism
of the region and that it would be a disincentive for the Garden Route.

D. Meeting at De Doorns

Briefing by SANRAL and Goba Consulting Engineers


SANRAL briefed the delegation on the pedestrian safety project on the N1  in
De Doorns.

Briefing by the Breede Valley Municipality

The Municipal manager briefed the delegation  on  the  Progress  of  the  De
Doorns Housing Project. He outlined its historical background  and  aims  of
the project, the problem areas, the implementation of the  project  and  the
current situation with regard to ASLA Devco.

ASLA Devco stated that all further relocation was stopped and that it  would
continue as soon as funds were made available to Breede Valley  Municipality
and when  the  Municipality  instructs  Asla  Devco  to  continue  with  the
process.

Briefing by the Councillors

One Councillor stated that the information given to the delegation  was  not
a true reflection of what was happening in the area. She stated that  people
were living in the riverbed and that people were displaced. She  added  that
Asla had not been honest with the project and that they were  playing  petty
politics. The community was split  up  and  Asla  played  a  role  in  that.
Relocators were working for Asla and they undermined the Councillors.

Tour of Ekuphumleni informal settlement
The delegation visited the site where some of  the  dwellings  were  in  the
riverbed. It was  apparent  that  many  of  the  homes  were  built  in  the
riverbed, and in the event of a flood many homes and even lives would be  in
danger.

Meeting with Kannaland Municipality

    • There is no disaster management plan at the municipality.
    • kannaland depends on other municipalities for human resources.
    • There should be a system of time limits for occupation of houses after
      completion to avoid vandalisation of finished houses.
    • The  municipality  had  a  Local  Economic  Strategy  that  was  never
      implemented because there are no officials available to implement  the
      strategy. Staff should be allocated to work on the strategy.
    • The committee request the department to make public  findings  of  the
      forensic audit of the Municipality.
    • The state of ambulance services in the  area  is  a  cause  for  grave
      concern as people have to phone George in order to get  an  ambulance,
      which takes two hours to reach Kannaland.


E. Meeting in Knysna on the proposed  Knysna  B-pass  with  SANRAL  and  the
Knysna Municipality.

      The Chairperson stated that the completion of the by-pass  was  urgent
      and that the barriers with regard to what was holding up  the  process
      needed to be identified. The delegation felt that  given  the  terrain
      and the urgency of the problem and its high costs, the by-pass had  to
      be created, whichever route was the  final  one  even  if  alternative
      funding  had  to  be  obtained  from  either  national  or  provincial
      government. The delegation requested that the MEC concerned be brought
      up to speed regarding the urgency of the matter.


      A recommendation was made by the  delegation  that  the  Environmental
      Impact Assessment (EIA) be re-looked at to ascertain if there could be
      improvements. The Chairperson noted that the costing was a  big  issue
      and  that  the  costing  modules  should   be   beyond   reproach.   A
      recommendation was made that SANRAL should give a detailed briefing on
      the costing and financial model to  the  Standing  Committee  and  the
      Select Committee on Transport in the NCOP.


      The delegation raised concern regarding the safety of pedestrians  who
      walked across the N1 even though there were pedestrian bridges.


F. Meeting with the George municipality

    • The disaster  management  plan  of  the  Municipality  must  be  drawn
      together with the Eden District Municipality  and  the  Department  of
      Local Government and Housing. This sentiment was also  shared  by  the
      SALGA representative in the meeting.
    • The committee wishes to congratulate  the  Municipality  for  spending
      their Municipal Infra-Structure Grants (MIG)
    • The LED strategy is not creating jobs for the people  of  George  i.e.
      even thought the town economy is  booming  people  are  still  without
      jobs.
    • The committee is also impressed with the five-year plan but  cautioned
      the practicality of the plan, as  it  does  not  include  mapping  and
      evaluation process.
    •  Concern  was  raised  on  the  long  housing  waiting  list  of   the
      municipality, and the policies which do not assist in  addressing  the
      housing backlog.
    • The municipality was requested to submit all the Environmental  Impact
      Assessment reports  to  the  provincial  Department  of  Environmental
      Affairs, and the delegation promised to help if the delays were coming
      from the side of the provincial government.
    • Concern was raised that the province owned large traces of land in the
      area and the municipality was struggling to get the  land  transferred
      to it.
    • It is also a concern that only one contractor manages all the  housing
      projects in George.
    • The provincial Department of Housing appointed Thubelitsha to  unblock
      the housing projects without consulting the Municipality.

   G. Meeting at the Nyanga, Manenberg and Oudtshoorn police stations

   Findings

   The delegation received presentations from Ms Y Takaka from the office of
   the Western Cape Provincial Commissioner, but was not satisfied with  the
   presentation. The Department of Community Safety  is  required  to  forge
   relations with the Department of Home Affairs to address  the  influx  of
   illegal immigrants. The lack of crime intelligence and failure  to  track
   gangsters is a matter of concern.

   Recommendations

    • The committee expresses its dissatisfaction with regard to the absence
      of Provincial Commissioner and the fact that no apology  was  tendered
      from his  office.   The  committee  recommends  that  the  chairperson
      address this issue. The presentation from  the  Commissioner’s  office
      was of a general nature and did not address all the issues.

    • The witness  protection  unit  will  be  invited  to  explain  to  the
      Committee whether witnesses  are  given  protection  after  they  have
      testified and what challenges are facing the unit.

    • The Justice Department should explore retention strategies  to  retain
      state advocates who often leave for the private sector.

    • The Committee recommends that the Department of Community Safety, SAPS
      and Department of Home Affairs should engage in discussions to develop
      a control plan to stop foreign drug dealers from entering the country.

    • The community  raised  concern  about  criminals  being  granted  bail
      easily. It is recommended that  the  Department  of  Justice  and  the
      Magistrates should conduct outreach programmes to inform the public on
      bail procedures.

    • The committee expressed with grave concern the lack of facilities at
      Bongolethu Community Service Centre as compared to Bridgeton (CSC) and
      that the department (MEC) should give attention to this challenge and
      provide a computer and a clerk.  The committee noted that Bongolethu
      is one of the disadvantage areas where most of the criminal activities
      took place.

    • The committee expressed its appreciation on the informative
      presentation by Oudtshoorn Police Station. The delegation also
      expresses appreciation on the progress made by Oudtshoorn in tackling
      gangsterism and good working relations between communities and SAPS.
H. Briefing by the Department of Cultural Affairs  and  Sport  on  the  2010
FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill

The Standing Committee on Education, Cultural Affairs and Sport was  briefed
on the legislation by Mr Boschoff (Legal Advisor),  National  Department  of
Sport and Recreation.

After the briefing, the Committee continued with the public hearings on  the
Bill.

Mr Boschoff  undertook  to  courier  the  Organising  Association  Agreement
between FIFA and SAFA to members by Monday 21 August 2006.

One submission was received  from  the  public,  which  suggested  that  the
entire bill be rejected because the state would be giving away a very  large
and important area of its jurisdiction to a body (FIFA).

After submissions were heard, the  Committee  agreed  that  the  negotiating
mandate be sent to the NCOP for concurrence of the Bill,  and  that  another
meeting be scheduled for the final mandates.

I. Meeting with SALGA and the Department of Local Government and  Housing  –
problems facing Local Government  in  the  province  and  issues  they  feel
should be raised in the NCOP.

Intergovernmental relations


SALGA consider it crucial that an open and frank discussion  and  assessment
should be undertaken of the workings  and  operations  of  intergovernmental
relations in the province. SALGA stated that they “desperately and  urgently
need to find a mechanism for  provincial  departments  and  national  sector
departments  to  interact  with  local  government  in  a   structured   and
coordinated way. The relationship with the legislature is only at its  early
stages and it is for that reason that SALGA want to reflect  the  critically
important   imperative   of   effective    community    participation    and
representation and SALGA would therefore want its members  to  play  a  much
more active and dynamic role in the legislature’s committee system.

LED’s and IDP’s

Much has been done to improve the quality of IDP’s and  the  development  of
implementable LED strategies, but SALGA stated that there is the absence  of
a process for local government  to  engage  with  the  PGDS  process.  SALGA
stated  that  in  order  for  the  IDPs  and  LEDs  to   be   credible   and
implementable, they must  be  informed  by  a  proper  appreciation  of  the
national and  provincial  policy  perspective,  so  too  must  the  PGDS  be
informed by local inputs and concerns. SALGA requested that a draft PGDS  be
discussed in all their districts as soon as possible.

Service Delivery


SALGAWC is keen on meeting the millennium  goal  targets.  SALGA  encourages
and assists municipalities to have clear  service  delivery  plans  so  that
they are able to deliver on those plans.

With regard to streamlining the relationship with the Provincial  Department
of Economic Affairs and Tourism, SALGA stated  that  there  are  initiatives
taking  place  and  that  they  are  currently  in  discussions   with   the
department.

SALGA stated that there are municipalities which are  over-capacitated  e.g.
the Metro, and those that are not, but that SALGA has a programme  which  is
ongoing to deal with the issue and that audit reports are being undertaken.

With regard to capacity SALGA is in the process  to  address  the  issue  of
scarce skills. Municipalities are in the process to start learnerships  with
the assistance of the Department of Economic Affairs and Tourism.

J. Meeting with the Premier, MECs and HODs – briefing on  issues  identified
in the visits

The delegations met with the Premier, the MECs and Heads of  Departments  to
brief them on their findings during the visits.

K.    Closing remarks by the Premier

The Premier stated that the high flyers programme of the SAPS is a  success;
however, the fact that gangsters were granted bail easily  was  problematic.
He suggested that the NCOP must  undertake  to  vigorously  investigate  the
importance of the  witness  protection  programme  with  the  Department  of
Justice  and  Constitutional  Development.  He  added  that  the  conditions
attached to conditional grants were too stringent and were taking  away  the
discretion of the provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     b) General Report of the Auditor-General on Audit Outcomes for 2005-06
        [RP 247-2006].

     c) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes of
        Local Government for the year ended 30 June 2005 [RP 172-2006].

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) Report of the National Commissioner of the South African Police
        Service (SAPS) for the period of January 2006 to June 2006, in
        terms of section 18(5)(d) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
        No 116 of 1998).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Government Notice No R.967 published in Government Gazette No 29265
        dated 6 October 2006: Withdrawal and replacement of the compulsory
        specification of circuit breakers, in terms of the Standards Act,
        1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and  Foreign  Affairs  on  the
   Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good  Laboratory
   Practice Bill [B 29B – 2006]  (National  Assembly  –  sec  75),  dated  1
   November 2006:


       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,   having
       considered  the  subject  of   the   Accreditation   for   Conformity
       Assessment, Calibration and Good Laboratory Practice Bill  [B  29B  –
       2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified  by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has
       agreed to the Bill.


2. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Measurements Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21B-2006] (National
   Assembly – sec 75), dated 1 November 2006:


       The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
       considered the subject of the Measurements Units and Measurement
       Standards Bill [B 21B-2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to
       it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75
       Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


3. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Adjustments
  Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 13
  November 2006:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
       Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 32 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
       77), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as
       a section 77 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


4. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws Second
  Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 13
  November 2006:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
       Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 34 – 2006] (National Assembly –
       sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
       as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


5. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Revenue Laws Amendment
  Bill [B 33 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77), dated 13 November 2006:

       The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of the
       Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 33 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
       77), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as
       a section 77 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


6. Report of the Select Committee on Labour and Public  Enterprises  on  the
  Postal Services Amendment Bill [B 22B – 2006]  (National  Assembly  –  sec
  75), dated 31 October 2006:

       The  Select  Committee  on  Labour  and  Public  Enterprises,  having
       considered the subject of the Postal Services Amendment Bill [B  22B-
       2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified  by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports that it has
       agreed to the Bill.


7. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs on the
   Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between the Southern Africa Customs Union
   (SACU) and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), dated 1 November
   2006:

       The  Select  Committee  on  Economic  and  Foreign  Affairs,   having
       considered the request for approval by Parliament of the  Free  Trade
       Agreement (FTA) between the Southern Africa Customs Union (SACU)  and
       the  European  Free  Trade  Association  (EFTA),  referred   to   it,
       recommends that the Council,  in  terms  of  section  231(2)  of  the
       Constitution, approve the said Agreement. Report to be considered.

8. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs on
  Withholding of Remuneration of Magistrate M Matereke, dated 7 November
  2006:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs , having
       considered the report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr
       Matereke, tabled by the Acting Minister for Justice and
       Constitutional Development on 12 October 2006 in terms of section
       13(4A)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993, reports as follows: The
       Committee recommends that the House approves the suspension of the
       salary of Mr Matereke as recommended in the report tabled by the
       Acting Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development. Report to
       be considered.

9. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs on
  the Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12B-2006] (National Assembly- sec
  75), dated 7 November 2006:

       The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs, having
       considered the subject of the Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12B-
       2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, recommends
       approval of the Bill with the following proposed amendments:

1. On page 2, in line 10, before the word 'calibre' to insert:
      "by the insertion, after the definition  of  "Appeal  Board",  of  the
      following definition:"
2. On page 3, in line 6, before the word 'dispossession' to insert:
     "by  the  insertion,  after  the  definition  of  "Designated  Firearms
      Officer", of the following definition:"
3. On page 4, in line 28, to omit "section" and to substitute "subsection".
4. On page 7, in line 17, to omit "11" and to substitute "25".[1]
5. On page 9, in line 12, to underline all the words in that line.
6. On page 10, in line 35, after "(a)" to insert "of subsection (2)".
7.  On  page  19,  in  line  33,  to  omit  "Authority"  and  to  substitute
   "Agency".[2]
8. On page 20, in line 39, in the  second  column,  to  omit  "Two"  and  to
   substitute "Three".[3]
   9. On page 23, in the Memorandum on the Objects of the  Firearms  Control
      Amendment Bill, 2006, in paragraph 1.3, after the  word  "possess"  to
      omit "9".[4]



-----------------------
[1]   The correct reference to the National Heritage  Resources  Act,  1995,
      is: (Act No. 25 of 1999)
[2]   The correct name is the South African Heritage Resources Agency.
[3]   The Firearms Control Act, 2000, presently  provides  for  Three  years
      imprisonment in respect of a contravention of  section  19(4)(b).  The
      reference to two years in the Bill, is a typing error.
[4]   There is no  limitation  on  the  number  of  firearms  which  may  be
      possessed for professional hunting. The number "9" is a typing  error,
      and is also not reflected in the text of the Bill.




