---
title: 'National Assembly - 10 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-10-10
---

Tuesday, 10 October 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on
the next sitting day of the house I intend moving the following motion:

   That the House –


     1) in view of the continued press speculation and numerous anonymous
        allegations in the press concerning his alleged involvement in
        Travelgate, accords the hon Mr M Goniwe an opportunity to explain
        whether and to what extent he was involved in the abuse of travel
        vouchers; or, if he was not involved in such abuse, what the amount
        and the reason was for the repayment made by him to the liquidators
        of one of the travel agencies; and


     2) resolves, if Mr Goniwe fails to seek an opportunity to explain his
        position, to appoint an ad hoc committee consisting of
        representatives of all parties to enquire into whether or not the
        hon Goniwe was involved in the Travelgate scandal, the nature of
        such involvement and what action, if any, should be taken by the
        House.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice to the House that I
intend moving the following motion:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes with concern that our current electoral system, which is
        based solely on proportional representation, prevents public
        representatives from meeting the needs of the electorate;


   (2)      further notes that a hybrid electoral system that includes
        elements of the proportional and constituency systems would be more
        beneficial for the electorate; and


   (3)      urges the Executive Government to review the current
        proportional system with a view to adopting a hybrid system.




               HAPPY 75th BIRTHDAY TO ARCHBISHOP DESMOND TUTU


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that on Saturday, 7 October,  Bishop  Desmond  Mpilo  Tutu
         celebrated his seventy-fifth birthday;

   (2)      recalls that in 1984 Archbishop Tutu was awarded the Nobel Peace
         Prize for his life-long dedication to the fight for peace, justice,
         human dignity and human rights;


   (3)      further recalls that His Grace was appointed to head  the  Truth
         and Reconciliation Commission to facilitate national reconciliation
         by giving amnesty to perpetrators of apartheid  atrocities  and  to
         heal the victims of these harrowing crimes;


   (4)      acknowledges his contribution to the anti-apartheid struggle and
         the struggle for human rights and dignity in general;
   (5)      recognises that Archbishop Tutu remains an  important  spiritual
         leader of our nation as well as an  embodiment  of  our  collective
         values of Ubuntu and good citizenship;


   (6)      congratulates the Archbishop Emeritus of Cape Town on  his  75th
         birthday and hopes that he will see many more; and


   (7)      wishes “The Arch” a belated happy birthday.


Motion agreed to.


            BEST WISHES FOR STUDENTS WRITING MATRIC EXAMINATIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes that yesterday, 9 October 2006, marked  the  beginning  of
         Grade 12 or Matric final examinations as they are popularly known;


   (2)      further notes that education is a foundation for development and
         encourages national talent and contributes to social cohesion;


   (3)      urges students to honour the right of  access  to  education  by
         taking their studies seriously;


   (4)      further urges teachers, in their dual capacity as educators  and
         parents, to ensure that the Matric examinations proceed smoothly so
         that the doors of learning continue to be opened for a better  life
         for all; and


   (5)      conveys its best wishes to all  students  as  they  are  working
        towards fulfilling their potential.


Motion agreed to.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                       (The late Mr Thozamile Gqwetha)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes with shock  and  profound  sadness  the  passing  away  of
         Comrade Thozamile Gqwetha on 24 September 2006;

   (2)      recognises that Comrade Gqwetha was a  towering  leader  of  the
         trade union movement, a distinguished patriot to whom unity of  the
         people was an article of faith;


   (3)       recalls  that  Khumbeni,  his  clan  name  by  which   he   was
         affectionately known within  the  union  circles  and  the  broader
         democratic movement, was a leader who stood by his people and would
         not  relinquish  his  responsibility  to  represent   the   genuine
         interests of the workers or submit to the extreme pressures of  the
         bosses, the apartheid government, neither would  he  seek  his  own
         fortune at the expense of the working class;


   (4)      acknowledges the great contribution  that  Msuthu  made  in  the
         revival of the trade union movement in the 80s, starting  with  the
         formation of the South African Allied Workers Union and culminating
         in the unity talks that led to the formation  of  the  Congress  of
         South African Trade Unions in 1985,  and  that  he  discharged  his
         responsibilities  with  dedication,   discipline,   diligence   and
         humility;


   (5)      believes that the life of this great workers’ leader  epitomises
         a commitment to peace, development and social progress; and


   (6)      conveys its condolences  to  the  Gqwetha  family,  the  African
         National Congress, the South African Communist Party, the Congress
         of South African Trade Unions and the working  class  movement  in
         general.


Motion agreed to.

 PRESIDING OFFICER GRANTED DISCRETION TO DETERMINE TIME FOR THE PRESIDENT’S
                            REPLIES TO QUESTIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That notwithstanding any rules to the  contrary,  the  House  grants  the
   Presiding Officer the discretion to determine the time allocated for  the
   President’s replies to questions for the rest of this term.


Motion agreed to.


                  MAKHAYA NTINI – SA CRICKETER OF THE YEAR


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Thank you, hon Chairperson. The ANC is committed to
the total transformation of our society in general and sport in particular.
The programmes that the government has embarked upon are starting to yield
positive results. Last Tuesday, 3 October 2006, the Proteas’ fast bowler
Makhaya Ntini became the first player to be recognised as one of the five
Mutual & Federal SA Cricketers of the Year on an incredible five occasions.
It is remarkable that Makhaya won the award five times. Of the five times,
he has won it four consecutive times, a record on its own.

We also celebrate the fact that one of our wicketkeepers, Mark Boucher, was
honoured for the third time at the same event, while Ashwell Prince, Hashim
Amla and Dale Steyn also received accolades for the first time. We
therefore call upon Parliament and all hon members to congratulate Makhaya
Ntini and his fellow cricketers on receiving this honour.

The ANC wishes the Proteas well on their tour to India. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                   IFP CONTROL OVER DISTRICT MUNICIPALITY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Thank you, Chair. The IFP wishes to congratulate its
councillors and those of allied parties in retaking eNdwedwe, a local
municipality in Ilembe, KwaZulu-Natal on 5 October. This is in addition to
the IFP also regaining the district municipality of Amajuba from the ANC.
In both cases this was achieved on the basis of co-operation with Nadeco
councillors.

We are however disturbed at the reaction of the ANC to these developments.
In respect of Amajuba, the IFP had to obtain a court order to force the ANC-
run council to call a council meeting at which an election could take
place. But even after losing that battle, the ANC office bearers refuse to
relinquish office, resulting in chaos in the council.

Endwedwe is witnessing a partial rerun of this unnecessary behaviour with
the ANC resorting to unpleasantness, including a refusal by old office
bearers to physically move offices. The IFP calls on the ANC to stop
behaving churlishly and to be more gracious in defeat. [Applause.]


                        MARINE LIVING RESOURCES FUND


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Chairperson, in replying to my questions about audit
disclaimers in respect of the Marine Living Resources Fund, the MLRF, the
Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism replied that new employees to
the fund were appointed on 1 May 2005, as he put it, to improve the
financial management and control of the fund. The hon Minister also said in
his reply that the fund had no employees prior to 1 May 2005.

According to reports in the Cape Times this morning, the fund had
R53 million in its coffers at the end of March 2005, deteriorating to a
current deficit of R45 million, ie since the appointment of the new
management team.

If the Minister’s reply to me is correct, it would appear that the fund
operated better without employees than with employees. If the new employees
were appointed, as the Minister put it, to improve the financial controls
and procedures of the fund, they have failed dismally.

The Minister owes us an explanation with regard not only to the factual
situation of the fund but also what steps he proposes to take to rectify
the situation, and particularly whether he proposes to take action against
the employees appointed on 1 May 2005 for poor performance. The important
work to be performed by marine and coastal management is seriously hampered
by the state of affairs at the MLRF and could lead to the total collapse of
services to the fishing industry. [Applause.]


         LABOUR MARKET POLICIES AND DECREASE IN UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms O R KASIENYANE (ANC): Chairperson, the decline in unemployment figures
as projected by Statistics SA is a vindication of the sound labour market
policies being pursued by the ANC government. According to Statistics SA,
figures show that unemployment has dropped from 26,5% in March 2005 to
25,6% in March 2006.

According to the Minister of Labour, Comrade Membathisi Mdladlana, this is
an indication of how well our labour market policies are functioning. Also
critical in the key findings is the fact that the number of people who are
actively seeking employment has increased, accompanied by the decline in
the number of discouraged work seekers who did not actively seek employment
in the month prior to the survey being undertaken. This reflects the
confidence shown by job seekers in our policies.

These statistics come at a time when our policies are under constant
attack, blamed for the high unemployment rate in the country. Several
studies have shown that the problem lies not with the policies themselves,
but with how they are implemented. Hence, 1,2 million jobs have been
created over a five-year period. [Time expired.]


                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Chairperson, according to the document on school-
based violence in South Africa, compiled by the SA Human Rights Commission,
violence, including sexual violence, is prevalent in many schools. It
states, among other things, that the possession of weapons by students,
sexual abuse and the use of alcohol and drugs on school premises has a
debilitating effect on the morale of school managers, educators and
governing bodies.

Many school principals say they are helpless, as they do not know what to
do. Teachers report that they sometimes fear their own gang-affiliated
pupils who carry weapons and smoke dagga. For many of them, being at school
is no longer a joy and a pleasure because of the risks and threats to their
lives.

The ACDP believes that if schoolchildren were still taught godly values and
the importance of respect for authority, particularly that of their own
parents and teachers, then our schools would not have been turned into
danger zones. Government made a mistake by stopping teachings about God in
our schools, and by abolishing corporal punishment without providing
alternative, effective disciplinary measures to educators, who are also
subjected to abuse and violence by learners.

If the hearts and attitudes of our learners are not changed, then even
metal detectors will not stop violence in South African schools.

On behalf of the ACDP, I conclude by wishing to convey our condolences to
the Mbhele family on the loss of their son, Nkosana, who became the latest
victim of school violence.

             COSATU SHAREHOLDER IN NEW NATIONAL LOTTERY OPERATOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Chairperson, Cosatu, despite its very strong objections
to the lottery, has emerged as one of the major shareholders in Gidani, the
consortium recently awarded the licence to operate the national lottery. In
2003, Cosatu made a submission to Parliament, objecting to the introduction
of the National Gambling Bill, saying it would have negative consequences
on the quality of life of the most vulnerable. Now Cosatu, through its
investment arm, Kopano ke Matla, holds 13,5% shareholding in Gidani.

In its 2003 parliamentary submission, Cosatu quoted research that found
that almost half of the adults in urban areas buy tickets, and that 40% of
them earn between R800 and R4 000 a month, and that those who spend more
than R625 a month on the Lotto were single African men earning less than R4
000 a month.

Cosatu also said that the lottery encouraged gamblers to think that they
can only change their lives through luck. Cosatu’s Zwelinzima Vavi said
that, in his view, the lottery was immoral and a second tax on the poor.
Cosatu at one stage even went as far as accusing the lottery of
establishing a ``zama-zama mentality’’.

Added to this are the workers of Uthingo, who will be losing their jobs
because their company did not get the bid. Guess what, Chairperson? The
workers who will be losing their jobs are members of a union called the SA
Commercial, Catering and Allied Workers Union which, incidentally, is a
Cosatu affiliate.

In conclusion, the ID wants to call on Cosatu to stop its ``zama-zama’’ and
``Zuma-Zuma’’ mentality, and give proper leadership to the workers they
represent. [Time expired.] [Interjections.]


        GRANTING OF FIRST NEW ORDER MINING RIGHTS TO LONMIN PLATINUM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Yesterday, the Minister of Minerals and Energy,
Buyelwa Sonjica, granted the first new order mining rights to be awarded to
a platinum company, Lonmin Platinum. Lonmin Platinum obtained the rights
for the Marikana Mines which accounts for 95% of its production. They
provide Lonmin with the right to mine the Marikana Mines for 30 years, with
an option of renewal for another 30 years.

However, at the event, the Minister said that she was displeased with the
progress of South African platinum companies when it came to meeting
requirements for new order mining rights. Lonmin Platinum is the world’s
third largest platinum company after Anglo Platinum and Impala Platinum.

Mining companies have until 2009 to comply with requirements to convert
their old order mining rights into new order mining rights under the Mining
Charter. The requirements include 15% black ownership of products by 2009
and 26% by 2014, as well as progress on issues such as employment equity
and education on their mines.

After Lonmin’s announcement, the company shares climbed 4,7%. Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]




                      EFFECTS OF EMPLOYMENT EQUITY ACT


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr S SIMMONS (UPSA): Chair, it is becoming increasingly evident that the
ruling party has its focus on internal party matters, and is leaving a
number of equally important issues unattended.

I have, on a number of occasions, tried to direct the ruling party’s
attention to the unacceptable effects of the Employment Equity Act in its
current form.

I am specifically referring to recent court rulings that allowed
discrimination among the generic group of black people as defined in the
Act, making it acceptable to give preference to black Africans above
coloured people, irrespective of the merit of the individual cases.

The UPSA wants to state it categorically that it is untrue that all
coloureds, all the time, enjoyed a more comfortable life during the
apartheid years than all black Africans.

The truth is that a significant number of coloured people went through the
same degree of suffering as our black African brothers during apartheid. We
also need to be mindful of the fact that a great number of our coloured
people unconditionally took part in the struggle against apartheid and even
lost their lives.

The UPSA will follow all reasonable avenues to ensure that our coloured
people receive the right to equal opportunities in respect of the
employment market. We will resist all attempts to fragment and polarise the
South African population at large. I thank you.


                             VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G G BOINAMO (DA): The tragic murder of a 19-year-old school pupil
yesterday shows what a long way our society has to go before our law-
abiding citizens can live without fear.

The murder of Simon Mbhele was no isolated incident. Our schools are
increasingly becoming hotbeds of violence and crime. The government needs
to act with far more decisiveness and commitment in order to prevent any
further tragedies, and to ensure that our children are able to learn and
play without fearing for their lives.

The DA calls on the government to urgently develop a plan of action to
combat violence in schools. Two key aspects for this plan must be, firstly,
appropriate procedures governing the consequences for pupils who have been
involved in criminal activities, and secondly, a provision for funding for
counselling and medical services for victims of violence in schools. Thank
you.


        WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM’S GLOBAL ECONOMIC COMPETITIVENESS REPORT


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr C M LOWE (DA): Mr Chairman, South Africa has slipped five places from
its 40th place in 2005 to be ranked 45th out of the 127 countries surveyed
in the 2006 World Economic Forum’s Global Economic Competitiveness Report.
South Africa scored particularly badly in the areas related to what the WEF
considers core basic requirements and efficiency enhancers for economic
competitiveness.

One such area where South Africa fared poorly was in labour flexibility and
efficiency, which includes the skills and educational levels of our labour
force.

It is therefore deeply concerning to learn that when the Steel and
Engineering Industries Federation of South Africa recently approached
government to invest funds from the National Skills Fund to train an
additional 500 artisans in skill priority areas, the application was
summarily dismissed on account of red tape.

The DA strongly believes that South Africa has the mettle to make it to the
top 10 in global economic competitiveness. When the private sector comes
forward with enterprising ideas to actually make that happen, the least
that the ANC government can do is to not stand in its way.


                ESSENTIAL OILS COMMUNITY PROJECT IN UITENHAGE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): The ANC-led government has committed R4 million over
three years to turn a fledgling essential oils community project outside
Uitenhage into a commercial success. The pilot phase of the project was
launched with the help of the Department of Science and Technology to
rescue KwaNobuhle farmers who were struggling to service a R400 000 Land
Bank loan, which helped them to acquire 800 hectares between Uitenhage and
Rocklands.

Mr Hanekom, the Deputy Minister of Science and Technology, said that the
essential oils project had excellent potential, and he urged the farmers to
work together and avoid the infighting that could wreck it. The project
stems from the initial approach made to the department by traditional
healers in Mpumalanga, who had identified the mosquito-repellent properties
of a plant from the project.

Tests were done, and the essential oil PBI was produced. While helping them
to turn the plant and their knowledge into a commercially viable product,
the department realised that the plant could also be cultivated in other
parts of the country that had similar water and climatic conditions.

The oil will be extracted from the plant, which the KwaNobuhle community
calls Nukunuka, and should fetch R300 per kilogram on the commercial
market. The community could aim, in the long term, to generate R15 000 to
R20 000 a hectare. At the moment, there are 12 workers, and the hope is
that this figure will increase to 90.

The ANC welcomes the support given by the Department of Science and
Technology to the community of KwaNobuhle, by turning their indigenous
knowledge into a viable commercial product, which will contribute towards
local economic development and job creation. I thank you. [Applause.]


       CONTRIBUTING FACTORS TO CRISIS FACING THE YOUTH IN SOUTH AFRICA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr R RABINOWITZ (IFP): Chair, our culture of entitlement, our failure to
balance rights with responsibilities, the unravelling of traditional
authorities, the weakening of family values, the lack of employment
opportunities for school-leavers, morally degenerate behaviour flooding TV
and cellphones, and the high incidence of HIV are among the many factors
contributing to the crisis facing the young people of South Africa.

The tragic murder of a 19-year-old boy by a 14-year-old fellow pupil is a
single manifestation of a widespread problem facing South Africa’s youth.
Young people are deeply affected by drugs, crime, teenage pregnancy and
other social ills that threaten our communities. They are languishing in
prisons facing charges of rape, murder, theft, possession of unlicensed
firearms, hijacking and drug smuggling.

Alcohol and drug abuse as well as prostitution are no longer restricted to
the back streets of major cities. The sex trade is booming in towns and
township streets and rural areas, increasing the incidence of HIV/Aids.
Youngsters steal money, strip tyres from parked cars, violently take mobile
phones and break into houses for DVDs and other valuable items. They are
not only prepared to kill, but they are prepared to die as well.

This is a national crisis that demands a reassessment of all the values
that underpin our society - in the Constitution, government departments and
religious sectors, and among youth leaders, businesspeople and all the
other interest groups that can affect the lives of South Africa’s youth.

The IFP offers its heartfelt condolences to the Mbhele family for the
tragic loss of their son. Thank you.


              ERADICATION OF BUCKET TOILET SYSTEM IN MPUMALANGA


                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms P TSHWETE (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson, the ANC-led government has
committed itself to providing clean running water and decent sanitation to
every South African by 2010. The ANC therefore commends the Mpumalanga
provincial department of local government and housing for completing the
eradication of bucket toilets in all formal areas throughout the province.

The department began its project last year, and spent almost R200 million
to complete it. The achievement is well within the national bucket
eradication deadline for formal areas, which is set for 2007. Mpumalanga
has become the first province to eradicate the bucket system. Over 18 500
bucket toilets have been replaced by flushing toilets or by a ventilated,
improved pit system. The VIP toilets currently in areas with poor water
infrastructure will also eventually be replaced with flushing toilets. The
project created over 5 000 part-time and 300 permanent jobs.

The ANC will continue to work with the people to ensure that the goals of a
better life for all are realised. I thank you. [Applause.]


                         RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH (DA): Chairperson, according to a finding by the
British-based New Economics Foundation, it was established that human
consumption of natural energy resources outstripped the replenishment rate
of natural resources to such a degree that as of today, 10 October 2006, we
have used more natural resources than we have managed to cultivate for this
year alone.

This startling fact reminds us that replenishing, renewing and making
efficient use of natural resources is ultimately much more important to our
security than all the weapons the ANC government has chosen to spend
taxpayers’ money on.

Currently renewable energy forms approximately 8% of South Africa’s primary
energy supply, and nearly all of that being noncommercial energy in the
form of firewood in rural areas, which is of course not being renewed. For
a country that is endowed with vast renewable energy sources, this
situation is unacceptable.

Government’s policy on renewable energy needs to be integrated into South
Africa’s broader energy plans. The DA calls on government to commit the
necessary funding to ensure that the development of renewable energy
technologies is fast-tracked. I thank you.




                        PROMOTING A HEALTHY LIFESTYLE


                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs M M MALUMISE (ANC): Chairperson, with regard to the Conference on
Obesity and the Promotion of a Healthy Lifestyle, the ANC is committed to
promoting healthy living to our people.

With obesity becoming a problem in South Africa, the role of the food
manufacturing industry in combating the problem was recently highlighted
during the Nutrition Congress held in Port Elizabeth. Various speakers from
manufacturing companies such as Unilever, Kraft, the SA Sugar Association
and Nando’s, made presentations at the congress that was held at the
Feather Market Centre.

Manufacturers are working with scientists and health organisations to
promote a healthy lifestyle. According to experts attending the conference,
manufacturing companies have a responsibility to adopt responsible
marketing practices. This includes self-regulation in the industry by
stopping advertising directly to children under six years, and by embarking
on a variety of activities, such as engaging the scientific community and
fostering co-operation between manufacturers, retailers and other
stakeholders.

The conference emphasised the need to promote research on obesity and the
comparative roles of different dietary factors, while also educating
community primary health workers on nutrition.

The ANC urges manufacturers to work with nutritionists, dieticians and
scientists to reduce the high incidence of obesity. If you want to get
slim, see me.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That sounded like a commercial
towards the end of the statement. The ANC has one more opportunity.

                  CONDOLENCES TO BEREAVED OF TEMPE SHOOTING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T V TOBIAS (ANC): Thank you, Chairperson. The ANC hereby conveys its
condolences to the families of members of the SA National Defence Force who
passed away during the Tempe shooting last week. At no point will we in the
ANC or in the security fraternity condone such behaviour. Therefore we are
committed to encouraging education on emotional intelligence, to ensure
that our people know how to deal with conflict resolution amicably, without
any shedding of blood. We send our condolences and sympathies: Let their
souls rest in peace.

                     PROCEDURES WHEN APPLYING FOR FUNDS
                      ECONOMIC POLICY EMPLOYMENT EQUITY

                            (Minister’s Response)
UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Mhlalingaphambili, mandiqale ngokuthi
ndafundiswa ekhaya ukuba ubuvuvu nentlavubulela ndingazihluphi
ngokuziphendula, ngakumbi xa zithethwa ngumntu ongacingisisanga nje ngoMark
Lowe. Ngoko ke andizi kuziduba kakhulu ngaye ngoba uthethelela abantu
abathi babeye kucela imali kwiSebe lezaBasebenzi baze abayifumana. Ngoku
yena uthetha ngered tape xa kulandelwa iPublic Finance Management Act.
Andazi ke nokuba kuthiwa masikroboze umthetho na ukuze senzelelele abathile
noothileshe. Ngelishwa ke, phaya kuQoboqobo, eZingcuka, amanyundululu
namanyala anjalo asingeni kuwo.

Mhlalingaphambili, ndiyabulela phaya kuKassie ngokuthi ayithethe into
yokuba abantu baseMzantsi Afrika bamthembile urhulumente wabo, kunjalo nje
bayithembile i-ANC ukuba ayiphazamanga ngokubeka le migaqo-nkqubo. Into nje
abayicelayo kwi-ANC kukuba siqinisekise iziseko zokulawula kwanokuba
abaqeshi bayawuthobela umthetho, ze sandise nenani labahloli ukuze
siqinisekise ukuba kukho uzinzo kuqoqosho lweli lizwe. Luzinzo eyona nto
ibalulekileyo, singanyusani sisihlisana kuba, ngokwenjenjalo sibalekisa abo
bafuna ukuzisa imali kweli lizwe loMzantsi Afrika. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, let me start by saying I was taught
at home not to worry myself by responding to false and unsubstantiated
allegations, especially if they are made by a person who thinks shallowly
like Mark Lowe. Therefore, I am not going to bother myself much about him,
because he is protecting the people who claim to have gone to the
Department of Labour to ask for funds, but to no avail.  Now he is talking
about “red tape” when the guidelines of the Public Finance Management Act
are followed. I do not know whether we should break the law for certain
individuals. Unfortunately, in Qoboqobo at Zingcuka, we don’t entertain
such balderdash.

Chairperson, I am thankful to Kassie for having eloquently stated that the
people of South Africa have confidence in their government and above all,
they trust the ANC, for it did not make a mistake by formulating this
policy. The only request that they have for the ANC is that we should
ensure that there is support for government policies and that the employers
do obey the law, so that we increase the number of inspectors to ensure
economic stability in this country. The most important thing is stability
and to stop fighting amongst ourselves, for by so doing we discourage those
who want to invest their money in our country.]

On behalf of the Department of Labour and of government in general, I want
to thank all the workers of this country for their contribution towards
these achievements. [Applause.]

In relation to employment equity, oops! Unfortunately, this issue about
coloureds and other things is your problem, not ours. In the ANC we do not
fight people. We fought against racism, because it is racism that we are
opposed to, whether it is happening in the workplace or elsewhere.

I am sure the hon member, the President of the PAC, hon Pheko, will
remember that in the past they used to call us Charterists because of using
the terms “black and white” many years ago, and therefore it is very
important that we always remember that we do not fight people ...

Dr S E M PHEKO: Chair, I rise on a point of order. The Minister must
address the question. It has nothing to do with the PAC. The PAC was
established in this country to establish a nonracial society. So let us not
talk about Charterism here. Let him talk about Charterism and not about
Africanism.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, what is happening in the House? Are
you ordering me to keep quiet or are you just giving him a chance to speak?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I am trying to get both of you,
hon members, who are trying to speak at the same time, an opportunity to
listen to the Chair so that I can rule. Hon Pheko, you are out of order. I
had not recognised you formally and yet you continued to speak. I would
urge you next time to first wait until you are recognised by the Chair, and
then you put your point of order. Please proceed, hon Minister.
The MINISTER OF LABOUR: In fact, he should apologise for disturbing me,
because I was still speaking.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Can I be recognised now? There, Chairman, you say I have
not been recognised. Let the Minister talk about Charterism and not
Africanism.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order, please, hon members!
Please proceed, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I can address him even on that, because I am an
African, and unlike him, I have neither a suffix nor a prefix. Maybe he has
been cut somewhere; but I am a pure African, period.

We are opposed to racism, and we do not fight people. In fact, if the hon
member can read the Employment Equity Act, he will find that it tries by
all means to indicate that by “black people” we mean coloureds, Indians and
Africans, and that was put there as a result of demands that we make sure
that we articulate the position that the term “black people” doesn’t mean
“black Africans”.

I don’t know what he means by black Africans. I’m getting more definitions
in this House. It is very clear that people understand that the employment
equity is not only about race; it is also about affirming people with
disabilities, as well as women. Therefore, you must stand up and be clear
as to what it is that you are opposing. Probably it is because you are one-
person party in this Parliament, and a man at that. [Time expired.]


        MURDER OF STUDENT AND MEASURES TO CONTROL VIOLENCE IN SCHOOLS


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, any person who believes that the
murder of the young Mr Mbhele at Forest Hill High School yesterday was a
result of indecisiveness is a high priest of exaggeration. All the
instances of violence in our schools are a matter of great concern to me,
as they should be to every person in our country.

I constantly ask myself as I see these incidents why it is that our
children believe they could carry a gun onto school grounds. Why do they
carry sharp weapons? What is it that makes a boy of 16 years of age beat a
child to within an inch of his life for a cellphone? What is wrong with the
children in our society? It has nothing to do with the Minister. It is
something that we must address within our communities and I say again,
within our families. It is something, which we have to do to change the
violent nature of our society.

I observed almost every moment of the Human Rights Commission hearings.
There was one video that I saw there of a boy beating another boy in
school. I have never seen such a vicious look on the face of another class
member – directed at their own comrade in class. The way he was kicking
that child who was on the floor - I found it unbelievable!

It is not something that we politicise here as being the lack of action by
the Minister. There is something wrong with our society. All of us must put
our shoulder to the wheel and do something about it. We are doing something
... [Interjections.] No, no, don’t shout, wait a moment.

We are doing something. We do have metal detectors in schools. We are
appointing security guards, as I indicated, but that is not the answer.
Before your son or daughter leaves home, make sure that they have not
smoked tik, are not carrying a knife and don’t have a gun in their
possession. Make sure that you have taught your child positive values
before he or she walks out of your home. [Interjections.]

Hon member, you are almost attacking the man next to you. That’s the
example you show your child and that is why our children cannot behave
properly, because they watch you. They watch you and that’s the conduct
they think they should exhibit. [Applause.]

In addition to the strategies that we have put in place, I am seriously
considering instituting random testing for drugs in our schools, because I
believe the impact of drugs may be what is leading to the psychotic kind of
conduct that we are seeing in some of the children in our school.

I hope that members of this hon House, when we institute that process -
which will be an intrusion into privacy which some members hold very high –
will support me in that regard. I believe that, in order to truly address
this issue, we need to teach our children manners and discipline in our
homes before they get into schools. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, the Minister said they
will have random testing in the House. I would support that. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): If it’s a proposal that we do so,
hon Chief Whip, I am sure the Minister would assist.

The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I have noticed that there are
certain members who are very excitable, so it might be necessary.
[Laughter.]




                      HEALTH PROFESSIONS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, hon members, on behalf of the
Minister of Health, Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, it gives me great pleasure
to present to the House the Health Professions Amendment Bill, which amends
the Health Professions Act, Act 56 of 1974.

Given the divisions of the past, the values of equity, justice and human
dignity are essential to the establishment of a fair and credible health
system that cares for all. Since the dawn of democracy, we have gone a long
way to transform the health sector to serve the interests of all South
Africans.

Although we have made strides in transforming various statutory councils,
experience over the past few years has shown a number of gaps in the system
that still need to be addressed, some of which may require legislative
change. The areas requiring much attention include the role of councils, in
particular, vis-à-vis government; their contribution to transformation of
the health sector; their membership, operational procedures and
communication with and accountability to the health department, while
serving the interests of the public.

It is for this reason that the Minister called for a meeting with the
chairpersons and registrars of statutory health councils on 6 November 2001
at which many ideas on some of these issues were aired. At this meeting, a
task team was appointed to look further into all the issues raised and to
make recommendations. Members of the task team were appointed in their
individual capacities but the team was balanced to include the expertise of
government, council members, council officials and academia.

The report compiled by the task team took cognisance of specific
differences in relation to different councils, but more especially the
commonalities that transcend all existing councils. It became evident then
that there was an urgent need to transform all statutory health councils to
enable them to fulfil the role envisaged for them in a democratic society.

Amongst the most important recommendations of the task team, the following
stood out, that the main purpose of professional councils is to protect and
promote the public’s interests, including delivery of quality health care,
the introduction of good corporate governance and the introduction of the
charter for council members. What is also important is the fact that the
councils have to be receptive to community and public interest and to
create smaller but more productive and efficient councils. With this Bill,
we also seek to address concerns raised by professionals with regard to the
service rendered by councils. The Health Professionals Amendment Bill has
gone to great lengths in incorporating these recommendations.

The primary purpose of the Bill is to transform the Health Professions
Council of South Africa so as to increase the protection of the interest of
the public and to promote greater accountability of council members and the
registrar. The Bill is intended to encompass some of the provisions of the
National Health Act of 2003, Act 61 of 2003 and other relevant statutes.
The Bill seeks to make consequential amendments to other legislation in
order to update outdated references.

It must be noted, hon members, that all councils but one are not listed in
Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999 as scheduled
public entities. To ensure accountability, it was imperative to insert
provisions of corporate governance. There was also a need to transform the
council in terms of the number of council members and their demographic
representation.

Nizokhumbula malungu ahloniphekileyo ukuthi eminyakeni eminingi eyedlule
sasisinye vo kweziyisishiyagalombili isikole esasiqeqesha odokotela
abamnyama, abomdabu baseNdiya namakhaladi. Leso sikole sesibizwa ngokuthi
iNelson Mandela School of Medicine kanti sasibizwa nge-Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Natal. Nizokhumbula ukuthi yilapho okwaqeqeshwa khona
abantu abafana noSteve Biko nabaholi abaningi bethu.

Ngithanda ukubonga ingqalabutho ngokuqeqesha odokotela - iMedunsa,
ngokuvula kwabo iminyango futhi bavume ukukhiqiza odokotela abamnyama
ababamba iqhaza ekulashweni kwabantu bakithi emalokishini nasemahositela
ngesikhathi sengcindezelo. Kanjalo siyayibonga neWalter Sisulu University
ngokugqugquzela abafundi ukuthi bazibandakanye nentuthuko yemiphakathi.

NjengoMnyango Wezempilo, sibheke ngamehlo abomvu-ke uhlelo lwePhini
likaMongameli, iJipsa, kanjalo nohlelo lwethu loMnyango Wezempilo
lwezabasebenzi i-Human Resource Plan ukuthi luzosiza ekukhiqizeni
abasebenzi bezempilo abazovala igebe lokushoda kwabasebenzi abaqeqeshelwe
ukwelapha abantu bakithi.

Nizokhumbula ukuthi le mikhandlu esiyiguqulayo namhlanje yayicwasa
ngokwebala. Kube umqansa-ke kithina njengohulumeni ngenkathi sisebenza
ukuyiguqula nenqubo yayo ukuze ikwazi ukusebenzelana nabo bonke odokotela,
kungacwaswa ngokwebala. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[You will remember, hon members, that many years ago there was only one
medical school out of the eight that we had, which was prepared to train
black, coloured and Indian students. That school is now called the Nelson
Mandela School of Medicine and then it was known as the Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Natal. You will remember that this is the very medical
school where people like Steve Biko and many of our leaders were trained.

I also wish to pay tribute to the pathfinder, Medunsa, for training
doctors, and for opening their doors to the black student doctors who in
turn played a pivotal role in curing the black people in the townships and
hostels during apartheid. We also thank the Walter Sisulu University for
encouraging students to take part in community development programmes.

As the Department of Health we are keenly watching the progress of the
Deputy President’s programme of Jipsa. On the other hand we are also
closely monitoring our own programme which is called “Human Resource Plan”
to see if it will help us produce the health workers who will fill the void
created by health workers leaving.

You will remember that these councils that we are turning around today
discriminated against people on the basis of the colour of their skin. It
was a long battle for us, as government, when we were working to transform
them as well as their way of accepting membership so that they could accept
all doctors across the board without discriminating against them on the
basis of the colour of their skin.]

There was also a need to transform the council in terms of the number of
council members. The Health Professions Act, Act 56 of 1974 was also found
wanting in terms of provisions on appointment of the president and
registrar, regulation on the conduct of professionals and the evaluation
and accreditation of teaching institutions.

The Bill therefore aims to include all the above-mentioned matters,
technical amendments and deletion of certain provisions. The Bill will
further bring in line with the current Act the objectives of section 50 of
the National Health Act, Act 61 of 2003. The Bill was published for public
comment and the comments were incorporated into the draft.

Now I want to talk very briefly around the objectives of the Bill. The
objectives of the Bill are to serve and protect the public in matters
involving health services provided by the profession; to foster close
liaison between the council and boards when considering certain matters; to
reduce the total number of council members from 52 to 25; and to further
regulate the appointment of council members and the registrar.

The Bill also aims to ensure accountability and transparency by the council
and the registrar, particularly relating to financial management of the
council; to empower the Minister to appoint members of professional boards
on the basis of nominations; and to make provision for evaluation, quality
assurance and accreditation processes for teaching institutions and
training facilities. The Bill aims to empower the Minister to make
regulations that will exclude certain persons from performing compulsory
community service and generally to guide the professions.

Let me present a short synopsis on the various aspects of the Bill. Section
3 aligns national health policy with objectives and functions of the
council while obliging the council to have strategic plans, to report to
the Minister on how such plans are to be achieved and to submit annual
reports. More importantly, the section emphasises the protection of the
interests and rights of the public in matters involving the rendering of
health services.

Section 5 will ensure efficiency control, accountability and transparency
by reducing the number of designated members from 25 to 16 and introducing
new corporate governance provisions. Section 8 empowers the president to
convene a special meeting if requested to do so by the Minister or a third
of the members. Section 10 empowers the Minister to appoint the registrar,
who will be the accounting officer after consultation with the council.

Section 12 empowers the Minister to appoint members of the professional
boards on the basis of nominations. This will ensure that there is
demographic representivity in the board. Section 14 enhances the powers of
the professional boards to, inter alia, prescribe processes relating to the
evaluation and accreditation of teaching institutions and training
facilities by such professional boards.
Sections 19, 20 and 42 deal with the admission, suspension, removal of and
fines imposed on professionals found guilty of improper conduct. Section 25
empowers the Minister to make regulations regarding, inter alia, persons
excluded from compulsory community service. Section 30 replaces the council
with the professional board as the authority that institutions are obliged
to submit certain particulars to, for example education and training
acquired or examinations being conducted at a particular institution; and
results of examinations being conducted at these institutions.

Section 33 enables professionals to further register in subspecialties,
professional categories and additional professional categories. In this
regard, the professional board replaces the council as the authority that
registers professionals. Section 37 generally prohibits performance of
professional acts by unregistered persons and lists the relevant offences
in case of noncompliance. Section 44 replaces the council by empowering the
Minister, after consultation with the council and the board, to make
regulations relating to unprofessional conduct.

In conclusion, I would like to applaud the Minister of Health for her hard
work and commitment in working with various stakeholders to ensure the
successful drafting of this Bill. I wish her a speedy recovery. I would
like to thank the task team; the health portfolio committee under the
leadership of hon James Ngculu; officials of my department under the
leadership of the Director-General, Mr Thami Mseleku; members of the public
who participated during public hearings; and, of course, the ANC for its
progressive health policies which have contributed to creating a unified
health sector. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Deputy Minister.
Order! Hon members, I can hear you from where I am seated. I don’t have to
listen in on your discussions but I can hear you loud and clear.

Mr L V J NGCULU: Chairperson, before I commence with my speech, I would
like to convey our condolences to the family and colleagues of Prof Sam
Mhlongo of Medunsa, who passed on after a car accident, I think, last week.
We all know the role he played in the health sector in particular.

Today, as the Portfolio Committee on Health, we present to this House the
Health Professions Amendment Bill, and as the ANC we’d like to state from
the beginning that this Bill should be supported. We do so, convinced that
this legislation is about transformation and ensuring that the people in
general and the poor and the working class in particular do benefit from
quality health provision and dignity of service.

In order for us to understand this particular point of quality health
service and dignity of service, may we remind ourselves of one of the
greater leaders of our revolution, Steve Biko, who passed on in September
1977. Perhaps here, we should remind ourselves that in August 1977 Steve
Biko was detained and kept at Walmer Police Station in Port Elizabeth. On 7
September Biko sustained head injuries during interrogation, after which he
acted strangely. The doctors who examined him, Drs Benjamin Tucker and Ivor
Lang, examined him lying naked on a mat and manacled to a metal grid, yet
they disregarded overt signs of neurological injuries. They also failed to
record his external injuries or to ask that he be kept in a more humane
environment or be allowed clothes. Even when a physician was finally
consulted and found possible brain damage, the doctors reported him as
normal and he was returned to the cells.

On 11 September Steve Biko lapsed into semiconsciousness and Drs Tucker and
Lang acquiesced to police wishes to transfer him to Pretoria Central, 1 200
km from there, lying on the floor in the back of a Land Rover. On his
arrival he was seen by a district surgeon, Dr A van Zyl, who administered a
vitamin injection for an intravenous drip to be started. On 12 September
Steve Biko died on the floor of a cell in Pretoria, naked and alone. That’s
why we say we urge this House that when you look at this Bill you should
take it from the context of a transformation of a society to receive
quality health service and dignity of service. The Bill therefore in front
of us seeks to rectify this situation.

The portfolio committee held public hearings and what we found was that
some of the people who may have had some misgivings about the intention of
the Bill, when we interacted with them, understood the critical and
strategic task of this legislation. The primary purpose is to transform the
Health Professions Council of SA so as to increase the protection of the
interests of the public and to promote greater accountability by the
council members and the registrar.

Given the scenario we have just sketched above regarding Steve Biko, the
Bill must therefore be understood to serve and protect the public in
matters involving health services provided by the profession as a whole.
There is a strong emphasis on the need to maintain and uphold professional
conduct and ethical standards within the profession, which the previous
dispensation disregarded as was illustrated by ourselves just now.

In this regard there are a number of provisions which we need to highlight.
My colleagues from the ANC will be taking up some of these in greater
detail.

Firstly, there is a section on the objects and functions of the Bill that
actually talks of the obligation of the council to bring strategic plans.
In this regard it’s all about complying with the Public Finance Management
Act. Secondly, there is a section that deals with the Minister being
empowered to exercise such appointments in the professional boards and also
on the basis of nominations.

In other words, here also, the nominations come from the profession and the
professionals are involved. We really want to stress this point that the
nomination process and the appointments thereof are not going to come from
arbitrary processes, but also from the internal processes within the
profession itself.

There are a number of reasons for this particular provision. Chief among
them is the fact that we have not gone far in the transformation of the
health profession boards, given, firstly, the production of health
professionals due to the history of our country. Hitherto, the
preponderance of whites in many if not all of the health professions, calls
on the intervention of this House to right the wrongs of the past. Some
among us may decry this decision as aborting democracy, but we will urge as
the ANC that elections themselves are not the only way to express
democracy. Secondly, democracy in this case should help take our country
forward, not reinforce inequalities of the past. The role of the Minister
in this regard will enhance the fact that her appointment will be able to
address a number of challenges such as race, gender, and the rural and
urban spread of the council.

Furthermore, the Health Professions Council is a statutory body and
therefore the state must play a role. It’s therefore important in playing
that role that this emphasis on the role and the hands-on approach of the
Minister becomes a point that we should all emphasise.

As we have stated earlier, in terms of the objects of the Bill, the
question first is to serve and protect the public in matters involving
rendering of health services by persons practising a health profession;
exercise its powers and discharges its responsibilities in the best
interest of the public and in accordance with the national policy
determined by the Minister; be transparent and accountable to the public in
achieving its objectives; uphold and maintain professional and ethical
standards within the health professions; ensure the investigation of
complaints, and ensure that persons register in terms of this legislation.

These are the noble objectives of this Bill. It seeks to ensure that
doctors such as those who turned a blind eye to the torture and humiliation
of Steve Biko must never practise again. It seeks to ensure that the
council that took about eight years to finalise an inquiry on Steve Biko,
and even when an infraction was determined, was still lenient, never
functions again.

That is why the ANC would urge this House to support this Bill. In
conclusion, we’d like to thank in particular the DG and the Department of
Health, the Health Professions Council of SA, in particular its registrar
and president, for the role they played in facilitating the interactions
with this Bill. Without them, I am certain, as the chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Health, the Bill would not have been the result we
find ourselves with here today. Similarly, the same applies for the role of
the state law advisers.

As the ANC we also would like to indicate here that we also want to thank
the Minister for ensuring that this process moved and that the Bill was
actually introduced to us swiftly.

We also would like to take this opportunity to wish the Minister of Health
well and a speedy recovery. I also want to say, especially on behalf of my
colleagues in the ANC study group on health that we take offence in
particular to the Gauteng DA MPL Jack Bloom, who, when the Minister is in
bed recovering from the illness she is suffering, issues a statement to say
that the Minister should go to a public ward. It’s an indication of the
callousness that has now become characteristic of the DA. [Interjections.]
This is indeed an illustration of the puerile behaviour that you find as
they howl here today and that actually emanated from their Chief Whip,
Douglas Gibson. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Hon Chairperson and hon members, we also wish the Minister a
speedy recovery. The primary role of the Health Professions Council should
be to protect the public in matters relating to health care provision. I
suspect all the members of the House will agree with that notion. However,
protecting the public cannot be accomplished without ensuring that the
interests of the health professions are given strong consideration as well.

The Health Professions Amendment Bill, as it stands before the House, will
achieve neither to any great degree. The centralising tendencies of the ANC
permeate throughout this Bill, much like they did in last year’s Nursing
Act, with the result being that the Minister of Health will now have
effective control over the Health Professions Council and the professional
boards.

The composition and independence of similar councils around the world is a
contested one. Finding a balance in the composition is important. There is
general agreement on one aspect though, that is, that there should not be
an inbuilt majority for any group of stakeholders. The president of the
General Medical Council in the United Kingdom, Graeme Catto, said last week
that the council in the UK needed to be independent of government and of
any department of state, though it should be accountable to Parliament. He
also said that the council should be independent of any particular group
among its constituencies. My colleagues from the ANC would say that just
because those principles are good for the United Kingdom, does not make
them good for South Africa. That is an unfortunate argument. If we truly
want to build confidence in our own council, then we must defend its
independence, with government being but one of many stakeholders.
Under the existing health professions legislation in South Africa, the
representatives of the various professional boards are directly elected by
the professionals themselves. The Health Professions Council has somewhat
of a balance between representatives appointed by the various arms of the
government with an interest in health, and the representatives from the
health professions. The Amendment Bill, however, empowers the Minister to
appoint members of the professional boards on the basis of nominations as
opposed to “the costly exercise of elections by the members of the
profession concerned”. What this means in reality is that the Minister will
now decide who will represent the health professionals.

The supposed rationale for undermining the democratic right of the health
professionals, that being costly elections, is a red herring on the part of
the Department of Health. This suggestion is laughable and the department
stopped using it as a defence eventually.

My colleagues in the ANC on the portfolio committee then started arguing
that it is permissible to deny the rights of the health professions to
choose their own representatives on the professional boards because
elections would not result, to use an ANC term, “in transformed membership
of the boards”. Well, let us have a look at the most recent membership
statistics of a few professional boards. On the Medical and Dental
Professional board 68% of the members are previously disadvantaged
individuals. The board for psychology, 64%; for the board for environmental
health, 70%; the board for dental therapy, 67%; the board for
physiotherapy, 72% and the board for radiography has 85%.

The ANC would have us believe that these boards are filled entirely with
angry white males. The fact is that these boards are tremendously diverse -
which is to be welcomed - and more importantly, these boards were elected
under the existing legislation and its associated regulations.

Honourable Chairperson, there is no excuse to deny the health professionals
the right to choose their own representatives. And, it is simply not good
enough to argue, that allowing health professionals to merely make
nominations from which the Minister will appoint their final
representatives is democracy; not when the Minister single-handedly has the
power to decide on the criteria for the nominations.

The members of the Health Professions Council, now reduced from 52 to 32
members, will all, in some way or another, be appointed by the government.
Sixteen members will be directly appointed by government departments or
associated state entities, and the other 16 appointed by the Minister,
after the not so democratic nomination process. The result is that the
Health Professions Council will now lose any semblance of independence.

I said at the start of my speech that all members of the House would agree
that the primary responsibility of the council is to protect the public.
There is probably also broad agreement that the council in its current form
has not always been as responsive to the needs of members of the public as
it could have been. In fact, there are cases where it has blatantly
neglected its duties as suggested by the submission to the portfolio
committee by the Aids Law Project. But, by making the council an arm of the
Department of Health, the council will not become more responsive or
accountable. Would, for an example, mothers who have lost babies through
negligence on the part of health professionals in public hospitals feel
comfortable about approaching the council for redress when all council
members are appointed by the government? Probably not.

Further, this Amendment Bill empowers the Minister to appoint the registrar
of the council. This provision will further entrench the power of the
Minister. Would a ministerial appointment in this position stand up against
the Department of Health where required? Probably not. It is notable that
the registrar of the Health Professions Council, Advocate Mkhize, took a
very active role in the deliberations on this Bill, even during the last
stages of its processing. He was overtly political in his contributions,
and at one stage went as far as to call the submission of the South African
Dental Association contemptuous, for daring to question the proposed new
powers of the Minister.

The centralizing tendencies of this Bill are completed with the provisions
that allow the Minister, after consultation with the council, to make
regulations relating to minimum requirements of curricula, the duration of
the curricula and the manner in which complaints against a registered
person shall be lodged.

The ANC argues that after-consultation is necessary because the health
professionals should not be able to hold the Minister to ransom, as the ANC
argues would be the case if in-consultation prevailed. My response to this
is that an independent multistakeholder body should fight these issues out
within itself. The Minister does not know better than the collective wisdom
of the stakeholders when it comes to these issues. And, while I am not
suggesting that the Minister of Health would necessarily abuse the new
powers provided to the Minister by this Bill, the potential for acting in a
unilateral manner exists. The DA believes we should be seeking to limit the
powers of Ministers, not further enhancing them.

We wonder in this country why so many health professionals pack for Perth.
Well, this Bill, like the Nursing Act before it, indicates that the
autonomy of the health professions and the nursing profession are under
growing assault by the government. The DA will oppose this Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, the IFP wishes the hon Minister well and
agrees with the hon Ngculu - if the Minister of Health is not entitled to a
private ward, then who is? In her treatment and that of everyone else, what
do we want from our doctors? Not that they be Chris Barnard, but that they
be competent, compassionate, accountable and all be models of morality.

We should stand firm against a system that could repeat the errors of the
apartheid era. Then, doctors were co-opted into a system that discriminated
for the benefit of some patients and against the interests of others. The
death of Steve Biko in fact was a product of this weak-kneed irresponsible
co-option.

Even now, doctors have not shown courageous leadership in tackling HIV and
Aids, preventing resistant TB or lobbying to change drugs used in public
health facilities to treat resistant gonorrhoea.

When the Health Professions Council loses even the little independence that
it has, we can expect medics to become even less able to provide objective,
scientific leadership and be ever more pawns of government. What happened
to Steve Biko should never be able to happen to anyone else.

We strongly support the goal of making doctors and other health
professionals more accountable. No one wants their health provider to use
their health to make money or to be made ill by a bogus professional. But,
ethics and accountability should be built into the council through
independent disciplinary committees, comprising two community members, two
board members and a person of the legal fraternity. Instead, the Bill
provides for loosely structured professional conduct committees with
members appointed from community representatives and one member of council
as chairperson.

It is unthinkable and completely unacceptable to achieve transformation by
removing health professionals’ rights to vote for their representatives.
Alternative strategies could include setting up a commission to investigate
obstacles to transformation in some disciplines or imposing progressive
quotas for a limited time.

The public should always have sight of regulations published in the Gazette
for three months prior to implementation. The attempt to change the status
of some regulations to internal rules is one we oppose. It negates
transparency and even further weakens the medical fraternity. Yet another
factor that is weakening the autonomy of health professionals is the
Minister’s appointment of the registrar. The IFP prefers that the council
and not the Minister should appoint the registrar. All the professional
associations and the Treatment Action Campaign who made submissions opposed
the Bill. They do not want their professions to become tools of government
policy. They are committed to transformation but they seek it in other
ways.

The IFP seeks transformation that is sustained and independent. We support
freedom of choice and we oppose this Bill. Thank you.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Hon Chair and members, the UDM also wishes the Minister of
Health a speedy recovery. The Bill before us should have as its objective
the goal of streamlining and improving the governance of the health
professions. What it does, however, is to blatantly bestow upon the
Minister a wide range of unnecessary powers. The language of this Bill
betrays an obsessive need for control that sees all matters through only
one lens, namely the Minister’s view on policy.

The impression that health professionals will be left with, is that they
cannot be trusted to run even the most mundane of their own affairs. Hence
the Minister now wants to reduce the number of members of the Health
Professions Council of South Africa, and at the same time wants the power
to appoint nine of its members from outside the health professions.

That measure alone destroys the health professionals’ democratic right to
govern their professions within the law and the Constitution. It also
exposes the council, which until now has demonstrated the ability to govern
its affairs reasonably well, to the dangers of patronage and mismanagement.


Indeed the Minister would have the power to dissolve the council and
appoint an entirely new council, and if that is not enough of a threat to
ensure compliance from the council ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, I regret your time has
expired.

Ms N C NKABINDE: The UDM will not support this Bill.

Ms M N S MANANA: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers
present, hon members of this House, it is a great honour that I have been
given an opportunity to participate in this debate. [Interjections.] Can I
be protected from Mr Gibson, please?

Firstly, let me indicate from the outset that I rise to support this Bill.
The Bill establishes the council, whose purpose is to serve and protect the
public with regard to health services. It must ensure that it maintains the
professional conduct and practice standards set for practitioners.

The transformation of the statutory council is important primarily to
improve their accountability, and define their roles and relationship with
the Department of Health. I will be dealing with the registration that is
required for health professionals.

In terms of this Bill, no person may practise unless registered to practise
in the category for which he is trained. Practising consists of the
diagnosis and treatment of physical and mental defects, illnesses and
deficiencies in humankind.

The registrar may only register a person if satisfied that information and
documentation in support of the application for the registration meets the
requirements. Upon receipt of the prescribed fee, a certificate will be
issued to authorise the application to practise in the health profession.
If the registrar is not satisfied regarding the information and the
documentation submitted, he or she must refuse to issue the registration
and must inform the applicant in writing of the reason for such decision.

Any person who is not registered and practises a health profession without
permission or pretends to hold such registration is guilty of an offence
and on conviction is liable to a fine or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding five years, or both.

The registrar shall keep registers in respect of the persons registered in
terms of this Bill and shall remove the names of all registered persons who
have died or whose names have been removed in terms of this Bill, and shall
from time to time make the necessary alterations. Every registered person
who changes his or her contact details shall in writing notify the
registrar within 30 days after such change.

Any person registered as a health professional in terms of this Bill, if
after an investigation into his or her professional conduct and an inquiry
held by the professional board is found guilty of unprofessional conduct,
shall be subject to one of the following penalties: removal of his or her
name from the register, a prescribed fine and payment of the cost of
proceedings and restitution, or both. An appeal can be lodged and the
penalty shall remain effective until an appeal is finalised.

I will now be dealing with the suspension of a health professional. The
registrar may suspend the registration of any person after the relevant
professional board has delegated this function to him or her. In respect of
a health professional who has failed to notify the registrar of his or her
address within three months, who has failed to comply with the requirements
in respect of obtaining professional development, or who has been suspended
in terms of section 15(b) (i) (a), the registrar must issue a notice of
suspension and forward it to the person by way of certified mail, fax or
electronic transmission to the address appearing in his or her register.

As from the date of the issue of the notice and its receipt by the person
concerned, any registration certificate issued to the person concerned must
be deemed to be suspended and such a person must immediately cease to
practise the health profession in respect of which he or she is registered
or to perform any act which he or she in his or her capacity as a
registered person is entitled to perform until such time as suspension of
his or her registration is lifted.

The suspension of a person must be revoked by the registrar upon the expiry
of the suspension period, payment of any annual fee which was not paid and
payment of a registration fee and other penalties, such person complying
with the requirement in respect of the continuing professional development
and such person complying with such other requirements as the relevant
professional board may determine.

The ANC is proud of this legislation. We are fairly confident that it will
bring confidence to the public in general and the Health Professions
Council of South Africa in particular. I wish the Minister well and a
speedy recovery. I thank you.

Ms F BATYI: Thank you, Chairperson. The ID supports the principles of the
Health Professions Amendment Bill, as we believe they do indeed aim to
safeguard the public interest and provide quality health care for all.
Progressive legislation such as this that aims to deepen our democracy
through transformation is needed to bridge the divides of the past,
specifically in our health sector.

However, although the ID is satisfied with the Minister appointing members
of the council and of professional boards in consultation with members of
these respective boards, the ID is concerned about the number of members
who serve on the council itself. The reduction from 25 to 16 members would
mean that some professional boards would not be represented. We therefore
call for the number of members to stay at 25.

The ID hopes that the portfolio committee will consider the consequence of
not every health board being represented on the council. If the Minister
and her department want to ensure that the needs of all in the health
sector are listened to, then they must all be given that voice and
opportunity to do so. I thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair and Deputy Minister, the ACDP supports measures to
ensure the protection of the public and advance public interests. However,
clauses in this legislation, which effectively increase the Minister of
Health’s power to control and influence the Health Professions Council of
South Africa and its allied professional boards, are unhelpful and
therefore unacceptable.

This Bill is seen by rational people as compromising the council’s
independence and entrenching government control. An example cited by the SA
Medical Association in submissions highlights the 2005 klebsiella outbreak
when government-employed health professionals were accused of being
negligent.

At times like these the public should be confident that they could approach
an independent council as opposed to a government-appointed body. Like the
Nursing Act amended last year, this Bill denies members of these
professions their democratic right to elect board members and diminishes
their right to participate in the regulation of their profession.

The ACDP therefore joins the many voices opposing these legislative
amendments. We also join all those who have wished the Minister a speedy
recovery. Thank you.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Hon Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present in
the House, hon members and distinguished guests, I stand here as R Mashigo
on behalf of hon Andrew Madella to read his speech in the debate on the
Health Professions Amendment Bill.

The principal Act was conceived at the time when South Africa was still
very much under the yoke of an inhumane, repressive and racist apartheid
minority rule. Today, 32 years later, our democracy is 12 years young and
the process of transformation and eradicating the apartheid legacy is
ongoing. The Bill is generally welcomed by the Aids Law Project who said
the following in the introductory remarks in their submission:


  As an organisation that has consistently sought to ensure that the Health
  Professions Council holds health professionals to account, we welcome the
  Bill and the many positive contributions we believe it makes in advancing
  and safeguarding the public interest.

This is what this Bill is all about, and in this debate hon Madella wishes
to focus on a few areas only, which are the composition of the council,
corporate governance, community service and regulations.
With regard to the composition, to which the Deputy Minister has already
referred, the new council, as set out in this Bill, will be composed of 32
members. The Health Professions Council of South Africa endorsed it whilst
the SA Medical Association said in their submission that they have no
specific objections against the proposed reduction in the size of the
council.

The same could be said about the submission of the SA Dental Association
and the SA Society of Physiotherapists, who also raised no issue with the
reduction in the size of the council.

In fact, all parties in the last sitting of the Portfolio Committee on
Health were in agreement with the proposed reduction in the size of the
council with the understanding that all professional boards will be assured
of at least one representative in the council.

The new board will consist of 16 members who will come from the 12 existing
professional boards; one person from the Department of Health appointed by
the Minister; one person appointed by the Minister of Education; one person
by the Minister of Defence; three persons appointed by the Council for
Higher Education in South Africa; nine community representatives; and one
person versed in law.

The transformation of the health sector at all levels is intrinsically part
of the broader societal transformation process following the dawn of a new
South Africa on 27 April 1994.

The ANC, who led an unrelenting struggle over many decades for the
liberation of all oppressed people and the creation of a nonracial,
nonsexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa, has been mandated by the
overwhelming 73% of the electorate in the 2004 election to proceed with the
transformation project in eradicating the legacy of apartheid,
notwithstanding how painful it may be for those few who have benefited from
apartheid and may still long for it to return.

The Bill creates the necessary space and provides for the essential
mechanisms to ensure much needed representivity of the demographics of
South Africa at leadership level within the health sector. It empowers the
Minister of Health to appoint members of the council and professional
boards based on the nominations received from the different boards and
members of the health profession.

The Minister, through the adoption of this Bill, will be able to ensure
that the composition of the council indeed reflects the demographics of the
country and is truly representative of all professional boards.

With regard to corporate governance, the Bill makes provision for the
inclusion of a number of very important principles, procedures and systems
of sound financial governance. It directs payments of all fees to the
council and it directs the council to use such funds collected through fees
to be utilised to defray expenses incurred in the performance of its
functions.

On the question of community service and regulations, the principle of
remunerated community service for a minimum period of one year, as set out
in section 26 of the Bill, has found favour with virtually all written
submissions dealt with in the Portfolio Committee on Health.

The prerogative of the Minister to make regulations for consultation with
the council concerning community service including determining the places
where it would be performed, the conditions of employment, as well as the
registration categories to be excluded from such service, has also found
favour with the participants.

It must, however, be pointed out that Sama argued for the publication for
public comment of the categories to be exempted from community service
prior to it becoming effective.

It is both the prerogative and responsibility of the Minister to make
regulations. The executive, in accordance with their constitutional
mandate, includes the implementation of policies derived from laws such as
this one under debate, and making regulations to guide and regulate the
implementation of such laws.
As the political head of the Department of Health, the hon Minister has the
constitutional mandate and prerogative to make regulations on any matter
incidental to this Bill. It is absolutely correct for the Minister to make
such regulations after consultations with the council. The powers,
responsibilities and mandate reside with the Minister to make regulations
and not the council or anyone else; hence the point of “after”. No dual
power, responsibility or mandate exists between the Minister and the
council.

The council, after being consulted, has the right like any other member of
the public, to submit their comments following the publication of the draft
regulations before its final adoption.

Finally, the ANC has a democratic mandate given by the voting population of
this country to transform South Africa into a nonracial, nonsexist,
democratic and prosperous society for its entire population. This Bill is
aimed at doing exactly that and for that we make no apologies. The ANC
supports the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M T LIKOTSI: Chairperson, this Bill is aimed at amending the Health
Professions Act of 1974 so as to make certain insertions and omissions to
the existing Act.

The Health Professions Council of SA, through this Bill, will ensure that
the national health policy objectives, as determined by the Minister, are
achieved. The PAC, however, is questioning the logic behind sending trainee
medical practitioners to countries whose qualifications are not fully
recognised by our country, such as Cuba. We stand to be challenged on this
point as it smacks of the old apartheid era’s infectious mentality.

The conduct of some health professionals leaves much to be desired.
Recently a nurse in Mpumalanga appeared before a court of law for gross
unprofessional conduct after she had administered HIV-infected blood to a
juvenile.

In the correctional services it is alleged that some medical practitioners
that attend to inmates are the cause of unwarranted casualties at these
centres owing to negligence. The PAC, however, supports the Bill.

We further wish the Minister of Health, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, a speedy
recovery. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF also wishes the Minister a speedy
recovery.

A recent survey indicates that a large number of our health professionals
migrate to countries with better opportunities. This further exacerbates
the shortage of health professionals.

The MF believes that the shortage needs to be addressed by dealing with the
loopholes in the system. In view of the Bill’s provisions, the MF is,
however, pleased with our attempt to address the shortfalls experienced by
the Health Professions Council of SA. This council plays a vital role in
the management of health professionals, as well as the quality and
accessibility of health care to the public at large.

It is important that this council, which addresses the needs and shortfalls
in the public health system, is provided with adequate resources to fulfil
its tasks, which include formulating legislation.

The MF supports the Bill, but wishes to point out that there are a few
narrow definitions that need to be addressed, such as “political nature”,
which can have serious implications for the interpretation of these clauses
and result in abuse of the Bill. The MF supports the Health Professions
Amendment Bill. Thank you very much.

Nksz N M MDAKA: Mhlalingaphambili, malungu abekekileyo, ubukhulu becala
siyavumelana nalo Mthetho uYilwayo weSebe lezeMpilo. Ntonje sinezinto
esinomdla wokuzigxininisa, ezizezi zilandelayo.
Okokuqala, uMphathiswa makawugxininise umba wokuba oogqirha abasuka
ngaphandle kweli lizwe makungahlolwa iziqinisekiso zabo nje kuphela, koko
kufuneka bakhe bavavanywe kuloo macandelo ezobugqirha bawafundeleyo.

Okwesibini, asingorhulumente ekufuneka ethwele olo xanduva, koko yibhodi
yezempilo. Asikuko ukuba sidelele iziqinisekiso zaba gqirha, ntonje
kungenxa yokuba icandelo lezempilo linobuzaza. Asinakusuka sijule oogqirha
ezibhedlele kuba besivezele iziqinisekiso singabavavanyanga ngokwamacandelo
ezempilo abawafundeleyo.

Okwesithathu, simqhwabela izandla uMphathiswa ngesihlomelo sokuba oogqirha
bakhe bagqibe unyaka besebenzela abahlali. Ezi zikolo bafunda kuzo
zisindlekwa ngeemali zerhafu yabantu. Aba gqirha naba bongikazi sele
benamava nje baqeqeshwa ze bahlawulwe ngeemali zerhafu yabantu. Yintoni ke
ekhathazayo xa kusithiwa mabatyale olo lwazi kubahlali? Siyawuxhasa lo
Mthetho uYilwayo. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs N M MDAKA: Chairperson, hon members, we support the Bill from the
Department of Health to a large extent. However, there are other aspects
that we need to draw your attention to, such as the following.

Firstly, the Minister must emphasise not only the thorough verification of
the qualification of foreign doctors but also the need to have them
assessed on the specific fields of their medical training.

Secondly, this should not be the responsibility of the government but of
the medical council. It must not be looked at as though we are undermining
the credentials of foreign doctors but this is because the medical field is
a sensitive area. We cannot afford to just place doctors in hospitals
because they produced their credentials without assessing them in their
specific medical fields.

Thirdly, we must applaud the Minister of Health for the amendment in this
Bill that stipulates that the doctors must complete one year of community
service. The tertiary institutions they study in are subsidised with
taxpayers’ money. The doctors and the nurses gained experience because they
were trained and were paid from taxpayers’ money. What is wrong when they
are asked to plough back into the communities? We support this Bill. Thank
you.]

Ms M L MATSEMELA: Chairperson, hon Members of Parliament, our guests,
Deputy Ministers present, some among opposition parties and certain
interested groups have sought to portray powers envisaged for the Minister
in this Bill as symptomatic of the overcentralisation of power. That is not
true. The Democratic Party, which is the DA today, and the Conservative
Party in 1991 demanded the resignation of the then Minister of Health, Dr
Rina Venter. They didn’t trust anyone. Today who are we as the ANC to be
trusted by them?

Mr M J ELLIS: You are quite right. We don’t.
Ms M L MATSEMELA: They didn’t trust anyone because they inherited this from
apartheid. Remember, apartheid was built on mutual mistrust. Member of
Parliament Gareth Morgan today ...

Mr M WATERS: And what about what the NP did with health?

Ms M L MATSEMELA: ... raised the same statements that were raised during
the public hearings. I would say that MP Morgan has a high level of
ignorance. He further said: “What if the Minister appointed unsuitable
people?” And I responded during the public hearings by saying: “How could
the profession nominate unprofessional or unsuitable people?”
[Interjections.] The amendment in this regard is very clear. It empowers
the Minister in section 13 on how to appoint the council, after the
professional boards have duly made their nominations. In the past,
elections of the council didn’t produce good results since 1974.

Mr M WATERS: Not the result you wanted anyway.

Ms M L MATSEMELA: He has conveniently forgotten that the citizens of each
and every country are the custodians of government. He will always speak on
paper but will never address a mass meeting. A cursory look at the history
of the HPCSA will reveal that at one point between 1974 and 1979 it was 97%
white and 3% Asian. That figure remained unchanged from 1979 and in 1984 to
1989 it was 100% white. From 1989 to 1994 it was 94% white, 3% Asian and 3%
African. The transformation wave set in with 58% Africans and 18% of Asians
and 24% whites from 2004 to date. Almost all Africans and females since
2004 to date were introduced into these structures through the
interventions by the Minister.

I have given you these statistics in order to demonstrate one thing: that
the latter changes have not taken place and will not take place because of
the benevolence of those who stand to benefit hugely from untransformed
boards.

Hon Rabinowitz has an overwhelming level of ignorance in this regard, by
saying that the ANC is removing the independence of this society.

E re ke go rute sengwe, motlotlegi Rabinowitz, ANC ke modisa wa setšhaba. E
tlogile le setšhaba sakeng. Ga e ithute go fetisa melao gompieno ka gonne e
le mo pusong. Ke kgale e emetse setšhaba sa rona. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[Let me teach you something, hon Rabinowitz. The ANC has the interests of
the nation at heart. It has been there for the people throughout. It is not
a novice in passing laws, but has been doing that for a long time. It does
not start now just because it is in power.]

In 2006 South Africa is a much better place than what it was in 1994. South
Africa in 2007 will be a much better place than it was in 2006. In a matter
of 12 years, the South African national legislature has been transformed
into one of the most open, engaged and active instruments of our present-
day democracy. This is in marked contrast to the previous racially
exclusive edifice that served a minority. South Africa’s health care system
has changed dramatically in the last 12 years. A new wave of legislation
designed to improve greater access to the health care profession and to
make it more accessible and affordable has evolved. This has subsequently
presented unique challenges and opportunities in this area that is so
central to the well-being of our nation. None of the gains I have spoken of
as well as those referred to by previous speakers would have been possible
without a sound and progressive policy regime championed by the futuristic
perspective of the ANC.

At the same time, none of these achievements would have been made if our
policies within the ANC were wrong. Similarly, we would not be able to
speak of a changing South Africa. With regard to all the achievements we
had spoken of, we have absolutely no hesitation saying that the ANC stands
at the centre of all these advances, and accordingly where the law of chaos
and complexity took hold, we have always been ready to accommodate the
resultant of unintended consequences.

I therefore make a bold statement that without a movement like the ANC,
South Africa would not be guided by the quest for a democratic, nonsexist,
nonracial future. For decades we engaged in a struggle to ensure that the
people shall govern.

Re kgonne go araba seane sa Setswana se se reng, mmatlakgomo kodumela o
etse moepathutse, ga go na lehumo le le tswang gaufi. [We managed to
qualify a Setswana proverb that says, what one desires often requires
effort.]

The ANC has worked for this achievement. Therefore, changes as a result of
the democratic dispensation in South Africa have inevitably had a profound
impact on the regulation of the health professions. The HPCSA is a
statutory body, established in terms of the Health Professions Act of 1974.
The Bill seeks to make consequential amendments to the principal Act in
order to update the outdated references. Its primary purpose is to
transform the Health Professions Council of South Africa so as to increase
the protection of the interests of the public and to promote greater
accountability by council members and the registrar. This Bill empowers the
Minister in section 13 to appoint the council, after the professional
boards have duly made their nominations. This will also ensure economy,
efficiency, effectiveness and equity.
I am equally certain that all of us understand very well that policies of
the ANC must respond to the objective reality as well as perceptions of
realities. Thus the council must be receptive to the community and the
public interest because ever-increasing numbers of our people have
expressed confidence in the government led by the ANC.

I would actually like to conclude by saying without any prevarication that
thousands in this country have suffered for justice and freedom and
transforming the health professions and their representative bodies are
therefore non-negotiable. Like canaries, these sweet birds may continue to
sing their sweet songs that mean nothing, but opposition to transformation.
In my conclusion, I want to thank those people who participated during the
public hearing, thank the chairperson of the committee hon James Ngculu who
is a mentor to me, all members of the Portfolio Committee on Health, in
particular the ID, PAC, and MF for their unwavering support for
transformation.

I also want to thank the Department of Health and the HPCSA, the Deputy
Minister, the state law advisers, the Minister of Health and also wish her
a speedy recovery. Throughout my speech I did not respond to the hon
members from the left because what is important is to speak on this Bill so
that the people of South Africa, which this Bill intends to protect, should
understand where we come from. I cannot come and speak at the podium and
waste my time by responding to whatever you were saying. You’d always sing
those songs but nobody in this country will ever listen to you,
unfortunately. [Interjections.] The ANC supports these amendments.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Sihlalo, angibonge kumalungu onke
ePhalamende akhulumile kule nkulumompikiswano, ikakhulukazi labo abakhulume
ngokwakha. [Chairperson, let me thank all the Members of Parliament who
took part in this debate, more especially those who spoke constructively in
this debate.]

I want to thank all members who have contributed, particularly those who
have contributed in a constructive way. I think that those who have opposed
the Bill need to understand something. It is that the majority outside of
this House supports the transformation that the ANC has led over the past
12 years. So we rest comfortably and are assured in the ANC that we are
representing the interests of the majority out there.

Two issues have been raised. It has been raised that this Bill will take
away the democratic right of the health professionals to choose their
members. It has also been said that this Bill will take away the
independence of these councils. Firstly, what I want to say is that if you
had listened carefully – and, unfortunately, the opposition has this
problem in that they don’t know how to listen – you would have heard the
last member who spoke tell us about the racial imbalance that continues in
these bodies. And, there is a history to that, hon members. The history is
that this country had a legalised, organised system of racial privilege.
You heard, hon members, and you know this, that out of eight medical
schools there was only one that catered for blacks.

Now, clearly, that would create a situation in which these bodies have
skewed racial structures. It is therefore important that the government, as
a representative of the majority, should intervene to make the corrections
to the imbalances of the past.

I want to correct the hon Morgan. I hope he is in the House. He has made a
big issue of the fact that the Health Professions Council of SA should
represent the professions. Let me remind the hon member that all these
professions have their own associations. These are the bodies that must
represent their professions. The council, on the other hand, hon member, is
not representative of the profession.

On the contrary, the council represents the interests of the community
receiving the service, and that is why the Minister has to appoint the
councils. We are not forming trade unions. Denosa is an association
representing nurses. We are not forming an association; we are not forming
a trade union. We are forming a statutory body, and this statutory body
must be appointed by a Minister. Even if you look at other departments,
this is how it is done.

Mr Ellis says “not at all”. I think we need to teach you a lot.
Unfortunately, it’s hard to teach somebody who already thinks that he knows
everything. But, Mr Ellis, you have a lot to learn.

Mr M J ELLIS: I think you do too, that’s the trouble. You won’t ...
[Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Mr Ellis, I will engage with you if you give
me a chance, but give me a chance now to finish my speech. [Interjections.]
I am going to finish, but you can’t force me to finish quickly. If I
disagree with you, you can’t then force me to finish quickly.
[Interjections.] I have time, and I’m going to ask that time be added. Hon
Chair, please add time because they are using up my time. [Interjections.]

I have made my point. We are grateful to those parties in this House that
support transformation. I think the party on the left, whatever they are
called – they have changed names so many times – will remain an
insignificant player in this country, because the majority outside only
trust the ANC. We are here to ensure that we do what they have mandated us
to do. [Interjections.]

On that basis, hon members, I just want to thank all of you. I’m sure
you’ll support this Bill, and this Bill is going to be law. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Decision of question postponed.

The House adjourned at 15:56.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
        Development Programme Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


 2. The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Mine Health and Safety
        Council for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 40-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Diamond Board
        Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 138-2006].

     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Nuclear Safety Regulator for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 52-2006].

 3. The Minister of Public Works

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Development
        Trust for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 122-2006].

                         TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 26 September 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
        classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


          b) South African Red Cross Society and Legal Protection of Certain
             Emblems Bill [B 25 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Post Office
        Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

2.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Construction Education and
        Training Authority (CETA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
        68-2006].


3.    The Minister of Public Works

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Department of Public
        Works for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements of Vote 6 for 2005-2006.

4.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     a) Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol on the
        Facilitation of Movement of Persons, tabled in terms of section
        231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Southern African Development
        Community (SADC) Protocol on the Facilitation of Movement of
        Persons.

5.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
        Agriculture for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2005-2006 [RP
        156-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Ingonyama Trust Board for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 227-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the
    International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
    Terrorism, dated 20 September 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the International
        Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
        recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Convention.

    Request to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on the
    Protocol to the OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
    Terrorism, dated 20 September 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the Protocol to the OAU
        Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, recommends
        that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        approve the said Protocol.


        In addition:


        The Committee recommends that the following interpretative
        declarations be made with ratification:


           • “That the Government of the Republic of South Africa is not a
             Party to the African Union Convention for the Elimination of
             Mercenarism in Africa and notes that this is a Convention that
             has been identified by the Assembly of the African Union as
             being suitable for review. In the interim the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa will interpret and apply Article
             3(1)(e) in accordance with legislation of the Republic of South
             Africa applicable to mercenarism, which prohibits the
             recruitment, use, training of, or engagement in, any mercenary
             activity”.


           • “The Government of the Republic of South Africa shall apply the
             provisions of Article 8 of the Protocol in accordance with the
             obligations imposed upon States Parties in Article 8 of the OAU
             (now African Union) Convention on the Prevention and Combating
             of Terrorism”.


    Request to be considered.

                        WEDNESDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)     The JTM on 27 September 2006) in terms of Joint Rule 160(3)
        classified the following Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


        (b)      Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM on 27 September 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3)
        classified the Civil Union Bill [B 26 – 2006], introduced in the
        National Assembly, as a section 75 Bill and as a Bill falling
        within the ambit of section 18(1)(a) of the Traditional Leadership
        and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No 41 of 2003).

2.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Civil Union Bill [B 26 – 2006] (National
    Assembly - sec 75) to the National House of Traditional Leaders, which
    must, within 30 days from the date of this referral, make any comments
    it wishes to make.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No 862 published in Government Gazette No
        29160 dated 25 August 2006: Stopping of Schedule 4 allocation to
        certain Provinces, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2005
        (Act No 1of 2005).


     b) Government Notice No 870 published in Government Gazette No 29180
        dated 31 August 2006: Determination of interest rate for purposes
        of paragraph (a) of the definition of “Official rate of interest”
        in paragraph 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1962
        (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 24 – Department for Safety
        and Security for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 24 for 2005-2006 [RP
        213-2006].


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of South
        Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

4.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 30 – Department of Minerals
        and Energy for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 30 for 2005-2006.
     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Geoscience (CGE)
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 58-2006].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Central Energy Fund Group of
        Companies (CEF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements of
        the Central Energy Fund Group of Companies for 2005-2006 [RP 148-
        2006].


     d) Report and Financial Statements of the National Energy Regulator of
        South Africa (NERSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Nuclear Energy
        Corporation Limited (NECSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
        109-2006].

5.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 29 – Department of Land
        Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 29 for 2005-2006 [RP 226-2006].

                         THURSDAY, 28 SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 3 – Department of
        Foreign Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 3 for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance and
        International Co-operation Fund for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


2.    The Minister of Finance

     a) Government Notice No R.914 published in Government Gazette No 29206
        dated 15 September 2006: Notice in terms of section 7(2)(a) of the
        Statistics Act, 1999 (Act No 6 of 1999).


3.    The Minister of Transport

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil Aviation
        Authority (SACAA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
        98-2006].
4.    The Minister of Labour

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Finance, Accounting,
        Management Consulting and other Financial Services Sector Education
        and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
        [RP 73-3006].

5.    The Minister of Housing

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 28 – Department of
        Housing for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 28 for 2005-2006 [RP 141-2006].

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
        Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2005-2006.


     c) Annual Financial Statements of the National Urban Reconstruction
        and Housing Agency (NURCHA) including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     d) Report and Financial Statements of The Thubelisha Homes for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     e) Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
        (Proprietary) Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
        Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

6.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 19 – Department of Sport
        and Recreation for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Drug-Free
        Sport for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 147-2006].


7.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
        and Industry for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2005-2006.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 164-2006].


     c) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2004 to June 2005.


     d) Report of the South African Council for the Non-Proliferation of
        Weapons of Mass Destruction for July 2005 to June 2006.

8.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Electricity Distribution
        Industrial Holdings (Pty) Ltd (EDIH) for 2005-2006, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
        2006.

9.    The Minister of Home Affairs

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
        Affairs for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements of Vote 4 for 2005-2006 [RP 223-2006].

                          FRIDAY, 29 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1.     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on the
        Auditor-General for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Auditor-General for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 202-2006].

     2      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Health for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
            Medical Research Council (MRC) for 2005-2006, including the
            Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
            2005-2006 [RP 146-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service (NHLS) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006.
     3.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
             Authority for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 125-
             2006].

     4.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     5.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Reports of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
             Council (HSRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             104-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
             and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 120-2006].

     6.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the
             Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious
             and Linguistic Communities (CRL) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 124-2006].

     7.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration:


          a) Government Notice No R.843 published in Government Gazette No
             29139 dated 18 August 2006: Amendment of prescribed fees in
             terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


          b) Government Notice No R.847 published in Government Gazette No
             29145 dated 18 August 2006: Financial Services Ombud Schemes
             Regulations, in terms of the Financial Services Ombud Schemes
             Act, 2004 (Act No 37 of 2004).


     8.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council (ELRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 169-2006].


     9.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:


          a) Draft Regulations regarding the Promotion of Access to
             Information, made in terms of section 92 of the Promotion of
             Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


     10.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements are referred to
        the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs
             Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     11.    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – Public Service
             Commission (PSC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 11 for 2005-
             2006 [RP 129-2006].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The President of the Republic

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 1 – The Presidency for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 1 for 2005-2006 [RP 145-2006].


2.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 5 – Department of
        Provincial and Local Government for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 5 for
        2005-2006.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Demarcation
        Board for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 140-2006].


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Municipal Infrastructure
        Investment Unit (MIIU) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 196-
        2006].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the National House of
        Traditional Leaders for 2005-2006.


3.    The Minister of Transport

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 33 – Department of
        Transport for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2005-2006.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
        Africa Limited (ACSA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF) for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


4.    The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Development
        Agency (NDA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 201-2006].

5.    The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 26 – Department of
        Communications for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 26 for 2005-2006 [RP
        221-2006].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Universal Service Agency
        (USA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial for 2005-2006 [RP 165-2006].
6.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 10 – Department of
        Public Service and Administration for 2005-2006, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote
        10 for 2005-2006 [RP 209-2006].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 12 – South African
        Management Development Institute (SAMDI) for 2005-2006, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
        Vote 12 for 2005-2006 [RP 236-2006].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the State Information
        Technology Agency (Proprietary) Limited (SITA) for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 20-2006].


7.    The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for the Built
        Environment (CBE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 32 for 2005-
        2006 [RP 229-2006].

8.    The Minister of Health

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 16 – Department of Health
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of Vote 16 for 2005-2006 [RP 210-2006].
     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Medical Schemes
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 230-2006].


9.    The Minister in The Presidency

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Youth Commission
        (NYC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements of Vote 33 for 2005-2006 [RP 242-2006].

10.   The Minister of Housing

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the People’s Housing Partnership
        Trust (PHPT) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

11.   The Minister of Education

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
        Educators (SACE) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

12.   The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Environmental
        Advisory Forum (NEAF) for 2005-2006.


13.   The Minister of Science and Technology

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Research Foundation
        (NRF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Godisa Trust for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.

14.   The Minister of Minerals and Energy

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electricity
        Regulator (NER) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

15.   The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 – Department of Water
        Affairs and Forestry for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34 for 2005-
        2006 [RP 166-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research Commission
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 118-2006].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel
        Authority (TCTA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Sport and Recreation dated 28
        September 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
        section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
        1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
        Report of Boxing South Africa (BSA) for 2005-2006:


        LATE SUBMISSION OF ANNUAL REPORT BY A PUBLIC ENTITY: BOXING SA


        Boxing SA (SA) has, regrettably, once again defaulted in terms of
        the timely submission of its Annual Report to Parliament.


        The Office of the Auditor-General (AG) was only able to commence
        with its audit of BSA during this week, because the entity’s
        affairs were not in order. The AG earlier withdrew from the BSA
        2005/06 financial year audit because the entity’s financial affairs
        were not in order. Corrections had to be done to the general ledger
        and financial statements because of:


        A SA Revenue Services (SARS) VAT audit that revealed outstanding
        VAT duties to the amount of R837 000, accrued since 2004.


        The implementation of new financial reporting requirements
        (International Finance Reporting Standards) (IFRS) and Generally
        Recognised Accounting Practice (GRAP).
        Different accounting procedures introduced for equipment leases and
        depreciation of fixed assets.
        Disciplinary steps against certain staff members were introduced in
        May 2006.


        The entity has undertaken to submit its printed Annual Report by
        mid-November 2006, after completion of AG’s audit.


        Signed
        REV DR M A STOFILE
        MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION

    (b)     Letter from the Minister of Minerals and Energy dated 27
        September 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly , in terms
        of section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act
        No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual
        Report of Mintek for 2005-2006:

        LATE TABLING OF MINTEK ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2005/6
        All public entities are required to submit their annual reports,
        financial statements; and audit reports on those financial
        statements to the National Assembly. This requirement is in terms
        of the Section 65(1)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act.
        However, should they fail to do so the Executive Authority should
        table a written explanation (S65(2)(a)).


        In compliance with Section 55(1)(d) of the PFMA, Mintek is unable
        to print and deliver their 2005/6 Annual Report as it is still
        under review with the Auditor-General.


        Mintek requested an extension to submit their annual report and I
        have granted this approval.


        I wish you well and thank you for your support.


        Signed
        MS BUYELWA SONJICA, MP
        MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY

                           MONDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Public Service Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister
         for the Public Service and Administration. Referred to the
         Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration and the
         Select Committee on Local Government and Administration.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Budget and Strategic Plan of the Auditor-General for 2007-2010
        [RP 225-2006].


 2. Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic
        Media Institute of South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of 2005-2006 [RP
        114-2006].


 3. Minister of Finance

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Sasria Limited for 2005-2006,
        including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements for 2005-2006.


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Reserve Bank
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


     c) The Address of the Governor of the Reserve Bank at the Eighty-Sixth
        Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders.


                           TUESDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

          1. The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of arivia.kom (Pty) Ltd for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors for
        2005-2006.

                          THURSDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1     The Minister of Housing
      (a)   Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
           Registration Council (NHBRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report
           of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
           [RP 159-2006].

                           FRIDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

         1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Third Reporting Exemptions made in terms of section 74 of the
        Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001), tabled
        in terms of section 74(2)(b) of the Financial Intelligence Centre
        Act, 2001.


         2. The Minister of Arts and Culture

    (a)     Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of
        Cultural Expressions, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


National Assembly

 1. The Speaker
    (a)     Memorandum of Understanding on the Establishment of a Regular
        Exchange Mechanism between the National Assembly of South Africa
        and the National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of
        China, tabled in accordance with the resolution adopted by the
        House on 20 September 2006.


CREDA PLEASE INSERT - T061006E-insert - PAGES 2124-2127


        Referred to the National Assembly Rules Committee and the
        Parliamentary Oversight Authority for consideration of issues
        arising from the establishment of a regular exchange mechanism in
        terms of their respective mandates.

                           MONDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture to the Speaker of
        the National Assembly, in terms of section 65(2)(a) of the Public
        Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the
        delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of Arts, Culture and
        Heritage Institutions for 2005-2006:


        EXPLANATION FOR THE LATE TABLING OF ARTS, CULTURE AND HERITAGE
        INSTITUTIONS’ ANNUAL REPORTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 65(2)(a) OF
        THE PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT ACT, NO 1 OF 1999: 2005/2006


        In terms of section 65(1)(a) of the above-mentioned Act the annual
        reports and financial statements, and the audit reports on those
        statements, of the Arts, Culture and Heritage institutions listed
        below were tabled late or have not been tabled.


        The following are reasons for late tabling of reports or for
        reports which have not yet been submitted:


          1. The completion of the Annual Report and Annual Financial
             Statements of the Nelson Mandela Museum has been delayed as the
             Council of the museum decided, at the last minute, to change
             their report contained in the Annual Report. This resulted in a
             delay with the final printing of the report.


          2. The Report of the Luthuli Museum was delayed because the
             Auditor-General has to date been unable to complete the audit.
             The reason for this is that the Luthuli Museum is a newly
             created public entity and the report to be issued will be the
             first ever.


        Yours sincerely


        signed
        Z PALLO JORDAN
        MINISTER

    (b)     Letter from the Minister of Arts and Culture dated 29 September
        2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly , in terms of section
        65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of the Annual Report of
        the Department of Arts and Culture for 2005-2006:

        LATE TABLING OF THE ANNUAL REPORT: 2005/6 FINANCIAL YEAR


        The above-mentioned matter refers.


        As required in terms of section 65(1) of the PFMA Act, I am writing
        to provide reasons for the late submission of the Annual Report of
        the Department of Arts and Culture.


        My department could not meet the 30th September 2006 deadline
        because of the fact that I was out of the country and approval was
        not granted. An Annual Report is an important compliance document
        as a result of that it will be unreasonable for an acting Minister
        to grant approval on my behalf.


        I hope you will understand that these were unforeseen problems.
        Please accept my sincere apologies.


        Yours sincerely


        signed
        Z PALLO JORDAN
        MINISTER

                          TUESDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 9 October 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3)
        classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

        (a)      Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and
            Good Laboratory Practice Bill [B 29 – 2006] (National Assembly
            – sec 75)


    (2)     The JTM on 9 October 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(4)
        classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


        (a)      Further Education and Training Colleges Bill [B 23 – 2006]
             (National Council of Provinces – sec 76).


2.    Translations of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Lugvervoer [W 18 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the Carriage by
         Air Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
             (FSB) 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 91-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
             Board (ASB) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 102-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Investment
             Corporation (PIC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             14-2006].

    2 The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The Reports of the Auditor-General and the Independent
        Auditors are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector of
             South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 212-
             2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 130-
             2006].


    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 17 – Department of
             Labour for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 17 for 2005-2006
             [RP 59-2006].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 106-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
             Fund (UIF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs
        for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Agri-Seta) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 66-2006].


    5 The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on Labour
        and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for consideration
        and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Manufacturing,
             Engineering and Related Services Sector Education and Training
             Authority (MER-Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             81-2006].

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration and report. The
        Reports of the Auditor-General are referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
             Service (SAWS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             48-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
             Fund (MLRF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 173-
             2006].
          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Greater St Lucia Wetland
             Park Authority for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. . The Report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
             Fiscal Commission (FFC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 105-2006].


    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             132-2006].


    9.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and Security for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 22 – Independent
             Complaints Directorate (ICD) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of
             Vote 22 for 2005-2006 [RP 113-2006].


    10.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 7 – Government
             Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements of Vote 7 for 2005-2006 [RP 123-2006].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Sentech Limited for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Broadcasting Corporation Limited (SABC) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the International
             Marketing Council (IMC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006
             [RP 127-2006].


    11.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Housing for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan
             Fund (RHLF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    12.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Arts and Culture for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of The Freedom Park Trust for
             2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys Art
             Gallery for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 121-
             2006]


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and Video
             Foundation (NFVF) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             111-2006].


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 152-
             2006].


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          f) Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre for
             the Arts for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          g) Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the Boer
             Republics for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          h) Report and Financial Statements of Blind S A for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006.


          i) Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             158-2006].


          j) Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa (BASA) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             135-2006].


          k) Report and Financial Statements of the Voortrekker Museum –
             Isigcinamagugu for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [PR
             107-2006].


          l) Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of Cape
             Town for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 89-
             2006].


          m) Report and Financial Statements of the National Museum –
             Bloemfontein for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
             152-2006].


          n) Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts Council
             of South Africa (NAC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          o) Report and Financial Statements of the Performing Arts Centre
             of Free State (PACOFS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          p) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Library
             for the Blind for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          q) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Heritage
             Resources Agency (SAHRA) for 2005-2006, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006 [RP 131-2006].


          r) Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          s) Report and Financial Statements of the Northern Flagship
             Institution for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 142-
             2006].


          t) Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


          u) Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

    13.     The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration and the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government:
        (a)      Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission
             of financial statements by municipalities and the status of
             audit reports as at 30 June 2006 for the financial year ended
             30 June 2005 [RP 153-2006].


    14.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
        General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Education for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 15 – Department of
             Education for 2005-2006.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Qualifications Authority (SAQA) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 189-2006].


    15.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence for consideration and report and to the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence. The Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
             Defence for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements of Vote 21 for 2005-2006
             [RP 163-2006].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Armaments
             Corporation of South Africa Limited (ARMSCOR) for 2005-2006,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 139-2006].


    16.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Public Works for
        consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-General is
        referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Construction
             Industry Development Board (CIDB) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
             2005-2006 [RP 198-2006].

    17       The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee
        on Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:


          a) A report to inform Parliament of a recent decision of the
             Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to uplift
             the provisional suspension of a Magistrate, Mr I W O Morake
             from Lichtenburg, with effect from 14 March 2006;


          b) A report to inform Parliament of a recent decision of the
             Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development to uplift
             the provisional suspension of a Magistrate, Mr M S E Khumalo
             from Amsterdam, with effect from 25 April 2006;

          c) A progress report in respect of an inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct against Magistrate K Sulliman from Durban, in terms
             of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993);


        (d)      A progress report in respect of an inquiry into
             allegations of misconduct against Magistrate M K Chauke from
             Pretoria, in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act,
             1993 (Act No 90 of 1993);


          e) A progress report in respect of an inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct against Magistrate M S Makamu from Benoni, in terms
             of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993); and


          f) A progress report in respect of an inquiry into allegations of
             misconduct against Magistrate M F Mathe from Johannesburg, in
             terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).

    18.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


        (a)      The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 28
             August 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing
             Members of the Assembly of the employment of the South African
             National Defence Force in The Kingdom of Lesotho.


    19.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The Report of
        the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 31 – Department of
             Science and Technology for 2005-2006, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 31 for
             2005-2006 [RP 162-2006].


    20.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report. The
        Report of the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2005-
             2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


    21      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Reports of the
        Auditor-General and the Independent Auditors are referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Commission
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 101-2006].

          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Competition Tribunal
             for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 134-2006].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
             Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.


          d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Quality
             Institute for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
             2006.


          e) Report and Financial Statements of the Export Credit Insurance
             Corporation of South Africa for 2005-2006, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             for 2005-2006.


    22      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
        for consideration:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Food and Beverages
             Manufacturing Sector Education and Training Authority (FoodBev-
             Seta) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 75-2006].
    23.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:


          a) Annual Economic Report of the South African Reserve Bank for
             2006.


          b) Government Notice No 811 published in Government Gazette No
             29101 dated 7 August 2006: Dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 R2 silver crown and R2 gold
             coins, in terms of South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act
             No 90 of 1989).


          c) Government Notice No 1010 published in Government Gazette No
             29050 dated 28 July 2006: Listing and Classification of Public
             Entities 1. Listing 1.1 Agriseta: Schedule 3A National Public
             Entity 2. Delisting 2.1 Primary Agricultural Education and
             Training Authority (PAETA) as a Schedule 3A National Public
             Entity 2.2 Secondary Agricultural Sector Education and
             Training Authority (SETSA) as a Schedule 3A National Public
             Entity, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999).


          d) Proclamation No R.31 published in Government Gazette No 29072
             dated 28 July 2006: Commencement of section 44(1), in terms of
             the Revenue Laws Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005).


2.    Membership of Committees


    (a)     Prof A K Asmal has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on the Review of State Institutions supporting
        Constitutional Democracy and the Public Service Commission on 10
        October 2006.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     a) The Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery
        Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS




National Assembly



 1.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on study
   tour to Germany, dated 5 September 2006:


   The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation having undertaken a study
   tour to Germany from 23 to 29 April 2006, reports as follows:


      Background


   The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation undertook a study tour to
   Germany in order to gather more facts on the challenges they encountered
   in their last lap of preparations for 2006 FIFA World Cup. The Committee
   intends to vigorously play a vital role as a watchdog over the entities
   the Committee exercises oversight on with valuable and informative facts.
   The visit took place from 23 to 29 April 2006.

   2. Objectives of the visit:

   • What plans are in place for building of infrastructures, especially
     stadiums?
   • What legislation is in place and what impact it has towards the
     preparations?
   • What plans are there for the preparation of the national team?
   • What are the plans for mobilizing effective local support?
    • Mass Participation Programme  - to get more insight on the programme.
    • School sport
    • How does the government coordinate the federations?
    • The functions of local government
    • The role played by government and the legislature specifically with
      the funds allocated to both the government and provincial legislatures
      and how are the funds accounted by government.



      Composition of the multiparty delegation was as follows:


   1. Mr. B M Komphela ANC (Chairperson and leader of delegation)
   2. Mr. C T Frolick (ANC)
   3. Ms D M Morobi (ANC)
   4. Mr. T D Lee (DA)
   5. Mr. B W Dhlamini (IFP)
   6. Ms N Mbuqe (Committee Secretary)




   4. Structure of the report


       The report reflects the activities undertaken by the delegation in
       relation to the objectives with various presentations made to the
       delegates by the various stakeholders, site visits, formal
       interactions and experiences identified by the Committee during the
       visit.
       The delegation was joined by senior officials of different government
       departments involved in the preparations of the FIFA World Cup headed
       by Dr J Phaahla, Director General for 2010 government Local
       Organising Committee.

   5. Findings



      CITY OF MUNICH



5.1   Meeting with Munich Transport and Tariff Association (MVV)


      The purpose of the meeting was to find out how transport system has
      been planned, constructed and finalised, who funded the project and
      the duration of construction. The MVV was founded in 1972 during the
      Olympic Games held in Germany. The kind of operation that MVV uses is
      only known in Austria, Germany and Switzerland. During the time of the
      visit there were thousands of people viewing the stadium using public
      transport and there are also games played every two weeks.


      Compared to the 1974 World Cup, the current one has become a global
      spectacle that brought entirely different logistical challenges. It is
      foreseen that not only the increased number of spectators will present
      challenges, but also numerous representatives from the press and the
      broadcast media, for whom support, information and transport services
      must be provided. The public transport system in Munich will cover the
      city and eight surrounding rural districts.


      There are three levels of transport systems:
      • Public authority, which order transport and pays.
      • Management companies that coordinate and plan
      • There are fifty eight (58) operating companies

      MVV consists of more than 50 different transport companies. This
      network is made up of Deutsche Bahn’s ten suburban railway lines and
      national rail’s 13 branches, which provides direct access from across
      the region to the city centre. The principal features of transport
      are: network; timetable where all transport types are condensed in and
      the tariff (that is one ticket valid for all means of transport).
      Times of train and bus schedule must be shown on timetable as well as
      the date of each game. MVV was introduced through legislation in 1996
      and is divided into MVG for city buses and RVO for rural transport.
      Tourists transported per annum are approximately 70 million. Busses
      are safe and they are constantly tested. Statistics show that
      1,8million passengers use public transport per day.

      MVV also has eight high-performance underground lines in the City of
      Munich operated by the Munich Transport Company. 10 tramlines, around
      70 city bus routes and over 210 regional bus routes, complement the
      network. Taxis are private sector and are not linked to government
      transport system. There will be more than 150 TV stations based in
      Munich for the opening match. There will be six World Cup matches
      played in Munich. The stadium has a parking space for 11 000 cars and
      350 busses. Munich’s Allianz-Arena stadium will be used as the venue.
      The Allianz-Arena is where the clubs FC Bayern Munchen and TSV 1860
      Munchen hold their matches.

      The project has a one-year trial run of transporting people to the
      stadium, and train schedules were taken into consideration on what
      could be possible challenges. The minimum period for building a
      stadium is three years.


5.2   Meeting with Munich Municipality – addressed by deputy mayor and Ms
      Henriette Wagerle: Coordination office of the Soccer World Cup.

      Ms Wagerle briefed the delegates that FIFA congress would take place
      in Germany two days before the opening. The new regulation of FIFA
      provides that the host country’s team plays in the opening game.
      Approximately one  to two billion spectators around the world are
      expected to watch the game, and the final game would be played in
      Berlin. Games would be played in twelve cities. The deputy mayor
      commended the delegation for the visit because Germany made a mistake
      of not visiting Korea-Japan to get first hand information on
      challenges, successes and failures. People in Tokyo did not have
      tickets and they celebrated in the streets, but Germany would be
      offering Olympic Park for 20 000 to 30 000 people to watch the game on
      a big screen, with music, food and drink. FIFA does not allow a
      stadium to be named after the sponsors but to reflect as FIFA WORLD
      CUP STADIUM during the event.

      The deputy mayor informed the delegation that FIFA gives late
      information on protocol issues, the Federal Government was also told
      at a very late stage to bring protocol concept. The advice given to
      the delegation was that each host city must get information from FIFA
      about the steps of handling protocol issues. More information was to
      be shared during the FIFA congress that is to take place before the
      World Cup. A day before the game the city would have reception for
      FIFA delegation. The host city should know exactly who will be
      involved in the congress and must insist on what each city must do in
      terms of host city dressing or having flags in public places and lamp
      posts, which is one of FIFA regulations.

      One of the biggest challenges is ticketing. Federal Government would
      want to know whether it would buy tickets or get them free from FIFA.
      Each host city must buy 2400 tickets within two weeks and have to
      choose within those two weeks how to use them. Tickets have to be
      personalised, which is problematic because one has to have all
      personal information to put on the system. It takes time to issue
      tickets when information has not been submitted.

      Munich learnt how to welcome guests during Lisbon Euro Games and
      decided to use those lessons. Cities have rights to decide on their
      policies and government is very independent in Munich.

      National security plan is in place and the highest security official
      decides on what to do in cases of danger and emergency. They are
      trained for disaster management e.g when hooligans fight or during
      terrorism acts. There will be one hundred and seventy-five (175) check
      points before one goes through the stadium but for Olympic Park where
      public viewing will take place, it would not be easy to have tight
      security due to the nature of celebrations envisaged.  The City of
      Munich will pay for tight checkpoints, which are very expensive.

      The host country had to think of the capacity of hotels for
      accommodating fans from other regions or countries. The police must
      guarantee security. One of the benefits for the country is to showcase
      and boost its economy. In Germany they had to provide for five
      training fields in five weeks and then close them for some time. No
      advertisements would take place in those venues. FIFA looks at the
      stadium, designs its own needs and advises on what should be there and
      what should not be there.

      The delegation was warned of FIFA’s stringent regulations. Marketing
      is in the hands of FIFA and only sponsors from FIFA are used. The city
      would have to work closely with FIFA to avoid conflict and the
      stadiums must only use World Cup names not sponsorship names, Allianz
      Arena Stadium were built for (340 million by the two clubs owners.
      FIFA provides volunteers for the Local Organising Committee to train
      them. There are Federal Rights; State Rights, City Rights and FIFA
      Rights.

      FIFA headquarters emphasised on bid campaigns with certain strategies.
      Strategies to hold major events are based on technical environment,
      architectural and emotional impact. LOC is not involved in TV and
      Hospitality Rights hence that is FIFA’s responsibility.


      The local, regional and federal government have spent a total of (288
      million to improve traffic access and link the arena to the A9 and A99
      freeways and to the city’s subway network. The use of stadium parking
      facilities would be restricted during the tournament. However, the use
      of public transport to get to and from the stadium is included in the
      price of match tickets. Subway trains would arrive at the stadium
      every two-and-a-half minutes.

      Marketing structure:

    • 15 official partners
    • 6 national suppliers
         • 12 FIFA cities. Provinces have no marketing rights or the right
           to directly associate themselves with FIFA. The government has
           to guarantee that the event happens. Federal Government has four
           components in its host concept.


5.3   Bavarian Provincial Parliament

      The chairperson of the Bavarian Parliament Portfolio Committee
      informed the delegation that the building of infrastructure is
      government’s responsibility. Germany has underground transport system,
      which is partially financed by the Federal Government and provincial
      Parliament.  Bavarian Parliament also took a decision that if
      government build roads, they cannot invest that money on other
      infrastructure. Rural areas have other priorities that are different
      from the ones in the city however, the city is happy to support those
      priorities.


      The delegation was advised to prepare for the event years in advance
      in order to achieve the best results. The schools played a major role
      in preparing the kids to welcome, own and feel proud of the event.


      In terms of transport, it was cooperation of Bavarian state and the
      City of Munich who contributed. Bavaria has rural development
      programmes but the only conflict is the interest of rural people
      versus urban people. The major event cannot take place in rural areas
      due to many factors.


      Federal government initiated campaign of competition ideas with awards
      to special projects like art, culture, social, marketing and invention
      of new ideas. Parliament had bad and good experiences at national
      level. The Minister of Sport is responsible and Parliament had a Task
      Force Committee that was created by Ministers of Education; Transport
      and Economic Affairs. The Task Force Committee was not successful. As
      a result there is Parliamentary enquiry to this committee as money was
      spent without accountability or supporting documents. It was noted
      that people who are involved in sport and business should come
      together but politicians must give framework and should not be
      entirely involved. There would be close cooperation with different
      police services. German Air force will be involved for air space
      protection but soldiers are not to take part. Schools, sports people
      and interior security must be used.

5.4   Tour of Allianz Arena Stadium

      The delegation took time to tour the stadium to gather information on
      its construction, duration, cost and what is contained inside. The
      stadium cost (340 million and will serve Munich’s two local soccer
      clubs, Bayern Munich and TSV 1860. For the duration of the 2006 FIFA
      World Cup Germany, the stadium will bear the name FIFA World Cup
      Stadium Munich, not Allianz Arena as it is presently known. It is the
      most modern stadium in Europe. The varying colours that light up the
      outer skin make the stadium a genuine visual and architectural
      highlight. It took less than three years to build this architecturally
      unique arena.


      A referendum was held in Bavaria about the stadium that produced an
      overwhelming 65,8% majority in favour of the project and 34,2%
      against. The foundation was laid on 21 October 2002 and handover was
      on 30 April 2005. The owners are Bayern Munich and TSV 1860 sharing
      50% each. The total capacity is 69 901 undercover including executive
      boxes and business seats. There are 9 800 parking places; the entrance
      height is 2 metres; three hundred and fifty (350) coach places and one
      hundred and thirty (130) parking spaces for the disabled.


      Guaranteeing safety and security of visitors is a major challenge to
      the city’s disaster prevention team. State of the art security
      standards were observed in building the new stadium and media centre.
      The emergency services are well prepared for any incidents in the
      stadium or at the Fan Festival in the Olympic Park. Strict security
      controls in and around the stadium would ensure the safety of visitors
      and make sure all matches run smoothly.


      The following can be found inside the Arena stadium:


       • 28 kiosks; 2 fan-restaurants each with 1 000 seats and press club
         with 350 seats
       • Offices and conference rooms
       • Appointed media areas
       • A nursery
       • 54 ticket counters
       • Shopping facilities
       • Changing rooms (four for players ie. 2 for FC Bayern and 2 for TSV
         1860; 4 for coaches and two for referees)
       • 2 warm-up rooms and 190 monitors.
       • The stadium has seven levels.

      Allianz Arena would host the prestigious opening match, three
      preliminary round games, one quarterfinal and one semi-final, which is
      a total of six games. The basic shell of the stadium was completed on
      schedule. The Arena won 2003 German Fire Prevention Award for its
      outstanding fire prevention plan. The award is the principal accolade
      in Germany for fire prevention in buildings. Stairway blocks are
      mounted in all three tiers; the first silver-grey seats are installed
      in the executive box area.
      The road network around the stadium is completed. The newly built
      connecting roads will be officially opened on 4 May 2006 together with
      the new underground station. On 17 March 2005 the pitch was re-laid
      for the second time.

6.    COLOGNE

6.1   Dinner meeting

      On the issue of the stadium Dr Schulte and Bern Siefert, former
      director of sport and Steering Committee member of Cologne Stadium
      briefed the delegation. Dr Schulte has been vice mayor and responsible
      for youth and sport and international relations in Cologne. He has
      been the director of construction for the stadium in Cologne. In the
      beginning more than thirty (30) cities wished to have matches played
      but later only 16 were selected in the first round and in the second
      round 12 cities were finally selected with the inclusion of Cologne.
      All cities thought that they would benefit if hosting but were later
      satisfied when responsibilities of hosting were announced. Benefits
      are to be divided as follows:

       • All matches would be broadcast through TV, radios and public
         viewing is very important to accommodate those who cannot afford as
         this service is free
       • Economic aspect – thousands would come and spend money in the city
         whether on hotels or food or music, museum etc.
       • This is the first project in the history of football in Cologne and
         supporters always follow their team. Brazil supporters will stay in
         Cologne for the duration of the event and will travel to where the
         team plays. The team will be accommodated where they play.
       • To ensure success one has to create certain conditions. Cologne had
         a stadium before building a new one. FIFA required a stadium with
         50 000 spectators. The old one had to be demolished.

      After the decision of building new stadium for the required capacity,
      the second decision was to be taken on where to build it. It was
      decided to build within the city in order to reach transport and avoid
      more problems and have to see that roads and transport infrastructure
      is ready. It is important to use public transport and there is tramway
      station closer to the stadium. The stadium is built for (120m and it
      can later be used for music festivals etc, but all that must be
      planned at the beginning. Security forces will be well prepared for
      hooligans but cannot guarantee 100% safety, as it might not be
      possible.

      Youth camps would be organised during the World Cup, as the period
      will be very hostile to the young people. It’s during school holidays.
      There is law to keep children busy by being offered tasks by local
      authorities. Sport and leisure activities are organised for youth.
      Youth sport is the biggest organisation in Cologne. Youth is trained
      and project activities are organised for young disadvantaged youth.

      The delegation sought clarity on how the stadium was refurbished and
      the involvement of security during the design and planning of the
      stadium. The response was that everything was broken down except the
      pitch; it was left as it was. During the construction they had to
      guarantee that 30 000 spectators will be accommodated. Dr Schulte was
      involved in building and took part in selection of architect but was
      not involved in designing. Security was involved.

6.2   Meeting with the director of events in the City of Cologne
      Mr Wieneke informed the delegation that there would be five football
      matches and the City of Cologne would provide wide range of cultural
      programmes. There would be four different approaches to be followed:


           i) Official programme established by FIFA
          ii) Number of artists to participate would apply to FIFA and FIFA
              would select from many.
         iii) Cultural activities are organised by FIFA
          iv) Cologne would participate in two official activities i.e.
              dancing.

      Cologne wanted to establish its own cultural programme and even
      private actors have organised their own activities. First type of
      activities were organised by municipalities of Cologne under
      tremendous difficult conditions, problem was finance of the private
      sector and the municipality needed sponsors where one had to respect
      the sponsors’ rules laid down by FIFA. FIFA has its own exclusive
      sponsors and it’s difficult to negotiate with FIFA to accept other
      sponsors.

      Sponsors are limited to cities like Berlin and Munich since they are
      hosting most of the games and as a result they would to take their own
      money to finance own programmes. (500 000 was invested to finance
      cultural own programmes – overall budget (2 400. Compared to other
      cities Cologne’s situation is better in planning and organisation of
      cultural games. G8 Summit took place there in 1999 and was organised
      by the city and 2001 Ice Hockey Championships, 2005 Youth Catholic
      Church and 2010 will be Olympic Games for Gays and Lesbians. This kind
      of game, Olympic Games for Gays and Lesbians is unusual in other
      countries but important in Cologne.


      A dedicated unit should be established to look at the organisation of
      successful event, including security department. What the city cannot
      plan is supporters coming from other places. Security measures are
      taken into account for people coming in and out of Cologne, and public
      viewing would be organised for those who cannot get tickets. The city
      had to be prepared to deal with a high number of spectators without
      tickets. FIFA is in charge of what is happening in the stadium but
      what happens outside is the city’s responsibility. FIFA sponsors were
      ready to sponsor equipment but the rest is organised by the city.

      Municipality owns copyrights and during the festival of the Ring,
      which was organised by a private company, they also had copyrights.
      Public viewing is exclusively under the municipality; FIFA has nothing
      to do with it. One has to respect FIFA rules anyway because other
      sponsors outside FIFA are not allowed.  After addressing FIFA
      officials it was found that none were prepared to sponsor. The local
      breweries are allowed to sell their own beer.

      There are two examples of operational concepts, biggest events are
      represented by Chief of Marathon company and the Director in the
      municipality as the Chief of Media company, private public partnership
      company in cooperation with MTV etc. the other is responsible for
      planning and organising concerning the development of the event. They
      use network of different actors established years ago and
      representatives of municipality, police, medical services and
      transportation. The two bodies will together decide and that is how
      the event is technically planned and organised.

6.3   Meeting with Head of Department in Cologne Municipality Sport Unit

      Mr Sanden has been with the municipality since 1978 coordinating all
      the media work. Included in the preparation packages is
      transportation; tourism; volunteer programme; public relations;
      cultural programme accompanying sport events and public viewing. The
      most interesting thing is that when the country is accommodating
      supporters, supporters pay but when accommodating a team, that country
      pays for the team. Supporters are coming in more numbers than a team
      so the country gains. The name of the stadium must also change from
      Rhein Energie Stadion Koln to FIFA WM Stadion Koln. There is public
      free area around the stadium.

      FIFA controls and checks all the movement of people. It is impossible
      to work with professionals only when organising because they are very
      expensive. However, using volunteers is best because they are
      available for information to assist visitors. No one is allowed to
      sell any product not approved by FIFA even in the car park.



      6.3.1 Benefits:


      It is worth hosting the World Cup event for improvement of
      infrastructures; for example, new highways are long-term benefits.
      Gate systems are sophisticated. In order to deal with transport
      difficulties, a new system has been established with colour codes
      symbolising car parks and entrances to the stadium.

      6.3.2 Volunteer programme:



      There are two types, one with FIFA officials and the other one with
      municipality officials. FIFA officials are available only during the
      matches. Cologne volunteers do much work in the city. The delegation
      was advised to convince FIFA to send volunteers that would stay for
      the whole period of the event. Also students studying sport should be
      involved and motivated to assist.

      6.3.3 Tourism:


      in terms of Brazilian supporters, 5 000 have already booked their
      accommodation in Cologne. The reason for accommodating Brazilians is
      that Cologne and Brazil share several similarities. All 64 matches can
      be viewed in a giant big screen in the public viewing areas.

6.4   Meeting with the FIFA official organiser (LOC)


      Mr Krause noted that there is an outer parameter around the stadium
      that will be closed from 28 May till 8 June for security reasons.
      There is an area for two hundred and fifty (250) journalists. All
      journalists would travel to other venues after 27 June, which is the
      last match to be played in Cologne. A small facility would be provided
      for journalists to transmit to their cities. Germany is obliged to
      build media centre in each stadium.

      The response was that twenty (20) beds should be reserved for
      emergencies. A medical officer would be in the stadium with three beds
      and those who would be badly injured would be transported to the
      clinic. FIFA provides medical officers with information on health
      regulations and requirements inside the stadiums. VIP areas have a
      small area for medical assistance regarding First Aid.  LOC is
      responsible for security and is also in charge of transporting FIFA
      VIPs. German Railway Company built new transport infrastructure
      joining to the city centre and the Tramway added more lines.

6.5   MEETING WITH– ARD OFFICIAL BROADCASTER

      This is the largest TV centre and will be covering all first division
      soccer leagues. FIFA and Germany Organising Committee focus on the
      opening now. The SA delegation was urged to negotiate with FIFA now
      because it is impossible for FIFA to put prices for the tickets so
      high taking into account the high enthusiasm of township soccer
      lovers. It is more important to fight for the event and not to leave
      it to FIFA and have to bargain with FIFA sooner than later.

      2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup’s success depends on the handling of
      football not being party political but be an international event. HBS
      is a world broadcast that is experienced and successful and it will
      produce international signal as mandated by FIFA.

6.6   Meeting with the Under-secretary in the sport museum - Manfred Palmen

      This museum ensures transfer of knowledge in preparation of the World
      Cup. The aim was to present the area as friendly, tolerant and well
      organised. There will be music programmes organised from local to
      international artists for entertaining in the public viewing areas. A
      guide is produced and distributed in English and German with dates,
      timetables for transport and cultural programmes free of charge and
      additional information could be downloaded from the website.

      FIFA protects its official sponsors as they pay high amounts. There
      has been discussion on extension of shopping hours during the event.

7.    BERLIN

7.1   Meeting with the Minister of Transport

      Dr Grossman is a member of Federal Government, holding a position as
      the State Secretary. There was (3,7bn made available for expansion of
      railway network and railway station that will be finished in May. The
      strategy devised was to bring visitors/foreigners who are not familiar
      with the area quicker and easier to the stadium. Fans will have a
      colour symbolising where the seat is and the area of entrance. Guests
      are expected to reach stadiums by means of public transport in their
      thousands. Basic minimum requirement is to have at least 50% of guests
      using public transport without paying extra.

      Stadium here is divided into four colours according to the tickets.
      Cars and buses also have different colours for parking. Navigation
      system should be switched off and everybody must use the road designed
      for the event.

      Every station is renovated and reconstructed; transport infrastructure
      was completed in November 2005 with lanes widened to six. Host cities,
      Federal Government and provinces did refurbishment.

7.2   Meeting at SA Embassy with the Minister of Interior and Sport
      (Coordinator of 2006 of the Federal Government), Dr G Rosenthal
      (Security Commissioner) and Mr B Schiphorst (FIFA Organising Committee
      member)

      The Minister congratulated the delegation on SA Freedom Day and
      appreciated the invitation to share the information on the
      preparation. The Minister played the key role in organising and
      coordinating the preparations with the relevant departments involved.
      Guarantees given to FIFA should be arranged as criteria. Most of plans
      were finished by 2005. Berlin will host most games including the final
      match.

      Dr G Rosenthal briefed the delegation on security as important aspect
      referring to the experience of 1972 Olympic Games. Preparations
      started in 2001 and the main challenge was how to divide the tasks
      between government and private organisations. The government is
      working closely with the private sector. A national concept was
      developed on security in May 2005 and was put in practise during the
      Federation’s Cup. Hooliganism will be prevented at an early stage but
      there is no specific phenomenon to deal with organised crime. It is
      expected that crime like theft will be a big issue in pubic viewing
      areas.


      There are thirty-one (31) countries in close corporation that would be
      visiting Germany. International Corporation will mean 500 police from
      foreign states to assist Germany. There are 400 public viewing areas
      organised for non-ticket holders.

      Foreign affairs – members of eleven countries would need visas,
      players and those accompanying will get visas easy. Ticket holders
      would organise visas on normal procedure with embassies in their
      countries. A concept is also developed with the Ministry of Interior
      on issuing of visas and procedures for meeting guests has been agreed
      upon. Foreign office would be responsible for meeting high-ranking
      guests. Organisational committee is not part of Federal Government but
      have good relations. Tickets are limited and are purchased through the
      Internet, which is deemed a fair practice. Anticipated challenge is
      traffic as flights and buses cannot be projected.

      FIFA has exclusive sponsors that will be advertising in the stadium
      and those complaining might have not understood or read the contract.
      Confederation Cup was the initial preparation for the team. National
      association requested Premier League to find youth clubs and has
      worked out well. National Football Association will reap good harvest
      out of the event.

7.3   Meeting with Mr Palme – Frankfurt national Coordinating Committee
      member

      Mr Palme has been responsible for general project management and the
      country started bidding in 1973. In 1997 on 1 October, a meeting of 24
      potential host cities took place in Frankfurt. Local Organising
      Committee’s philosophy is “A time to make friends”. The approximate
      vat out of ticketing is estimated at (30m. All pitches will be renewed
      by mid May to prepare the turfs for the stadium. There is also an
      amount of (30m from the Federal Government for Arts and Culture
      Programmes. Overall budget for organising committee is (430m from
      ticketing and contributions and from FIFA and national suppliers is
      (170m.

      The main challenge is to focus on the key tasks, which are the
      fulfilment of contractual commitments; creation of a special
      atmosphere or international presentation of a country; budget
      planning, which is very difficult to project and to reach economic
      targets. Matches are evenly spread all over Germany.
     8. Conclusion

      The delegation viewed the visit as an eye opening experience. As the
      delegation learnt from France, FIFA constantly changes regulations.
      The visit to Germany would put South Africa in a better position even
      in rectifying the mistakes committed. The delegation appreciates the
      honesty and enthusiasm of the Germans in sharing crucial information
      that is going to enhance the preparedness of the different
      departments.

      Some of the issues that the delegation made evaluation of the trip on
      was the coverage of the game by big screens for poor communities and
      those who cannot afford tickets are important. The importance of
      having public viewing area where access is easy and transport is
      available to all should be taken into cognisance by the host cities.
      Preparations for the World Cup should be communicated through all the
      people of the country including disadvantaged communities for buy-in
      and ownership of the event. The event would focus mainly on showcasing
      the country and bringing the country together. Constant change of
      regulations by FIFA for the hosting country is a concern. And the host
      cities should clearly understand the contracts between them and FIFA.


   9. Recommendations

      The Committee recommends that:


            • The delegation that went to Germany through government cost
              must have own conference to draw a programme for synergy from
              all education received from Germany and make a working
              document.  This will give direction to interact; review and
              modify issues to draw a plan of what was seen. There is a
              need for a follow up meeting with Germany Local Organising
              Committee to find out the lessons learnt from the event.
            • to ensure capacity in our municipalities to open channels of
              communication with LOC and host cities. It is imperative for
              the Committee to send two delegates to the meetings of LOC
              and host cities in implementing the guarantees.
            • To keep careful look at finance in that concurrent process
              should be in place i.e. transport, building of stadia, etc.
              The national department should play a vital role to see that
              host cities could be well prepared for Confederation Cup.
            • It is recommended that, as much as possible, the
              Parliamentary delegation and the same officials should be
              retained in the group for the sake of continuity. Follow-up
              visits should be structured in such a way that it is possible
              for sections of the group to hold parallel breakaway meetings
              with their German counterparts.  The different groups will
              enable more in-depth discussions around sector-specific
              issues, without involving the whole delegation.  It will also
              result in a more effective management of time.
            • An authoritative Executive Committee, consisting of high-
              ranking government officials should be formed, to tightly co-
              ordinate and oversee the integrated planning process for
              2010, and to ensure successful implementation of the 2010
              FIFA World Cup Project.
            • A National Agenda for the World Cup Project is determined at
              the highest-level possible, in order to provide a common
              vision and a strategic framework within which all World Cup –
              related activities should operate that a common and uniform
              approach on World Cup-related legal matters be adopted by all
              government departments and levels of authority
            • An effective Communication Campaign targeted at the South
              African public should be conceptualised and executed, in
              order to cultivate and maintain buy-in and support from the
              public.
            • Marketing of the country and host cities is very important to
              build a long-term attraction for visitors to want to come
              back. The country should not just accept every interpretation
              by FIFA of the implication of protection of its rights.
              Amongst the issues to be thrashed out is the extension of
              FIFA rights to public viewing areas and the dressing of
              cities towards the start of the World Cup. Public viewing
              areas are important promotional tool especially for non-host
              cities where there are no FIFA restrictions for trading. The
              use of arts and culture programme to promote the country and
              cities and to keep the fans longer in each city.
            • Schools should feature prominently in the promotion and
              popularization of the World Cup and the country message.
            • Transport plays a major role in the success of an event such
              as FIFA World Cup and therefore public transport especially
              rail should be priority. The planning of stadia must be
              integrated with other infrastructure such as transport and be
              targeted to be finished at least a year in advance to allow
              testing.
            • Security planning must focus more outside the stadia, in the
              public viewing areas and other entertainment areas more than
              in the stadium because the stadium is easier to control with
              tickets and accreditation. The Department of Provincial and
              Local Government should consider developing relevant support
              programmes to host cities that will provide support and
              guidance to such cities to attend matters that fall within
              their powers and responsibilities. For example, to provide
              assistance in amending or enacting by-laws to accommodate cup-
              realities such as extended shopping hours or the closing or
              roads and businesses.
    Report to be considered.


