---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 September 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-09-19
---

TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:25.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we apologise for starting 15 minutes late,
but we are grateful that you understand that we had some business to attend
to. Thank you very much for that.


                     WISHES ON COMMENCEMENT OF RAMADAAN


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes the coming of the Muslim Holy Month of Ramadaan;
   (2)      further notes the Muslims in those areas of conflict that  shall
        offer the sacrifice of fasting from sunrise to sunset;


   (3)      recalls the sacrifice of Ramadaan to be a test of  faith  and  a
        month of purification; and


     4) conveys its good wishes to all Muslims over this auspicious month.


 Agreed to.


                      OPENING OF HECTOR PETERSON SQUARE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I  move  without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that –


        (a)  on  9  September  2006  the  Culemborg  Municipality   in   the
            Netherlands officially opened the Hector Peterson Square; and
        (b) the opening ceremony was attended, amongst others, by Councillor
            Willem-Jan Stegeman, Mr.  Gert  Van  Maanen  and  a  number  of
            children from the suburb of Molenzicht;

   (2)      recalls that -


        (a) this gesture is to honour not only  Hector  Peterson,  but  also
            children like  Hasting  Ndlovu  from  Soweto,  Mzimkulu  Crosby
            Ndingane from Gugulethu and Nazeem  Khan  from  Manenberg,  who
            were killed during the 1976 student uprising; and


        (b) the Hector Peterson Square is situated on the Nelson Mandela
            Lane; and

   (3)      conveys its sincere appreciation of the honour bestowed by the
        Culemborg Municipality on the people of South Africa, to name the
        park after Hector Peterson.

Agreed to.

    APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHIEF JUSTICE OF SOUTH AFRICA, JUSTICE DIKGANG
         MOSENEKE, AS CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WITWATERSRAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY:  Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that –


        (a)  on  Thursday,  7  September  2006,  the   University   of   the
            Witwatersrand (Wits University) announced  the  appointment  of
            Deputy Chief Justice of South Africa, Justice Dikgang Moseneke,
            as the new Chancellor of the University; and


        (b) when the announcement was  made  Justice  Edwin  Cameron,  said:
            ``The University is privileged to have  one  public  figure  of
            very  high  distinction  and  personal  calibre  succeeded   by
            another”;


   (2)      recalls that the Deputy Chief Justice served a term of ten years
        on Robben Island and while there, he obtained his BA degree majoring
        in English and Political Science and his B  Iuris  degree  and  that
        this was to be the start of his legal career;



   (3)      congratulates Justice Dikgang Moseneke on his appointment  as  a
        Chancellor and believes and knows that he will serve the institution
        with vigour and determination; and


   (4)      wishes the Deputy Chief Justice continuing success in his new
        post.

Agreed to.

                    REFERRAL OF REPORT BACK TO COMMITTEE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
the motion printed in the name of the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, as
follows:

   That the House refers the Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice
   and Constitutional Development (Announcements, Tablings and Committee
   Reports, 20 June 2006, p 1507) - Hearings on the Implications and
   Approval of the proposed New Salary Scales for the Magistracy, in
   particular the introduction of a New Motor Vehicle Allowance for
   Magistrates and Senior Magistrates, as recommended by the Independent
   Commission for the Remuneration of the Public Office Bearers, back to the
   Committee for further consideration and report, the Committee to confer
   with the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs of the
   National Council of Provinces.


Agreed to.


                          NINTH CONGRESS OF COSATU


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T D ANTHONY (ANC): Madam Speaker, the ANC salutes the Congress of SA
Trade Unions on holding its ninth national congress as from yesterday.

The national congress is convening at a crucial conjuncture in the
transformation of our country and the intensification of the globalisation
process. It meets at a time when there are major challenges facing the
working class, the poor of our country and the developing world in general.

The ANC awaits the key resolutions to be taken by the workers of the
country that will advance the national democratic revolution. This is
particularly necessary given the ever-increasing expectation of the masses
of our people that our alliance will further accelerate our country’s
progress towards the achievement of the goal of a better life for all.

We call on the working class of our country to continue to uphold the
traditions that we’ve come to expect from the revolutionary trade union
movement. Thank you.

    IRREGULARITIES, HATE SPEECH IN AGRICULTURAL COMMUNITY OF RAWSONVILLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr R J KING (DA): Mev die Speaker, die DA doen ’n beroep op die Minister
van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit om dringend die ware feite rondom die polemiek
rakende klagtes van verkragting, ernstige aanranding en polisieversuim op
Rawsonville vas te stel.

Ons vereenselwig ons as DA met Agri-Wes-Kaap se versoek dat die LUR vir
Landbou, Kobus Dowry, en die LUR vir Gemeenskapsveiligheid in die Wes-Kaap,
Leonard Ramatlakane, onmiddellik ’n hoëvlak-ondersoek loods na die beweerde
vergrype, en spesifiek ook dringend kyk na die klaers, die instansies wat
die proses dryf en die motivering daaragter.

Ons vra ook dat Minister Nqakula kyk na uitlatings wat mnr Tony Ehrenreich,
Wes-Kaapse sekretaris van Cosatu, op Sondag, 17 September op ’n vergadering
van sogenaamde plaaswerkers op Rawsonville gemaak het.

Haatspraak soos ``Ons is vandag hier om oorlog te verklaar’’, ``die
vergieting van ons mense se bloed op die lande ’’, ``as dit is wat dit verg
om slegte boere in ’n regte rigting te dwing, moet ons hulle in die rigting
in moer’’, en ``as boere aanhou om soos mal honde ons plaaswerkers se regte
te skend, dan moet ons hulle slaan’’, en ander vieslikhede wat ek nie hier
wil herhaal nie, is gebruik.

Ek verneem dat die oorgrote meerderheid van Ehrenreich se gehoor met busse
aangery is van elders in die Boland. Ek is nie verbaas nie. Ek is bevoorreg
om die deursnee plaasmense, werkers én eienaars, van Goudini en die Breede
Kloof te ken as goeie, eerbare, Godvresende mense, mense wat tot
siekwordens toe sou walg om na sulke smerige retoriek te moes luister.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R J KING (DA): Madam Speaker, the DA appeals to the Minister of Safety
and Security to urgently ascertain the true facts around the controversy
regarding the charges of rape, assault with the intent of causing grievous
bodily harm and police negligence in Rawsonville.

We, as the DA, associate ourselves with Agri-Western Cape’s request that
the MEC for Agriculture, Kobus Dowry, and the MEC for Community Safety in
the Western Cape, Leonard Ramatlakane, immediately institute a high-level
inquiry into the alleged transgressions, and also specifically take a
critical look at the complainants, the bodies driving the process and the
motivation behind it.

We also want to ask that Minister Nqakula look at remarks made by Mr Tony
Ehrenreich, Western Cape secretary of Cosatu, on Sunday, 17 September, at a
meeting of the so-called farm workers at Rawsonville.

Hate speech such as “We are here today to declare war”, “the shedding of
our people’s blood in the fields”, “if it is required to prod bad farmers
in the right direction, then we must thrash them in that direction”, and
“if farmers like mad dogs continue to violate the rights of our farm
workers, then we must beat them”, and other loathsome remarks that I do not
want to repeat here,was used.

I understand that the vast majority of Ehrenreich’s audience were bused in
from elsewhere in the Boland. I am not surprised. I am privileged to know
the cross-section of farm people, workers and owners, in Goudini and the
Breede Kloof as good, honest, God-fearing people, people who would have
been nauseated to the point of illness if they were obliged to listen to
such foul rhetoric. [Applause.]

        IMPLEMENTATION OF LAW GOVERNING HOUSE OF TRADITIONAL LEADERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Deputy Speaker, to the legal persona it was no
surprise to see a piece of legislation published on the 14th and enforced
for implementation the morning of the 15th of the same month, that is less
than 24 hours on the Statute Book.

Indeed, all of us would like to see our laws implemented as soon as
possible, but not in less than 24 hours’ time for humanitarian reasons. It
is beyond reasonableness.

We saw the hon Judge President of KwaZulu-Natal enforcing the establishment
and swearing-in ceremony of the provincial house of traditional leaders on
the basis of a law or regulation passed on 14 September 2006, on 15
September 2006.

On to the legal jargon, ignorance of the law is no excuse and the judge was
within his legal right to enforce the law despite the ignorance about the
contents and the requirements thereof.

The legal jargon is based on Roman Dutch law. It was good for the Romans
and the Dutch. Was it good for the Africans? How does the African
Renaissance define this jargon? How does the ubuntu concept address this
case? When was the invitation issued to the judge to come and preside?
Could it have been less than 24 hours? Surely, he could not have accepted
the invitation.
This incident exposed certain persons in high offices as being unfair,
untruthful and untransparent to the institution of traditional leadership
in the province of KwaZulu-Natal. Thank you.


               GANG-RAPE AND ASSAULT OF FARMWORKERS CONDEMNED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M R MORUTOA (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC expresses concern at the
allegations of gang-rape and assault of farmworkers by farmers in
Rawsonville, Western Cape.

According to available information, the incident took place on the evening
of 29 April 2006, when farm dwellers, Anneline, 22 years old, and Anthony,
16 years old, received a phone call from a local farmer instructing them to
accompany a group of farmers on a hunt.

The evening ended in tragedy, with Anneline being gang-raped by the five
men, and Anthony beaten into a coma, after he was tied to a car and dragged
through a river. He spent more than three months in a coma, after which he
was admitted to a psychiatric hospital as a result of severe head injuries.

According to the Women on Farms project, five months down the line, neither
Anneline nor Anthony is any closer to getting justice. The organisation
attributes this to a lack of progress in investigating the cases and the
failure of the police to protect them from ongoing threats from the
farmers.

The project further claims that this case is not unusual, and is located in
a broader culture of human rights violations in farmworker communities,
where farmers act with impunity.

The ANC calls on the SA Police Service to expedite the investigation into
the alleged atrocities committed by farmers against their workers and for
increased efforts to protect the human rights of farmworkers. Thank you,
Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

                       MARRIAGE BETWEEN MAN AND WOMAN

                            (Members’ Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Deputy Speaker, the ACDP embraces and promotes the
biblical standards for marriage and the family, which maintain that
marriage was instituted by God and is intended to be a lifelong union
between a man and a woman.

It is significant that France has recently ruled against the so-called
“same-sex marriages” to protect children, citing article 7 of the UN
Convention on the Rights of a Child. The ACDP calls on our government to do
likewise in the interest of our children, and ensure that the rights of our
children are placed above the narrow interests of groups that want to
legally perpetuate a sinful lifestyle that is not only unhealthy and
unnatural, but is also frowned upon by all traditional cultural, religious
and tribal groups on the African continent.

The ACDP declares that every child has a fundamental right to a mother and
a father. Marriage between a man and woman protects that right, even in
cases of divorce, where the courts ensure that a child has an appropriate
level of care from and access to both parents.

The Civil Unions Bill doesn’t. Instead it grants adults the right to
replace a natural parent with a legal parent of another gender, making a
child essentially fatherless or motherless. The Civil Unions Bill
undermines marriage. It ignores children and transforms marriage into a
vehicle for validating sinful relationships, changes African values and
must, therefore, be rejected.

We declare that since traditional marriage is the only family structure
that provides a child with both a father and a mother, the government has a
duty to support and defend it. Thank you.


                              RWANDAN GENOCIDE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Rwandan genocide, which took
place 12 years ago and left many millions dead and many more suffering, has
very important lessons for the African continent as a whole and for South
Africa in particular.

It is quite clear that one of the major contributing factors to this
genocide was the inability of the greater worldwide community to intervene
in avoiding the situation. The lessons learnt from the Rwandan genocide
should not be forgotten, especially when dealing with issues concerning the
Darfur region of Sudan.

It will be on South Africa’s conscience if we continue withdrawing South
African peacekeeping troops in the African Union when we know that the
Sudanese government has murderous designs for the people of Darfur. Asking
a government that has already committed wide-scale genocide for permission
to stay or for a United Nations force to replace us would make us
accomplices in any further genocide.

The ID would like to appeal to President Mbeki to exert whatever pressure
he can on the African Union to halt the withdrawal of the African Union
peacekeeping troops. Africa must take control of this situation. We must
not withdraw, and must instead strengthen our forces.

The ID believes that every possible action should be taken in order to
prevent genocide in Darfur and not make a mockery of the memory of those
who died in Rwanda. [Applause.]


       TRAINING FOR FORMER LIBERATION SOLDIERS AND ACTIVISTS COMMENDED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr O E MONARENG (ANC): Deputy Speaker, we, in the ANC, applaud the
initiative by the Direct Action Centre for Peace and Memory in terms of
which former liberation soldiers and activists are taught research tactics,
presentation skills and story telling. The programme is aimed at empowering
former liberation fighters who, at times, find it difficult to reintegrate
into society and to adapt to peacetime.

The initiative will also open a new chapter in our reflections on our
history as it involves an approach not dictated by the textbook method, and
will thus involve a new approach and add a new continental spirit to our
perspectives about history and public education.

This initiative by the Direct Action Centre for Peace and Memory is a
valuable contribution to the preservation of our history and heritage, in
an effort to ensure the progressive realisation of the dream expressed in
the Freedom Charter, that the doors of learning and culture shall be open
to all. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     CONTAINING OF NEW TB STRAIN IN KZN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N M MDAKA (UIF): Madam Deputy Speaker, the UIF applauds the national
Department of Health for doing its best to contain the spread of the
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in KwaZulu-Natal. This new TB has raised
fears in our communities that it could be a second killer after HIV and
Aids.

The Department of Health should, however, do more to inform the public
about the dangers of this infectious disease. We call on the Minister of
Health to launch a national education campaign to inform communities about
preventative measures and possible symptoms of this new TB so that more
lives can be saved. Thank you.

                      NHBRC FAILING TO DO REMEDIAL WORK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, to be a world-class organisation
that protects housing consumers and regulates the home-building industry
was the vision of the National Home Builders Registration Council, an
agency established by the Department of Housing to protect housing
consumers.

The intentions of this institution are noble, but, as the saying goes: “The
road to hell is paved with good intentions.” Many housing consumers were
registered with the NHBRC in the belief that they had some protection
should something go wrong. They found their interaction with the NHBRC
nothing short of a hellish experience.

In one particular instance, although the NHBRC has acknowledged a claim in
2003 for remedial work at an estimated cost of R75 000, three years later,
as I speak here today, the remedial work has still not been done and the
costs have probably escalated to anything between R300 000 and R500 000.

The homeowner has indicated that what was originally a small crack, has now
developed into the possibility of the roof of the house collapsing upon
them.

This does not seem to bother the NHBRC, and notwithstanding the fact that
there is no dispute between the homeowner and the NHBRC in terms of their
liability to undertake the repairs, it appears that there is simply nobody
competent enough to make a decision. This is the case despite the fact that
two additional directorates were established in the previous financial
year, as well as, ironically, customer care. In addition to the current
chief executive officer, a new chief operating officer was appointed. One
would have thought that this would lead to an improvement in services, but,
clearly, it hasn’t.

The NHBRC has an accumulated surplus of over half a billion rand from just
R113 million in 2003. And yet the outstanding claims have increased from
132 in 2003 to 172 in 2005.

Similarly, the actual provision for technical liabilities for 2005 was R78
million, whilst the actual amount paid out for remedial work totalled R3,7
million. Clearly, this is not a question of a lack of funds, but of lack of
capacity. Perhaps the fact that ... [Time expired.]


  AGREEMENT BETWEEN SOUTH AFRICA AND CHINA ON CLOTHING AND TEXTILE IMPORTS


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr M SEFULARO (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, Parliament has taken note of the
agreement between South Africa and the People’s Republic of China to
control the rate of clothing and other textile imports from China into
South Africa.

We further note the resultant response and appeals by the main retail shops
in South Africa and the agreement by government to postpone the
implementation date. Notwithstanding the latter agreement, Parliament
appeals to the relevant authorities to continue to work for the protection
and revival of what remains of the South African clothing and textile
industry.

The owners and workers of the various factories also have an obligation to
improve production methods and identify new products and markets. Success
in this regard will prevent any further job losses in the vulnerable
sector.

Parliament would like to remind the retail sector and its shareholders that
they also have an obligation to support the domestic clothing and textile
sector. Whilst pursuing sustainability and profit, they should be placing
equal, if not greater emphasis on development and the fight against
poverty. I thank you.


             VIOLENCE AND VIOLENT BEHAVIOUR IN SOCIETY CONDEMNED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the extent to which violence
and violent behaviour have crept into our society and become a common way
by which people solve their disputes or vent their frustrations or
grievances is evident not only from the increase in violence in our
schools, but also from the behaviour displayed by people during daily
activities.
Soccer is without a doubt the most popular sport in our country and brings
joy to millions of people and hope to many aspiring soccer stars. It is,
therefore, sad that a fight between two players from rival soccer teams in
Mahlabathini in KwaZulu-Natal ended in a tragedy recently, after one of the
players, 17-year old Mxolisi Nkwanyana, was stabbed and killed.

The alleged perpetrator of this crime is a 14-year old player from the
opposing team. This murder follows that of Emmanuel Lefuna, who was also
stabbed and killed during a soccer match in Pietermaritzburg. Allegedly, he
was killed by a player from his own team, mind you.

These are just a few, very disturbing incidents that highlight the
desperate situation that we are facing with regard to violent behaviour in
our society. This is an unacceptable situation. We have got to find ways of
rescuing society from this violent behaviour and moral decay, as well as
ways of restoring high morals and values. I thank you.


                       PEACEKEEPING MISSION IN SOMALIA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J SCHIPPERS (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC recognises that the struggle
for peace and stability in Africa constitutes a major challenge for the
African Union. The African Union Peace and Security Council approved a
proposal for the deployment of 8 000-strong peacekeeping missions in the
war-torn Somalia.

This decision was taken after a recommendation of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, a seven-nation east African regional bloc. Hon
members will remember that Somalia has been without a government for the
past 15 years. Different militias have been in control of various parts of
the country over the period, terrorising local communities.

The ANC commends the initiative taken by the regional body and supports the
decision taken by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
contribute towards peace efforts in Somalia.

Somalis, like all Africans, deserve peace, economic development and the
right to participate in sport and recreational activities. I thank you.


               MARINE LIVING RESOURCES FUND BADLY ADMINISTERED


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Marine Living Resources Fund
received qualified audit reports and disclaimers in respect of the four-
year period, 2002 to 2005. The fund has no board of directors and they
neglected to submit any financial statements, as required.

I’ve just highlighted some of the problem areas raised by the Auditor-
General. He could find no supporting documents for credit mounting to R18,
460 000; assets register for assets totalling
R345 million; and stock on hand totalling R207 million.

Furthermore, no bank reconciliations were done; harbour fee income of R4,
950 000 and harbour fee debt of R2, 840 000 has not been documented; debts
amounting to R72 million; harbour fees and the levy on fixed property
amounting to R10 million has been written off without authorisation.

According to the annual report the chief financial officer of the
department is also the chief financial officer of the fund. The executive
officers are the deputy directors-general under the delegation of the
director-general of the department and the chief financial officer.

These officials, as well as the Minister, should, therefore, assume
responsibility for the mess in which the fund finds itself. The question
is, Madam Deputy Speaker, whether any action was taken against the
officials concerned and whether they received performance bonuses.

If performance bonuses were paid, on what basis were they paid, given the
qualified audit reports and disclaimers? If no disciplinary action is to be
taken, it will reinforce the view in the mind of the public that the ANC’s
comrades can do no wrong.

The Minister owes us an explanation and his replies to questions forwarded
to him in this regard are not satisfactory and will be followed up.
[Applause.]


              CALL FOR STRINGENT SENTENCE AGAINST CHILD ABUSER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksz P TSHWETE (ANC): Sekela-Somlomo, thina singamalungu ombutho wesizwe i-
ANC, siya kuthi gqolo ukuqinisekisa ukuba amalungelo abantu ayahlonitshwa,
ngakumbi amalungelo abantwana abangamantombazana, kuba ngabona
basemngciphekweni wokuphathwa kakubi, ngakumbi ngamadoda angcolileyo.

Isigwebo sawiswa phezu kwentloko yomthanjiswa yiMantyi, uNambitha Dambuza,
ngenxa yokuxhaphaza intombi yakhe ngokwesondo.
Le ntlondi ingaka kucaca ukuba umthanjiwswa lo, ongummangalelwa, uyiqhube
isithuba esingangeminyaka emihlanu.

Simemelela inkonzo yakhe, abathanjiswa beNkosi kwiimvaba ngeemvaba, nabantu
benkonzo ngokubanzi, ukuba batsho ngazwilinye ukuba abadlwenguli nabaphathi-
gadalala boomama abanandawo kumabandla abo. Thina singamalungu ombutho
wesizwe siyasamkela isigwebo sikaMantyi, kwaye senza isicelo sokuba awise
isigwebo esiqatha ukuze sithumele umyalezo ongqingqwa kwabo bayenzayo le
ntlondi nemikhuba, nakwabo basaceba ukuyenza. Enkosi. (Translation of
isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, we as members of the ANC will
continuously ensure that people’s rights are respected, especially the
rights of female children, because they are the ones who are vulnerable to
abuse, mostly from male perverts.

A sentence was handed down by Magistrate Nambitha Dambuza against a
particular reverend for sexually abusing his daughter. It is clear that
this reverend, who is the accused, has been practising this iniquitous
behaviour for about five years.

We are appealing to his congregation, ministers from different
denominations and people at large, to unanimously speak against rapists and
those who abuse women and ensure that they do not have a place in their
churches. We, as members of the ANC, welcome the verdict that has been
reached, and we are appealing to the magistrate that she should give a very
heavy sentence in order to send a message to those who still practise this
and those that are still contemplating getting involved. Thank you.]


       TRANSFORMATION OF SPORT AND RECREATION PART OF NATION-BUILDING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D M MOROBI (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC views the transformation of
sport and recreation as part and parcel of the transformation of South
African society, including nation-building. Sport remains an important
vehicle through which to ensure a better life for all.

Each day South Africans are making progress in the transformation of our
society. Sylvia Kedebone Mokaila has recently been promoted to a
professional boxing referee. Her passion for boxing started when she was
fourteen years old in Lumanyaneng, a village just outside Mafikeng.

She started as an amateur boxing referee in 1997. Last year, in the new
dispensation in boxing, she was officially awarded a professional
certificate by Boxing SA at Pretoria Academy. She has since got eight
professional fights under her belt.

The ANC continues to work with the people in ensuring total transformation
of our society. We salute the brave women of our country in the sterling
work they continue to do. I thank you.


   IMPLEMENTATION OF AGREEMENT WITH THE REPUBLIC OF CHINA ON CLOTHING AND
                                  TEXTILES


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I want to
thank the hon Sefularo for the statement that he made concerning the
implementation of the agreement on clothing and textiles with the People’s
Republic of China.

As the hon member indicated, the Department of Trade and Industry recently
reached an agreement with the manufacturers and the retailers to postpone
the implementation of this agreement until January 2007. This will allow
the industry to prepare to fill the gap by stepping up local production at
that particular time.

The department will make no apology for implementing this agreement. It is
similar to that which is being implemented in many other jurisdictions, and
it followed representations made to the International Trade and
Administration Commission of South Africa by the manufacturers earlier last
year. The outcry that we heard from vested interest in the retail sector,
those that have made huge profits by importing, is most unfortunate.

The silence from the manufacturers’ side speaks volumes about the power
relations within the industry, and there have even been reports of cases of
threats to the manufacturers. Let those who are making those threats be
quite clear that we will not hesitate to act in terms of the Competition
Act against instances of abuse of dominant position.

Finally, let me say to the hon member that we agree with him that this
agreement will only provide breathing space for the local industry. A
customised sector programme has been agreed to by all stakeholders and will
be implemented shortly. This provides for the long-term restructuring,
which is in the end the long-term solution for job saving in that
particular sector. I thank you.


                           CIVIL UNION LEGISLATION


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The South
African Constitution grants equality to all South Africans regardless of
gender and sexual orientation. It is, therefore, important that we, as
representatives of the public, do not act in any way that ensures that
while we advance equality for everyone else, there are those to whom we
deny the same rights that they deserve.

I think it is important for the hon Rev Meshoe to understand that it is not
correct to say that all religious, traditional and cultural groups are
opposed to the civil union legislation. There are many who have come out in
support of it, who have said that it is necessary that we move in this
direction because they too understand that even their own religious and
cultural beliefs do not warrant that anyone should be discriminated
against. It is important that we should, when we articulate our views, not
make claims that are exaggerated.

The final thing I wish to say on the same matter is that there are public
hearings currently taking place, led by the Portfolio Committee on Home
Affairs. Rather than grandstanding here in Parliament, it is important that
we should all participate in those public hearings. There will be many
opportunities for the ACDP to participate in the portfolio committee
discussions and deliberations, even in the debates that will take place in
the House.

I think it is better that, as Members of Parliament, we use and exploit
those opportunities that we have, rather than speak here during the time
for members’ statements, which will not contribute to the debates of the
parliamentary committee or to the debates of the House itself. I thank you.
[Applause.]

       THE CHALLENGE OF FATALITIES AND INJURIES ON OUR COUNTRY'S ROADS

                          (Subject for Discussion)
Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, hon members. There were 17 000
deaths on South African roads last year. This is substantially up from
previous years. With the daily average of some 50 deaths on our roads, we
are losing more or less the equivalent number of people killed as in the
tragic conflict in Iraq daily.

Besides these deaths, there are 21 disabling injuries, 125 serious injuries
each day. South Africa has one of the highest per capita road trauma rates
in the world. We speak about road accidents as if we were dealing with an
unfortunate fact of life, but as the Latin American writer, Eduardo
Galeano, once put it:


  We call accidents what are really crimes committed by cars.

Galeano is only half right. Cars are not generally the main cause of
serious crashes. It is people. In our country driver behaviour is a factor
in 91% of crashes, and driver behaviour is the sole causal factor in 64 of
these cases. Who amongst us has not lost a family member, a close friend, a
political colleague, or a neighbour in a road fatality over the last five
years? The social and psychological impact on our society is enormous and
the economic impact is estimated to be some R43 billion a year.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, there are just too many meetings
taking place. We would like to encourage them because we think they are
very good and useful, but outside the House. Thank you. Hon member, will
you please continue?

Mr J P CRONIN: Some 40% of our road fatalities are pedestrian deaths and
many of them are children. According to the Medical Research Council for
children between the ages of 0 and 14 years, road fatalities are in fact
the leading external cause of death. We have to begin to appreciate the
scale of the challenge that we are facing, and we have to understand that
far from being an unfortunate fact of life, road safety in South Africa is
a public health issue, and it is also a human rights issue.

Our Bill of Rights says:


  Everyone has the right to life.


It says:


  Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity
  respected and protected.

This is simply not happening on our roads. Commuters are crammed, without
dignity, into unsafe minibuses - many of them death traps. Tens of
thousands of learners, some very young, walk to school along hazardous
roadsides in which there is no space provided for pedestrians. The rights
of pedestrians and cyclists are generally neglected everywhere in our towns
and cities.

The disabled have a particularly difficult time. They amount to some 10% of
our population, but our public transport – where it exists – makes little
provision, if any, for disabilities. Yet the Bill of Rights says:

  Everyone has the right to freedom of movement.

The Bill of Rights says:


  Every child has the right to be protected from maltreatment, neglect,
  abuse or degradation.

But how often do we see young children bouncing around loose in the back of
a vehicle without seatbelts?  Perhaps because we think road crashes are
simply accidents, an unfortunate fact of life, we do not seem to think that
the failure to take the most basic precautionary measures is not child
abuse, but it is child abuse!

No one on the roads is entirely safe, rich or poor, white or black, young
or old. But, as with so much else in life, it is the poor who bear the
brunt of road traffic crashes. This is a global phenomenon. Some 1,2
million people died last year on roads in the world, 85% of those
casualties were in developing countries. What can we do in South Africa?
The very first step is to grasp the seriousness of the challenge we face.
The second step is to move away from fatalism.

Road traffic smashes are not a mere fact of life. With determination, with
clear planning, with a will to implement effective measures and with active
public participation, it is possible to drastically reduce the levels of
death and serious injury on our roads.

In the last several months the Department of Transport has finalised a
revamped National Road Safety Strategy, which was tabled here in
Parliament. As the ANC we believe that this strategy is good, but it now
needs to be implemented with vigour and determination, and we call on all
South Africans to give support to this. The key features of this strategy
are taken up in the draft resolution, which I have tabled in the House this
afternoon. Among these is ensuring that there is effective co-operation
with the courts.

It is a disgrace, but only 4% of prosecutable road offences actually make
their way into the courts. This is extremely worrying. One among several
reasons is that in many of the courts breathalysers are not recognised.
Prosecutors and traffic officials then rely on blood testing, and there is
a very cumbersome way of testing blood, they take many months, they often
get lost in the medical system, and magistrates throw out cases.

Clearly this cannot be allowed to persist and we call on the Department of
Transport and other transport departments to engage with the courts as a
matter of urgency to find effective solutions to this.

But the courts are not the only ones to blame. Only 17% of traffic fines
are actually collected. The administration and follow-up on fines must be
greatly improved.

Traffic law enforcement also needs to be declared an essential service. We
know when most road deaths occur. They occur after dark, especially on
Friday nights and Saturday nights. But that is precisely the hours in which
there is very little, if any, effective traffic policing.

The speed limits in our country need to be reviewed. As an immediate step
we need to bring down the speed limits in areas of high pedestrian activity
- around schools, factory gates, shopping areas and so on. The
international norm is around 30km/h to 40km/h, ours is 60km/h. If you
travel at 60km/h and you hit someone, they are dead, but if you travel at
30km/h and you hit someone, they will be injured, but they are likely to
survive.

We have to change driver behaviour. There is a hard core of drivers who
simply defy things. We learnt in our hearings that there is an Ethekwini
bus driver who has had 30 accidents in one calendar year, and he is still
driving around. We have got to take away the driving licences of people who
are doing this kind of thing. It is a scandal!

There are other measures that the Department of Transport has proposed. We
back those. I will have a chance at the end of this debate to mention some
of those, but I think the key thing is we call on government to be more
determined to act as a champion. This kind of campaign requires a champion,
but at the end of the day government can only do so much. All South
Africans, the entire public has got to really be very active to bring down
this tragic level of fatalities and injuries on our roads. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Firstly, let me thank the hon
Cronin for introducing this important debate to the House. I am really
perturbed though that the Minister is not in the House today; particularly
as this issue is one of his and his department’s pressing and biggest
challenges. Road safety, and in particular the high incidence of accidents
and deaths on our roads has impacted in some way or other on every one of
us, as the previous speaker has said.

The figures speak for themselves: 40 lives a day. As long as it rises it
will continue to remain in the public interest until something can be done
about it. Despite numerous strategies over the years by the Department of
Transport to reduce the number of accidents, the matter seems only to get
worse.

More than 90% of crashes are due to lawlessness and negligence and this
comes at a cost, as has been said, of R43 billion to our economy and an
untold amount of human suffering. Something drastic needs to be done and no
stone should be left unturned in finding the solution.

The DA over the years has called for a road safety summit in order to get
first-hand inputs from the road users and stakeholders. These are people
that are using our roads daily and face the wrath of death and destruction
on our roads. Many have practical and innovative ideas to reduce the
carnage and unless we listen to these voices, all the theories in the world
won’t help in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and Asgisa goals
of reduced fatalities by 50% by 2014.

The motor vehicles population is increasing by approximately 4,5% per
annum, motorcycles by 16% and taxis by 3,3%. Concurrent to these statistics
is the fact that the average age of vehicles is increasing and sits at
around 10 years or more. This is putting greater pressure on traffic
volumes on our roads and with more unroadworthy vehicles as well. The
failure of the department to effectively roll out the Taxi Recapitalisation
Programme, coupled with the fact that our public transport Initiatives of
using buses and trains have failed dismally, means that more and more of
our commuting and freighting population still rely on private cars and
trucks to go about their daily business.

How much longer must this continue? Passengers and freighters need to be
given more reliable, safe and affordable options to reduce the traffic
volume on our roads and in our cities. Above all, those ending up with no
option but to use the roads need constant and visible policing. Without
this key factor, serious traffic infringements will continue unabated and
unroadworthy vehicles will continue to ride on our roads freely.

Road safety enforcement is highly fragmented and jurisdiction limited to
municipal boundaries. Provincial or national highway police are barely
existent, and unless the talk about their formation becomes a reality, all
the laws in the world won’t help.

Zero tolerance is the name of the game, and offenders need to be arrested
and serious repeat offenders’ licences suspended.

Although the DA supports the proposed demerit system, its implementation
and administration appears to be questionable in the foreseeable future
when one considers the long delays in getting the RTMC up and running, and
the slow implementation of the Road Traffic Infringement and related Acts
which we have spoken about.

At present South Africa has a total of 9700 traffic officers deployed in
local government and provinces. Considering some 6500 of these officers are
employed in local government within the confines of the metros and
municipalities and that the majority of accidents take place on our
national and provincial roads, one can see that we are seriously
understaffed in so far as provincial and national traffic policing goes.

International norms require one traffic officer per 55 kilometres of road
where we only have one traffic officer per 155 kilometres of road. We talk
about the shortfalls year after year; the time has now come for action. I
am asking the Minister that he must undertake an audit of the current
situation and make every effort to recruit, train and accredit sufficient
traffic officers on our roads or face the wrath of public outcry.

There are already murmurings of the state not meeting its constitutional
obligations to respect, protect and fulfil the human rights entrenched in
our Bill of Rights as applicable to the current situation on our roads. The
Minister needs to take heed of these threats.

Statistics shows that taxi passengers in particular come to grief four
times more than other road users and the recent report resulting in the
recall of some 500 Gazelle 16-seater buses introduced as one of the new
approved taxi vehicles calls into question the whole Taxi Recapitalisation
Programme.

The main purpose of the programme was to remove old unroadworthy taxis from
the system, yet we now sit with a problem of even new taxis experiencing
safety problems.

This vehicle has Santaco as an equity partner, and investigations I have
undertaken show that many of the affected vehicles have been modified by
adding additional seats, thereby increasing their designed loading
capacity, and that many of these vehicle owners have not complied with the
manufacturers’ maintenance and service plans.

The question arises as to what exactly Santaco is doing to keep their
members and affiliates informed or advised about noncompliance. It’s
commendable that McCarthy Distributors have recalled the vehicles to
safeguard the lives of the commuters using them, but untold losses in
earnings will be encountered by the operators and owners during this
period, in what is already becoming a marginal and in some cases
unsustainable industry. I say this particularly when taking into account
the costs of paying back the capital on the vehicles after the scrapping
allowance of R50 000 has been paid. The Minister must fully investigate
this matter and report back to this House.

Finally, may I take this opportunity to thank and wish Dr Wendy Watson good
luck in her endless campaign to improve safety on our roads and reduce the
carnage in terms of her strategies and goals; but she can only achieve this
with the full support of all of us and this will need more resources, more
capacity and more importantly, more cops. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Mr T E VEZI: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I would also like to thank
the hon Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Transport for this
initiative. Fourteen thousands deaths and hundred of thousands of serious
injuries every year is more than a challenge. It is a national disaster
that is costing our country tens of billions of rands every year.

It is a fact that well-meaning campaigns such as Arrive Alive have not
delivered the required success rates in the form of fewer deaths and
injuries. In fact, after having spent millions on Arrive Alive, the death
and injury rates have steadily climbed during the existence of the
programme and the time has come to recognise that it has failed in its main
objectives.

The IFP feels that the main contributing factor to steadily increasing
death and injury rates is a general lawlessness that is manifested on our
roads. This lawlessness encompasses unlicensed drivers, alcohol and drug
use, unroadworthy vehicles and speeding; and in fact, extends to all
aspects of road use. There is simply no respect for, or adherence to
traffic laws in our country. It really is a “free-for-all”.

There can be only one remedy to effectively address this disaster. We have
good, strict and appropriate road traffic laws, but why are they not being
enforced in a no-nonsense, zero-tolerance manner? It is because lip service
continues to be paid to traffic law enforcement. There are prominent road
safety campaigns only over certain periods of the year; a roadblock here
and there; low prosecution rates of traffic offenders; inadequate fines and
underresourced traffic authorities. These are but a few examples of this
lip service.

It is all good and well to boldly state that drivers’ attitudes must change
and we agree with that. Except that attitudes must be changed not by the
offer of a carrot or turning a blind eye, but by using the proverbial
stick.

If drivers lose their licences, have their vehicles confiscated and are
prosecuted successfully and made to suffer the real, immediate consequences
of their actions, then the deterrent effect offered by strict law
enforcement will change their attitudes. When strict law enforcement is
constantly used, we will see a decrease in death and injury rates.

In my remaining minutes I want to register my party’s concerns about the
fate of road accident victims subsequent to the recent changes to the Road
Accident Fund legislation. It is almost unthinkable that we would decrease
the compensation paid to road accident victims in the midst of a national
crisis that has no end. It is our opinion that it goes against the grain of
a democratic, caring and rights-based society to curb damages to victims of
road accidents and to remove their common law rights to sue for damages.
Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, South African
society sacrifices tens of thousands of people in road fatalities every
year. This staggering carnage has an immeasurable cost in human lives and
runs into billions of rands lost to the economy every year.

We need to assess the trend of the past two decades and come to the
conclusion that road fatalities remain stubbornly high, despite the tactics
and programmes that have been implemented in the past. Such an assessment
must necessarily bring us to the realisation that new tactics, policies and
approaches to road usage and safety must be explored.

A number of things come to mind. Firstly, speed trapping alone is not law
enforcement; it hardly enforces speed limits, never mind any of the many
other road safety rules and laws. Secondly, vehicle roadworthiness is a
neglected facet of road safety, despite the vast number of patently
unroadworthy vehicles that one regularly witnesses on the roads.

Thirdly, periodic or seasonal awareness and enforcement campaigns should be
carried out for nine out of every twelve months in a year. Thank you, Madam
Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.]

Mr V C GORE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. The points raised by some of
my hon colleagues are indeed very important. I would, however, in the
limited amount of time afforded to me, like to draw this House’s attention
to an aspect of road injury which is often overlooked and misunderstood.

As a personal survivor of a motor vehicle accident, I have a particular
interest in and understanding of these issues. The unfortunate reality of
both the hospital system and the rehabilitation procedures within this
country leaves much to be desired when it comes to spinal cord and head-
injured survivors.

According to the Quad-Para Association of South Africa through their Bags
of Hope Programme, South African roads produce an average of 200
quadriplegics and paraplegics per annum. Of these, around 60% are admitted
to state hospitals in this country. Due to a lack of skills, resources,
drugs and assistive devices, experience has shown that up to 40% of those
admitted to state hospitals will not survive three years.

In other words, of the 200 quadriplegics and paraplegics produced on our
roads annually, it is expected that just fewer than 50 of these individuals
will die due to preventable actions. Our solution is to ensure that the
Road Accident Fund has an adequate post-accident programme to ensure that
there is sufficient rehabilitation and support of the spinal cord-injured
and head-injured survivors of road accidents.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Deputy Speaker, in addition to the shocking number of
fatalities on our country’s roads and the comments that hon Gore has just
made, statistics from the Department of Transport indicate that on average,
7 000 people per year are left permanently disabled as a result of car
accidents.

The ACDP has consistently highlighted the role of alcohol in the disruption
of lives and the tearing apart of families; and we want again to draw
attention to this with renewed urgency with which we must address far-
reaching consequences of drunken driving. Figures from the Department of
Transport show that 95% of car accidents are as a result of traffic
violations.

The ACDP welcomes initiatives to impose harsh punishments on those who
violate traffic laws, as well as the proposed probation period for new
drivers. Law enforcement is of key importance and must play a central role.
Road safety lessons in schools must also be elevated in importance and play
a greater role. The ACDP believes that the implementation of such measures
will inspire change of attitude amongst drivers and a new culture of
caution and co-operation on our roads, which will have a significant impact
on lessening casualties and fatalities as a result of car accidents. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Comrades, hon members, every
day on the roads and highways of South Africa, traffic offences are
committed which contribute to 38 deaths, 21 disabling injuries and 125
serious injuries which occur in road accidents on a daily basis.

The traffic offences, which are committed by both motorists and
pedestrians, pose a danger to the safety of the users of our roads and
often result in accidents, which not only leave behind damaged vehicles,
but result in injuries and death of those involved. The cost to our economy
on road accidents in 2005 was R43 billion - notwithstanding the pain and
suffering of both victims and families.

Currently, of those who are caught committing a traffic offence: 17% of
drivers exceed set speed limits; 4,3% of drivers exceed the legal alcohol
limit; 28% of drivers disobey traffic signals; 2,3% of drivers do not have
legal driving licences; 15,6% of drivers transporting passengers do not
have a valid professional driving permit and 21,3% of vehicles stopped have
defective tyres.

These are figures based on those traffic offenders who have been brought to
book and yet there are many other traffic offenders who are not caught.
Currently, only 4% of prosecutable road offences are brought to court,
while only 17% of traffic fines are paid and this is a situation that
cannot continue and needs to be resolved.

Road offences are criminal acts and need to be dealt with harshly by our
courts. Many strategies have been implemented to help make our roads safer
and to enforce compliance with the rules of the road.

These have included the Arrive Alive Campaign; the Tourist Bus Accident
Package; Operation Juggernaut; the Patrol Vehicle Project and the 2001 Road
to Safety Strategy. We also have the Road Traffic Management Co-operation
Act, the Road Traffic Infringement Act and the Administrative Adjudication
of Road Traffic Offences Act. Yet, despite these strategies and statutes,
the level of noncompliance with these safety and regulatory measures
remains unacceptably high.

I have a number of news clipping with me to illustrate what so often
happens on our roads every day and I will read some of these headlines: “57
injured after bus crashes into car”; “Speeding blitz - 17 arrested in
Ekurhuleni”; “16-year-old drives motor cycle at 194 km/h”; “Bus slams into
petrol station” and “Soldiers, miner lose lives in head-on crash”.

We need to ask: if we have these various measures to enforce compliance
with the rules of the road, why then do we still see such an unacceptable
high number of accidents, casualties and fatalities?

There are a number of steps which have been taken to increase the level of
enforcement, such as the creation of a highway patrol of 120 vehicles, the
improvement in the training given to traffic officers, the establishment of
the Road Traffic Management Corporation and the National Traffic Call
Centre. Whilst steps have been taken to operationalise the RTMC, we need to
see faster progress, as the RTMC will play an important role in road
traffic law enforcement, road safety communication and education, road
traffic information and the implementation of the Administrative
Adjudication of the Road Traffic Offences Act. Part of the work of the RTMC
is to ensure more effective co-ordination of traffic authorities throughout
the country and we need to urge the RTMC to speed up this process. The
implementation of the Road Traffic Offences Act, which will start with a
points demerit pilot project to be implemented in Tshwane in January 2007
is most welcome.

This will result in motorists who commit a traffic offence having points
assigned to their driver’s licence. If a motorist accumulates 12 points,
this will result in the immediate suspension of his or her licence for 52
days. A motorist whose licence is suspended three times or more will have
their licence nullified and will have to go through the licence test
process from the beginning.

A motorist, for example, caught driving with an alcohol level above the
legal limit would have six points allocated against his or her licence. We
understand that this will be implemented throughout the country by 2008.
These are tough measures and we trust that the users of our roads will take
note that the breaking of traffic rules is not going to be tolerated.

Whilst a lot of work is being done through the use of speed traps to slow
down speeding motorists, we need to see more visible traffic enforcement.
According to a briefing, which the Portfolio Committee on Transport was
given on 30 August this year, the National Road Safety Strategy includes
the implementation of 1000 traffic checking roadblocks on a daily basis.
This will certainly send out a clear message that we are tough on law
enforcement and that traffic offenders will be brought to book.

We hope that this will be implemented as a matter of urgency. However, we
need to see more patrol vehicles on all roads. They must be at local,
provincial or national roads on a 24-hour basis. In this regard, we want to
call on the Minister of Transport to urgently declare traffic enforcement
an essential service.

Often at night one finds vehicles being driven at high speeds and vehicles
being driven by drunken drivers. Currently many of the offenders get away
with this because there are no traffic officers on the roads at night. It
is for this reason that by being declared an essential service, traffic
enforcement would be able to take place on a 24-hour basis.

In order to ensure that we can travel safely on our roads, we need visible
and effective law enforcement. This means that the necessary resources,
which include funds, need to be in place. The Department of Transport has
advised the Transport Committee that the necessary funds will be provided.
We trust that the Department together with National Treasury will ensure
that the necessary funds are indeed allocated. Whilst it is incumbent on
government to implement strategies to ensure compliance with the laws which
govern how motorists should travel on the country’s roads, it is equally
important that the users of the roads play their part as well. Too often we
see drivers of motor vehicles and motorcycles driving without number
plates.

Unroadworthy vehicles are often used to transport passengers, endangering
the lives of passengers and others. Drivers driving at excessive speeds and
under the influence of alcohol, pose a serious threat to the lives of
passengers and other users of the roads.

There are no special laws that allow for tow-truck operators to drive
through the red robots and at excessive speeds. Nor are there any special
laws which allow minibus taxi drivers to drive in emergency lanes and stop
wherever or whenever they want.

In 2005, 17 000 people were killed in road accidents, which is up from 14
000 in 2004. It is therefore time, I think, that every person in South
Africa who makes use of the roads, starts to obey the rules of the roads
and that they consider other person who use the roads as well.

If we all work together as users of our roads together with government, we
can make our roads safer. We can reduce unacceptably high number of
injuries and deaths attributed to road accidents.

And also, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee,
Jeremy Cronin, for giving us as members of the House an opportunity to
discuss this important issue. We in the ANC will support this resolution
before us. Thank you very much.

Mr B E PULE: Madam Speaker, Ian Phillips, the advisor to the Minister of
Transport had this to say, and I quote: “The Minister’s view is that we
really don’t need to debate these things anymore. Implementation is the
name of the game”. The UCDP subscribes to the philosophy that says
implementation should be the game.

South Africa is a leading country in road fatalities. This obviously poses
an onerous challenge on all road users - irrespective of the mode - to take
responsibility and act decisively in the quest of zero tolerance for
flouting road regulations. South Africa can no longer afford people who
just drink and drive because alcohol is one of the causes of these
fatalities, if not the greatest.

South Africa can no longer afford law-enforcement agencies such as traffic
officers who hide at certain places rather than patrolling and remaining
visible on the roads. That would definitely conscientise drivers to observe
traffic rules. Passengers must be conscientised that seatbelts are for
their own safety, and not for pleasing traffic officers. They seem to be
more afraid of traffic cops than death.

Heavy fines have to be imposed on defaulters, as a deterrent; otherwise the
government is spending more on road accidents than developing the poorest
of the poor who are being killed on these road accidents. I thank you.

Nk M D NXUMALO: Phini likaSomlomo wePhalamende, Malungu ahloniphekile
ePhalamende, zivakashi ezikhona eNdlini ...

USOMLOMO: Bengicabanga ukuthi sengiwuSomlomo ...

Nk M D NXUMALO: Somlomo ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Ms M D NXUMALO: Deputy Speaker of Parliament, hon Members of Parliament,
guests present in the House ...

The SPEAKER: The last time I checked I was still the Speaker ...

Ms M D NXUMALO: Madam Speaker ...]

... in his 2006 state of the nation address, the President stated that, and
I quote:


  South Africa needs more effective and efficient transportation systems,
  the integration of service delivery and infrastructure investment.


May I add that this call has become more urgent than ever before.

The latest statistics reveal that accidents lead to the loss of more than
17 000 lives, 7 000 permanently disabled people and 40 000 serious injuries
annually, as well as around R43 billion in costs to the state, communities
and individuals. With a situation like this, we will be able to reduce the
number of fatalities in our roads, which affect mostly women and children.

I would like to highlight some of the causes of road accidents, and speed
is one of the causes. We should know by now that speed kills. Drivers must
adhere to speed limits. Other causes are unroadworthy vehicles; attitude of
drivers; drunken driving; use of cellphones while driving; fatigue;
noncompliance with the road signs; pedestrians walking on freeways or
highways; our roads not being designed for cyclists and pedestrians; no
sidewalks, especially in our townships; and no respect for pedestrian
crossings.

We should introduce a point system where we reward those motorists in their
early 20s and late 30s, who have annual unbroken records of not speeding,
as well as those from early 40s to early 50s. The incentives can range from
recording the names of such motorists, truck drivers, taxi drivers, etc on
a national database. Special categories of awards can created with the help
of insurance companies to incentivise such motorists.

There are laws that have been passed by this House, and amongst them are
the following: Road Traffic Management Co-operation Act, which seeks to
provide for co-operative and co-ordinated planning and provision of advice,
regulation, facilitation and law enforcement in respect of road traffic
matters; and the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act,
which seeks to provide for a points demerit system and the suspension of
driving licences of repeat traffic offenders. This Act has not been rolled
out yet.

The following aspects should be attended to urgently. We need to ensure
that the speed limit on our roads is adhered to: 120 km per hour on
freeways and mainly 60 km per hour in the built environment. There should
be constant checking of unroadworthy vehicles, especially buses and taxis
that carry our people to and from their destinations. Drivers should
practise patience on our roads to avoid road rage and unnecessary loss of
life. Drivers must not drink and drive. Drivers must rest after every two
hours of driving, as fatigue contributes to most of the accidents.

Noncompliance with road signs is a serious offence and harsh penalties must
accompany such offences. No pedestrians must be allowed to walk on
highways. The designated areas for pedestrians and cyclists must be
incorporated into our road planning, and township planning must ensure that
there are sidewalks so that the pedestrians and vehicles will not fight for
space on the roads.

On our roads, some drivers do not respect areas designated for pedestrians,
therefore law-enforcement agencies must ensure heavy penalties against
those who commit violations against pedestrians. When people occupy the
land, legally and illegally, it affects proper planning and they tend to
cross busy highways without due regard for their own safety. Quick
upgrading of road safety mechanisms can prevent such accidents. We need
education on road safety in our schools and this must be incorporated in
the school curriculum. Our road safety departments in municipalities must
take the lead in this regard.

At home, children must be educated about the dangers of playing on the
streets without regard for their safety. Our parliamentary constituency
offices must play a major role in educating the communities through a
number of creative initiatives on road safety. Law-enforcement agencies
must, therefore, ensure that the laws of this country are adhered to.
Strict enforcement of the laws is evident in KwaZulu-Natal. Lastly, one
life lost is one too many. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ngiyabonga, Phini likaSomlomo. [Ihlombe.]

USOMLOMO: Hhayi, ungibelesele umhlonishwa uNxumalo ngokubiza ngePhini
likaSomlomo namhlanje. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Well, the hon Nxumalo is keen on repeatedly addressing me as
the Deputy Speaker today.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year there were 14 000 road
fatalities, 40% of road deaths are pedestrians and road deaths are the
major cause of unnatural deaths in children under the age of 15. These
facts are a harsh reality, and if that is not enough, then the fact that
road accidents cost government R42 billion a year is a serious motivation
for road safety in South Africa. We thank the hon Cronin for bringing these
statistics to our attention.

The situation on our roads is terrible and it needs to be addressed
immediately. However, this should not just address transport shortcomings,
but, as noted in Johannesburg, Pretoria and Durban, pedestrians have a
terrible habit of walking in the road and persistently refuse to walk on
the pavements.

Many road accidents and pedestrian deaths are caused by these pedestrians
who ignorantly choose to share the road with commuters. The MF believes
that legislation should be drafted making this behaviour illegal with a
penance of a fine for walking in roads.

Since South Africa is in the grip of 2010 fever, the clean-up of our roads
in view of these statistics that the hon Cronin so wisely likened with war
killings should definitely stir enthusiasm for transformation. However, the
MF believes that the motivation should not be 2010, but the responsibility
to maintain safer roads for all. I thank you.

Mnr M I MOSS: Mev die Speaker, Adjunkminister, kollegas en vriende, dit is
vir my ’n groot voorreg en eer om aan vandag se uiters belangrike debat oor
padveiligheid in Suid-Afrika deel te neem. As ’n slagoffer van die
onaanvaarbaar hoë aantal ongelukke wat jaarliks op ons paaie plaasvind,
beskou ek myself as gekwalifiseerd genoeg om oor hierdie onderwerp te
praat.

Suid-Afrika se padsterftesyfer was verlede jaar meer as 17 000 en dit is
een van die hoogstes in die wêreld. Hierdie onaanvaarbaar hoë
padsterftesyfer het ’n baie nadelige uitwerking op die Suid-Afrikaanse
samelewing as geheel. Ek gaan ’n meer persoonlike weergawe gee van hoe my
ongeluk my persoonlik geraak het.

Die 11de November 1993 was ’n dag wat ek nooit sal vergeet nie. Op die
jeugdige ouderdom van 33 jaar het my hele lewe drasties verander. Ek was
die organiseerder van die ANC aan die Weskus toe ek in ’n ernstige
motorongeluk betrokke was. Ek is sedertdien ’n kwadrupleeg en permanent
gestremd. Volgens die dokter was ek gelukkig om die ongeluk te oorleef.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M I MOSS: Madam Speaker, Deputy Minister, colleagues and friends, it is
a great privilege and honour for me to participate in today’s extremely
important debate on road safety in South Africa. As a victim of the
unacceptably high number of such accidents that occur on our roads
annually, I consider myself sufficiently qualified to talk on this topic.

South Africa’s road fatality figure was more than 17 000 last year and that
is one of the highest worldwide. This unacceptably high fatality rate has
an extremely negative impact on South African society as a whole. I shall
give a more personal account of how my accident has affected me personally.

The 11th of November 1993 was a day I shall never forget. At the youthful
age of 33 my entire life changed drastically. I was the organiser of the
ANC along the West Coast, when I was involved in a serious motor accident.
Since then I have been a quadriplegic and am permanently disabled.
According to the doctor I was lucky to survive the accident.]

Dr Wendy Watson, Chief Director: Road Transport Regulation of the
Department of Transport, recently made a presentation to the Portfolio
Committee on Transport. Her revelations on road safety challenges in South
Africa were shocking and moving. She says that last year alone accidents on
our roads cost South Africans R43 billion. An average of 38 deaths, 21
disabling injuries and 21 serious injuries take place in our country every
day.

Every year 20 000 families are going through the immeasurable pain and
suffering by having a member killed or disabled due to accidents. Due to
the motor accident of 12 years and 10 months ago, I became part of the
above statistics. I am permanently bound to a wheelchair. My life has
changed vastly and I am left with very limited physical use and control of
myself. There are so many things I cannot do for myself and I depend on
other people to do most things for me - simple things that many people take
for granted.

My hands and legs don’t work and I have no feeling or sensation in my body
from my chest down. I cannot sit on my own and cannot stand at all. I
cannot dress or undress. To get washed, whether it’s in a shower or in a
bath, I need 100% assistance. I can only eat or brush my teeth on my own by
putting devices in my hands. Even getting to bed or turning from a position
of sleeping on my back to my stomach or my side, I need help. This is all
because I was injured in a motor vehicle accident.

If we as South Africans are not serious about road safety, which seems to
be the case, serious accidents in which increasing numbers of people will
become disabled and die on our roads will become part and parcel of our
lives. We simply have to prevent it.

Ek is ook nie die eerste Lid van die Parlement wat ’n slagoffer is van
padongelukke nie. Daar sit die agb Mzondeki en Vincent Gore wat vanuit sy
sitplek moet praat omdat hy weens ’n ongeluk nie van hier voor af kan praat
nie. Daar sit Roseberry Sonto en David Dlali, wat permanent krukke nodig
het om oor die weg te kom.

Aan my linkerkant is daar die agb Stuart Farrow, ook ’n aktiewe lid van die
Portefeuljekomitee oor Vervoer, wat baie besorg is oor padveiligheid. Hy
loop met ’n effense gebrek as gevolg van ’n ongeluk wat hy 20 jaar gelede
opgedoen het.

Nog ’n lid, Roy Jankielsohn, ook ’n Lid van die Parlement, wat twee jaar
gelede so ernstig beseer is dat hy in ’n koma was, is egter van die
gelukkiges, want hy het noemenswaardig van sy beserings herstel.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I am also not the first Member of Parliament to become the victim of a
road accident. There is the hon Mzondeki and Vincent Gore who has to speak
from his seat because he cannot speak from the front here, due to his
accident. There is Roseberry Sonto and David Dlali, who permanently need
crutches to get about.

On my left there is the hon Stuart Farrow, also an active member of the
Portfolio Committee on Transport, who is very concerned about road safety.
He walks with a slight disability as a result of an accident he suffered 20
years ago.

Another member, Roy Jankielsohn, also a Member of Parliament, who was
injured so seriously two years ago that he was in a coma, is one of the
fortunate ones, however, because he recovered significantly from his
injuries.]

I do not think we always realise the importance of road safety in our
country. The people mentioned above did not attempt or were not committing
suicide. They were either drivers or passengers and the accidents in which
they were involved were not deliberate either. Whether they were driving
fast or slow, under the influence of alcohol or not, or driving on a
slippery, wet or bad road, the bottom line is that the accidents could have
been avoided.

When I recovered to my full senses in hospital after having been in a coma
after my accident, the doctor gave me tips I shall remember for the rest of
my life. The doctor told me that since I did not have my seatbelt on at the
time of my accident, in future when I get into a motorcar, I should ask the
driver to buckle me up first and then fasten his own seatbelt.

Whether my accident happened because I did not have my seatbelt on or not,
or in the case of other accidents where it was because of speed, alcohol,
conditions of the road or whatever the case may be, road accidents are
human and they can and should be avoided. We need to strive for the first
prize, to strive for road safety at all times.

Die omstandighede van my ongeluk en wat gebeur het, is nog neutvars in my
geheue. So teen die middag van die 11de November 13 jaar gelede het ek en
my vriend Leonard Barnes, ’n vrywillige werker van die ANC, vanaf
Lambertsbaai na Doringbaai gery. ’n Paar kilometer buite Lambertsbaai op ’n
private grondpad sou ek die laaste keer ’n motor bestuur.
Die ongeluk het skielik gebeur. Die een oomblik het ek nog die motor
bestuur en die volgende oomblik het ek op die naat van my rug gelê. Al wat
ek kan onthou, is hoe ek vir my kameraad sê: “Leonard, my nek is seer.”

Die rugmurg tussen my vyfde en sesde nekwerwel is totaal morsaf gebreek.
Die besering was só ernstig dat ek per helikopter na die hospitaal vervoer
moes word. Dit het my nege maande geneem om te genees en gerehabiliteer te
word.

In hierdie tyd moes ek vir die eerste keer in my lewe gaan stem, en ek kon
nie. Iemand anders moes namens my ’n kruisie trek, want ek het die gebruik
van my hande in die ongeluk permanent verloor. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follow.)

[The circumstances surrounding my accident and what transpired, are still
perfectly fresh in my memory. Around the afternoon of the 11th of November
13 years ago, my friend, Leonard Barnes, a volunteer worker of the ANC and
I, drove from Lamberts Bay to Doring Bay. A few kilometres outside Lamberts
Bay on a private gravel road I would drive a car for the last time.

The accident happened suddenly. One moment I was still driving the car and
the next I lay flat on my back. All I can remember is how I told my
comrade, “Leonard, my neck is sore.”

The spinal cord between my fifth and sixth vertebrae had been completely
severed. The injury was so serious that I had to be transported to the
hospital by helicopter. It took me nine months to heal and to be
rehabilitated.

In this time I had to go and vote for the first time in my life, and I
could not. Someone else had to make the cross on my behalf, because I had
permanently lost the use of my hands in the accident.]

Dr Watson also pointed out to the portfolio committee that as South
Africans we are faced with many serious challenges when it comes to road
safety. She said that we are regarded as a noncompliant society with no
respect for the law. Alcohol abuse and speed are amongst the main causes of
accidents. Law enforcement is inadequate and of the thousands of motorists
who are fined, the fine collection is only 17%.

Fraud and corruption are very prevalent in the transport industry,
according to her. There is also a critical need for better co-ordination
between the three tiers of government. The speed limits in the urban areas
are too high for pedestrians, hence the high tally of pedestrian deaths.

One can also at long last say that the government is now beginning to take
the issue of transport safety more seriously. Progressive road safety
campaigns such as Arrive Alive are only some of the campaigns that have
been implemented in the past. A two-day transport lekgotla was held at
Tshwane and will be followed by three more conferences, which will end with
the Third Annual African Road Safety Conference on 31 October and 1
November at Kayalami.

The account I was trying to sketch to members tried to illustrate the
importance of road safety. The suffering that you have to go through, at
times is to such an extent that you wish it hadn’t happened to you. But, as
speakers before me have said: all people are potential victims of road
accidents because it does not only depend on you as a driver or as a
passenger with a driver who knows how to drive, but you get those unruly
elements on our roads who don’t care a damn whether you are a law-abiding
citizen or not. These are the facts that we have to imprint on the drivers
on our roads. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms N M MDAKA: Chairperson, hon members, this debate came coincidentally
while the nation is debating gains and losses arising from the enactment of
the Road Accident Fund Act 19 of 2005, which came into effect in January
this year. It is my view that we must now shift the focus and start looking
at how best it is for us to prevent the causes of injuries and fatal
deaths, which are inevitable accidents.

I must voice my grave concerns. Not a day passes without the media
reporting the news that a taxi has been involved in an accident. Maybe the
Minister of Transport should consider a regulating law that will enable
these minibuses to have their special lane, at least in metropolitan
cities. The department should consider regulating truck drivers and long
distance transport to take a pause in between their journeys because this
is too much.

Although the campaign by Arrive Alive is well appreciated, it is
regrettable that few of our drivers voluntarily listen to these calls.
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, everyone agrees when evaluating the statistics
relating to deaths on our roads as a result of motor vehicle accidents that
the number of people dying on our roads is unacceptably high, especially
during Easter and the December holidays.

According to the Road Safety Strategy, the main contributors to road
accidents are: driver factors, 80%; vehicle factors about 15% of cases and
road environment, 5% of cases. When we examine the number of accidents
involving minibus taxis, the trend is very disturbing. Many of us driving
to Parliament experience the gross violation of traffic rules by especially
minibus taxis on a daily basis. Most of the time there is no or very little
law enforcement. Traffic officers must be visible every day on our national
roads, especially during peak hours.

We welcome the sponsorship of 20 vehicles by OUTsurance to enhance safety
on our roads.

Finally, speeding is a punishable offence. The maximum penalty could be
death. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J P CRONIN: Chairperson, hon members, first of all, I just want to say
that the Minister has apologised for not being present. He would very much
like to have participated in this debate.

I would like to thank all of the speakers who took part in this debate for
their constructive words and also wise inputs – wise without exception. In
particular, obviously, the very moving inputs made by the hon Gore and hon
Maxwell Moss who reminded us as we reeled off grim statistics that we are
not just talking about statistics – we are talking about human beings and
real human suffering.

In Parliament, I think, we sometimes earn perhaps the unjustified
reputation of being quarrelsome and more interested in scoring points
against each other around sometimes silly matters - the politics of
politicians and not the politics of the real issues that are affecting
millions and millions of people out there. And so, I would, particularly,
like to thank the tone and quality of the inputs that we’ve received from
all participants in this debate.

When we behave like politicians, in the narrow sense of the word, we
reinforce the cynicism, which I think often lies at the heart of the very
problem that we’re dealing with when it comes to safety on our roads - the
kind of cynicism and scepticism about authority and responsibility. Make no
mistake that this is an issue that the public expects us public
representatives to take very seriously and to ensure that we do something
about.

Why have we seen this increase - quite a dramatic increase in the last
years? It has a lot to do with an increase in the number of cars. Last
month 35 000 new cars got onto our roads – that has to be a factor, and it
underlines why it’s so important to get our public transport right so that
there will not be so many cars on the road.

We must be careful not to undermine or dismiss what has been tried in the
past. Arrive Alive has indeed been an important campaign. But it is
essentially an education campaign. There’s hardly anyone in South Africa
who doesn’t know now that speed kills, we should buckle up and shouldn’t
drink and drive. But out there, there’s a hard core of some 15% to 20% of
drivers who hear, but are just not listening and are not prepared to
listen. Therefore, what now has to be done can be summarised in three
words: It’s enforcement, implementation and enforcement.

When it comes to implementation, there have been problems. For instance,
here in Parliament, the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic
Offences Act was passed in 1998. That has still not been implemented. One
of the key reasons for the failure to implement is this confusion between
the municipal, provincial and national spheres. The Constitution says
traffic enforcement is basically a provincial and local competency. That’s
important but we can’t now allow turf battles to undermine effective
implementation. I think it’s absolutely important that we send from
Parliament a strong message in that direction.

We also need public support. Some measures would be firm but we need to
understand the importance thereof. The Bill of Rights says:

  Everyone has the right to life.
  Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity
  respected ...
  Everyone has the right to freedom of movement.

Let’s make that inspiring vision something that actually applies on our
roads every single day. Let’s work together to make a serious impact on
road safety in South Africa. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

 CENSURING OF THE FORMER MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY FOR MISLEADING THE
                  PUBLIC ON THE DAMAGE TO THE KOEBERG UNIT
                             (Draft Resolution)

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, on the eve of the local government elections
held on 1 March 2006, the hon Minister Alec Erwin made a statement that
South Africa understood to indicate that a major national security
flashpoint was sabotaged.

In turn, the hon Minister Lindiwe Hendricks went a step further saying that
``clearly, other forces were at play’’ and that there was ``... growing
evidence of a linkage of some of these events to resistance to the
transformation drive by the government’’.

Government Ministers have no business misleading the public at a time as
crucial as an election. In any other democracy, such action by members of
the Cabinet would lead to voluntary resignation or in fact their dismissal.

Despite the reports of the Nuclear Energy Regulator as well as any other
reports on the incident, no evidence of any sabotage nor in particular that
these events originated from ``resistance to the transformation drive by
the government’’ was found, in fact quite the opposite.

It is unfortunate that the hon Minister has shown no grasp of the
seriousness of making a misleading statement pertaining to a breach of
security at a major national security flashpoint on the eve of an event as
important to the calendar of a democratic country as a country-wide
election.

The hon Minister has had ample opportunity to apologise to the people of
South Africa for having made the misleading statements but has failed to do
so.

Cabinet Ministers are entrusted with running our nation. Under no
circumstances can we condone their misuse of issues of national security
that affect millions of people for narrow party-political purposes. Due to
the shutdown of the Koeberg number 1 power unit, businesses in Cape Town
have suffered damages close to a billion rand.

It is therefore in the public interest that responsible parties are held to
account, as this will help prevent this situation re-occurring, whether it
is in the case of electricity provision or any other sector.

It has become all the more imperative that an independent commission of
inquiry be appointed now that the hon Minister of Public Enterprises and
the hon former Minister of Minerals and Energy, Lindiwe Hendricks, have
discredited themselves in the public eye by making frivolous claims that
the Koeberg problems were the result of sabotage.

So far, neither of the hon Ministers have been willing to take any
responsibility for the shortage of electricity generation and distribution
capacity in South Africa.

Instead, government has tried to soft-pedal South Africa’s shortages. In
March 2006, Members of Parliament were informed that South Africa does not
face a national crisis, but were merely in a ``tight spot’’.

I therefore call upon this House to take steps to censure the hon Minister
Lindiwe Hendricks for misleading the public on the eve of the local
government elections. I thank you, Chairperson.

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Sihlalo, malungu  ahloniphekile  esishayamthetho,  maqabane
... [Chairperson, hon. members of the House, comrades ...]

... let me start by making a differentiation here  between  the  public  eye
and the DA’s eye. The hon Schmidt’s generalisation  about  the  public  eye,
meaning their eyes, is confusing but it’s okay.

Kusukela   ngenyanga   kaLwezi   kuya   kuZibandlela   nyakenye,   kudlulele
nakuNhlolanja kulo nyaka,  kwaba  nokucisha  kukagesi  izikhathi  ezimbalwa.
Lezi zehlakalo yizinto  ezaphatha  kabi  isizwe  sonkana,  bheka  nje  ngoba
iKomiti Lezokumbiwa  phansi  Namandla  laze  labiza  umhlangano  nenhlangano
ephehla futhi iphake  ugesi,  u-Eskom.  Lezi  zinhlaka  zombili  zaludingida
kabanzi lolu daba.

Khona manjalo owayenguNgqongqoshe ngaleso sikhathi, uNkk Lindiwe  Hendricks,
wathintana  nabelul  eki  bakhe  ngalolu   daba,   wayesebeka   uvo   lwakhe
kubacosheli bezindaba. UNgqongqoshe  wakubeka  ukuthi  wayeselumene  indlebe
nabeluleki boMnyango nokuthi kukhona amahlongandlebe ayedala  ukuphazamiseka
kukagesi. Wakubeka nokuthi  uphiko  lobunhloli  bezwe  kanye  nolwamaphoyisa
lwalululandela lolu daba. Waqhuba wathi izigilamkhuba  ziyoyikhotha  imbenge
yomile, futhi lezo zichwensi zazisebenzela ubumnyama  ngezenzo  zazo,  kanti
nezenzo zazo azihambisani noguquko olusekelwe phezu kwentando yeningi.

Sihlalo,  ngiyehluleka-ke  ukuthola  ukuthi  yini-ke  lena   eyenza   ilungu
elihloniphekile uMnu Schmidt athi uNgqongqoshe akakhombisanga  buqotho  kule
Ndlu, nasesizweni. Empeleni, kuliqiniso elimsulwa  ukuthi  kukhona  abathile
asebebhekene ngqo nengalo yomthetho ngaleso senzo. UNgqongqoshe  wenza  into
esisizile   yokwembula   ikhasi   ebelihlanekezelwe.   Ngabe   leli    lungu
elihloniphekile  lalifuna  uNgqongqoshe  asonge  izandla  yini  kodwa   kube
konakala? Ngabe lalifisa ukuthi kube yilo yini elicebisa uNgqongqoshe  ngale
mpicabadala na?

UNgqongqoshe wakhombisa  ubuholi  obuqotho  nobunombono-ngqangi  ngomsebenzi
wakhe. Kungephikwe ukuthi uNgqongqoshe akasona  isanusi,  wayengeke  aphonse
amathambo   aqagule   amagama   nezibongo,   amapasi   nezipesheli    zalawa
mahlongandlebe.  Pho-ke  yini  lena  eyenza  ukuthi  namhlanje  leli   lungu
elihloniphekile lifune ukuthi thina sidingide  insumansumane  emini  kwabha?
Kungabe lokhu kukhombisa ukuthi  sekuphele  izinto  eziphusile  esingazixoxa
na? Ingabe leli lungu elihloniphekile neqembu lalo bazama  ukuzuza  amaphuzu
kwezombusazwe na?
Ngakolunye uhlangothi, singalixolela leli lungu ngoba umbuso wethu  ulawulwa
ngentando yeningi. Sazabalaza silwela uhlelo  olunje  ukuze  sikhulule  nabo
abafana naleli  lungu,  ababebhema  shungwini  linye  nombuso  wobandlululo.
Sasenzela ukuthi uwonkewonke akwazi ukubeka  uvo  lwakhe,  kungakhathalekile
ukuthi luphusile yini noma cha.

Ukuba  mina  bengiyileli  lungu,  bengizothi  asixoxe  ngobumnandi  bentando
yeningi ngoba kumnandi ukuphila ngaphansi kwentando yeningi, hhayi le  mbude
esiyixoxayo.  Nokungenadosi  sekuyatinyela,  ngimfunge   uDingiswayo!   Goba
msenge, zikudle izimbuzi!

Kunezinselelo ezinkulu esibhekene nazo kule mboni kagesi. Okuyikhona  engabe
sixoxa ngakho ukufakelwa kukagesi ezindaweni esiphuma kuzo.  Isizwe  sakithi
sikhathazekile ngokuthi, okokuqala,  siwuthola  kanjani  ugesi;  okwesibili,
yehliswa kanjani intengo yawo; okwesithathu, siqinisekisa kanjani ukuthi  lo
gesi esinawo emakhaya useqophelweni eliphezulu?

Muva  nje  sikhuluma  nabomasipala,  ikakhulukazi  labo   bezifunda,   ukuze
bahlangatshezwe ekutholakaleni kukagesi. NgoLwesihlanu lolu  esiphuma  kulo,
ngenkathi iPhalamende  Labantu  lihlangane  eTsoreni  litshelwe  wumphakathi
ngezinkinga  ohlangabezana  nazo   ngogesi.   Kuleziya   zinkumbi   zabantu,
bengebaningi ungathi uZulu eya eMakheni, akukho  ngisho  namunye  oke  wathi
kunenkinga yokungabi qotho kwalowo owayenguNgqongqoshe walo  Mnyango.  Nina-
ke beqembu le-DA niwuthathaphi  lo  mqondo  omfishane  kangaka?  Niyazihlaza
njengeqembu futhi nihlaza neSishayamthetho sethu. Nenza umphakathi  ucabange
ukuthi sonke sifana nani, kube sengathi asazi ukuthi ziyini izidingo zawo.

Ngisho noma ngabe useMutale, e Shingwedzi, useKgalagadi noma use-O R  Tambo,
eMkhanyakude, eKangala, eMotlosana, eThabo Mofutsanyane, Ekurhuleni  nalapho
siphuma khona eTsoreni, abantu bafuna lezi  zinto  esizibalayo  Njengombutho
Wesizwe,  hhayi  lezi  zakwenu  kwa-DA.   Sinabantu   kulo   mbutho   wethu,
uKhongolose, abakwazi  ukubona  into  ingakenzeki.  Lokho-ke  kuchaza  khona
ukuba nombonongqangi, njengobuholi bombutho.

Ubuqotho bukaNgqongqoshe abungatshazwa, nalapho esekhona  njengamanje  wenza
siziqhayise  ngaye.  Ngifaka  inselelo  elungwini  elihloniphekile  leKomiti
lethu lezokuMbiwa phansi naMandla  ukuthi  kokuzayo  lifake  ingxoxo  eyenza
isizwe  siye  phambili,  lingazenzi  inhlekisa   njengozakwabo   umhlonishwa
uGibson,   osedumile   nokho   ngokuba    yinhlekisa.    Kodwa    unelungelo
elikuMthethosisekelo  lokusho   noma   yini,   ngisho   nokunomqondo   kanye
nokungenawo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Between November and December last year, and also in  February  this  year,
there were several blackouts. These incidents disturbed  the  whole  nation.
The minerals and energy committee called a meeting  with  Eskom.  And  these
two structures had a long discussion about this issue.
The then Minister of Minerals and Energy, Mrs Lindiwe  Hendricks,  consulted
her advisers concerning this issue and she made the statement to the  media.
The  Minister  made  it  clear  that  she  consulted  the  advisers  of  the
department  and  that  there  were  people  who  were  tampering  with   the
electricity supply. She also said that the National Intelligence Agency  and
the SA Police Service were investigating this issue.  She  went  on  to  say
that the perpetrators would face the consequences and that their  acts  were
not in line with changes entrenched in democracy.

Chairperson, I fail to understand what makes the  hon  member,  Mr  Schmidt,
say that the Minister was not honest with  this  House  and  the  nation  at
large. In fact, the truth of the matter is that there  are  people  who  are
currently facing the law with regard to  these  actions.  The  Minister  did
something that helped us and she corrected  the  misinformation.  Does  this
hon member want the Minister to fold her arms while things are getting  bad?
Does the member want to advise the Minister about this riddle?

The Minister demonstrated honesty and vision in her job. We cannot deny  the
fact that the Minister  is  not  a  sangoma;  she  therefore  could  not  be
expected to throw the bones around and foretell the names and  addresses  of
the perpetrators. What is it then that makes this  hon  member  want  us  to
discuss the fairytale in broad daylight? Does this mean that we are  running
short of things to be discussed? Are this hon member and  his  party  trying
to score political points?
On the other hand, we can forgive this hon member because our government  is
democratic. We fought for this kind  of  governance  so  as  to  free  those
people who were singing the same tune with the  apartheid  government,  like
this hon member. We  fought  so  that  everyone  can  express  her  opinion,
regardless of whether that opinion makes sense or not.

If I were this hon member, I was going to say let us talk about the joys  of
democracy because it is nice to live in a  democracy,  and  not  leave  this
nonsense that we are  talking  about  now.  Even  the  least  dangerous  now
pretends to be dangerous. I swear by  King  Dingiswayo!  Things  have  since
changed for the worse!

There are many challenges that are facing the electricity industry. What  we
are supposed to talk about is the supply of electricity in places  where  we
come from. The people are worried, firstly, about how  to  get  electricity;
secondly, about how to decrease the electricity price  and,  thirdly,  about
the quality of the electricity that they get.

We are  currently  talking  to  municipalities,  particularly  the  district
municipalities, so as to  meet  them  halfway  with  regard  to  electricity
supply. Last Friday when the People’s Parliament had a sitting  in  Tsoreni,
we were told about the problems that the community encounters in  connection
with electricity. Out of the many people who were there –  as  many  as  the
Zulus on their way to Makheni – not even one  person  complained  about  the
dishonesty of the former Minister of  this  department.  And  where  do  you
people from the DA get this crazy idea from?  You  bring  disgrace  to  your
party and the National Assembly. You make the community think  that  we  are
all like you and we don’t know their needs.

Whether they are in Mutale, Shingwedzi, Kgalagadi, O R  Tambo,  Mkhanyakude,
Kangala, Motlosana, Thabo Mofutsanyane, Ekurhuleni or even Tsoreni  –  where
we have just been – people want  these  services  that  we  as  the  African
National Congress mention when we talk about governing the country, not  the
ones that the DA mentions.  We  have  people  in  this  party,  the  African
National Congress, who can foresee things. That means we have  a  vision  as
the leadership of the party.

We don’t doubt the leadership of the Minister; even where she is today,  she
makes us proud of her. I am challenging the  hon  member  of  the  Portfolio
Committee on Minerals and Energy to raise the  issues  that  will  take  the
nation forward, and not make fun of himself  like  his  colleague,  the  hon
Gibson, who is now a laughing  stock.  He,  however,  has  a  constitutional
right to say whatever he likes regardless  of  whether  it  makes  sense  or
not.]

We  note  with  sadness  the  disgraceful  nature  of  the  DA.  Instead  of
addressing issues of creating jobs and fighting poverty, they  are  studying
newspapers and  formulating  policy  positions  -  what  a  shallow  way  of
circulating ideas.
They have developed  a  trend  of  being  economical  with  the  truth.  For
instance, it has been proven that they never raised a question on the  issue
of the President’s residence with the Department of Public Works. They  were
once more found wanting on Madam Speaker’s integrity  to  the  nation.  They
are now targeting Minister Hendricks on an issue which is a  nonstarter.  If
the opposition continues to demonstrate  such  lack  of  depth,  then  South
Africa literally has no opposition. Your preoccupation with playing  to  the
gallery has no substance, to say the least. [Interjections.] We urge the  DA
to start taking this House seriously and not bring all nonsense forward  for
a flimsy debate.

We will continue to meet targets of development as set out by the  programme
of the ANC-led government. On this, we will not be detracted,  even  by  the
whingers there. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, the reasons surrounding the power shortages that
caused so much destruction to the lives of people in the Western Cape, have
created heated debate and much speculation. We have heard many theories
including one about sabotage, but the only actual evidence that we were
presented with, before the report of the National Energy Regulator of SA,
was that of a bolt which caused damage to the generator at Koeberg.

All this speculation is understandable, though, considering the role that
the electricity plays in our everyday lives and the fact that we do not
want to experience a repeat of this unfortunate incident. We, in the IFP,
do however, believe that the lack of time and communication by the relevant
authorities about the power shortages, as well as certain members of
government making unsubstantiated claims, have contributed to people
speculating unnecessarily about the situation and inventing their own
theories about how and why the blackouts were caused.

The real reason for the power shortages, were made known in the report by
the National Energy Regulator of SA, which conducted an investigation into
this serious matter. It was reported that the former Minister of Minerals
and Energy, Mrs Lindiwe Hendricks, stated that the power shortages could
not just be linked to inadequate transmission or generation capacity and
that they curiously coincided with an important process in the democratic
calendar.

What I know concerning this was the extent of the hon Minister’s comments
about this matter on 28 February 2006. Although the Minister might have
made some veiled suggestions, we do not believe that they were intended to
mislead the public. The most important issue is to ensure that we do not
have to repeat this whole debacle and that the report of Nersa is taken
into consideration, so that we can correct the problems that led to the
blackouts and ensure that a similar situation does not develop again in the
future. I thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, the ID finds all of this completely absurd. We
would like to know why Parliament’s time has to be continually used up to
settle scores between these two parties when all that is actually required
is a simple apology.

The parliamentary events of the last few weeks could have all been avoided
if the ANC and the DA could just learn to apologise when they have made a
mistake. Instead, we have to consider censuring the Minister and setting up
ad hoc committees to ascertain whether Ministers are sabotaged or not.
Minister Erwin, you said it, it’s on tape, get over it and simply
apologise. Hon Gibson, you made an error in judgment by invading the
President’s residence - apologise and let us move on.

It is no wonder that politicians have such a bad reputation. What all the
public sees is the constant squirming and spinning, when they just need to
admit wrongdoing and apologise.

Everyone knows that the money received by the ANC in Oilgate was wrongly
acquired, so give the money back. Everyone knows that the DA is being
hypocritical by not giving Kebble’s money back, but it still wants to use
spin instead of concrete actions. Can we please end this cycle of
schoolyard antics and show South Africa some real leadership? Can we please
concentrate on the real issues such as how we compensate businesses that
went bankrupt because of these power outages? Those are the kinds of
discussions the public is really interested in. I thank you.
[Interjections.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP does not see the necessity of
appointing an ad hoc committee for a matter that is of such absolute
clarity, that it requires no investigation. Let us indulge consciously in
the exploration of semantics, but let the matter be resolved without
further delay. The hon Minister Erwin publicly used the words ...
[Interjection.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon member please
take your seat! I think you are in the wrong debate. This is not the one
setting up the committee. Do you want to continue on this one?

Mr H B CUPIDO: OK. Thank you, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please, proceed hon member.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, on the other one, it is the view of the ACDP
that the hon Ms Lindiwe Hendricks, erred in making public statements that
could not be backed up with evidence. We are further of the opinion that,
making such a statement on the eve of the local government elections was
not within the bounds of the required levels of responsibility. At a time
when households were thrown into disarray by the electricity blackouts,
entire communities and even hospital patients were being affected, it was
entirely inappropriate to attempt to extract political gain from the
situation. The ACDP would welcome an apology from the hon Ms Hendricks.
Thank you.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, op die vooraand van verkiesings word baie
dinge gesê. Die agb leier van die DA is byvoorbeeld bekend vir sy uitsprake
voor elke verkiesing, dat die DA gereed is om die ANC te klop. Of dat slegs
die DA groot genoeg is om die ANC aan te vat. Die waarheid is dat die DA
nie groot genoeg is nie en ongelukkig nie die ANC op sy eie kan keer nie.
In Kaapstad en George kon hy dit wel doen, maar met die VF Plus se steun –
maar nie op sy eie nie. Moet die agb DA-leier daarvoor gesensureer word?
Moet die Parlement na die verkiesing eis dat die DA-leier in die openbaar
om verskoning vra vir die soveelste misleiding? Is die uitsprake nie maar
net verkoopspraatjies of “puffing” soos dit in die regswêreld genoem word
nie? Miskien.

Miskien het die destydse Minister van Minerale en Energie ook net
verkoopspraatjies gemaak toe sy die wêreld vertel het dat die probleme by
Koeberg veroorsaak is deur mense wat transformasie teenstaan. Miskien was
dit net verkoopspraatjies wat veroorsaak het dat elke Eskomwerker wat by
Koeberg werk, vir ses maande lank ’n terreur en sabotasieverdagte was. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, many things are said on the eve of
elections. The hon leader of the DA is, for example, is known for his
pronouncements before each election that the DA is ready to beat the ANC.
Or that only the DA is big enough to take on the ANC. The truth is that the
DA is not big enough and unfortunately cannot stop the ANC on its own. It
could do so in Cape Town and George, with the support of the FF Plus – but
not on its own. Should the hon DA leader be censured because of it? Should
Parliament, after the election, demand that the DA leader publicly
apologise for misleading it for the umpteenth time? Are the pronouncements
not just sales talk or “puffing” as it is called in the legal world?
Perhaps.

Perhaps the then Minister of Minerals and Energy was also just engaging in
sales talk when she told the world that the problems at Koeberg were caused
by people opposed to transformation. Perhaps it was only sales talk that
caused each and every Eskom employee who works for Koeberg to be a terror
and sabotage suspect for six months. [Time expired.]]

Mnr J J M STEPHENS: Mnr die Voorsitter, ek moet darem sê, in elke
verkiesing het die DA in werklikheid die ANC aangevat en damn goed gedoen
ook op baie plekke. Maar daar is darem ’n groot verskil tussen om ’n
voorspelling te waag oor die uitslag van ’n verkiesing en om werklike feite
nie korrek weer te gee nie. Daar is ’n baie groot verskil. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr J J M STEPHENS: Mr Chairperson, I must just say that in every election,
the DA has in reality taken on the ANC and done damn well in many places.
But there is actually a big difference between risking a forecast about the
results of an election and not conveying the correct facts. There is a very
big difference.]

Hon Mthethwa, I must really say that I am astounded by your lack of
comprehension of what democracy really is. You say that you fought for it.
I am afraid, you fought for something that you don’t understand.
[Interjections.] I am really sorry. Your grasp of the basic idea of
democracy is very, very tenuous. You don’t understand what the value of
truth and the value of honesty are in the whole process. Democracy does not
consist merely of people making a cross on a piece of paper and choosing
representatives every now and then. Democracy is far more than that. It is
far more. It is time, hon Mtethwa that you perhaps take up a book – there
are a number of them on democracy – and start reading and you will gain
some understanding and you might even join the DA. [Applause.]

Hon Greyling, the less he said the better, but what he said is the better,
because he is just a noise boy. Apparently he doesn’t have anything to
really contribute, except for a lot of volume.

We are all elected representatives and leaders of the people of South
Africa. Our first allegiance in everything we say and we do must surely be
to the people of South Africa. The fact that we are members of political
parties must rank in importance behind this allegiance. We cannot allow
ourselves to become mere vote-catching tools, whenever there is an
election. Whatever the pressures to win elections, we must first be true to
our greater responsibility, and that responsibility is to advance the cause
of South Africa, rather than the cause of any particular political party.
Indeed, a conflict between these two should never arise. I am constrained
to make this point because it ill-behoves any one of us to abuse the
position of trust that the voters have placed us in by making inventive
statements tailored to suit our own party-political agenda. The public
rightly expects us not merely to be truthful and sincere in what we say and
in what we do, but in so saying and doing to advance the common good of all
people.

What is true for members is even more so for Ministers, such as the hon
Hendricks. Ministers are in a unique position to access the facts
pertaining to the administration of the state. Ministers must therefore be
meticulous about the correctness of the facts they present to the people.
They cannot indulge in flights of fancy. They must not be divisive or
alarmist. At risk is the very credibility of the state. State credibility
is at the heart of legitimacy. If people lose faith in the punctilious
truthfulness of Ministers, it is not merely the governing party that is
discredited, but the whole machinery of state. When people discover that
they can no longer trust information and statements emanating from
government, the fabric of public life is frayed and weakened. A season of
hope can easily turn into a season of despair.

By allowing her to be so cynically used for electioneering, the hon
Hendricks has done a disservice to the people of South Africa. She
mentioned mounting evidence that Koeberg’s breakdown was wilfully
perpetrated in resistance to the government’s transformation agenda, but
that mounting evidence apparently dismounted and ran for cover so soon
after the elections, that one can only infer that there was no such
evidence at her disposal at the time she made the statement. [Applause.]
Hon Mthethwa would do well to take note of the results of the investigation
that was done afterwards.

Not only was that statement calculated to win the ANC a few votes in the
Western Cape, it was a callous and deeply divisive statement. It was
calculated to cast suspicion and to create distrust between communities
throughout the length and the breadth of this country. Will the hon
Hendricks not agree that it is our duty, all of us, to heal the wounds of
the past, rather than to exacerbate them? [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Nkskz B TINTO: Mhlalingaphambili, malungu abekekileyo akule Ndlu, amaqabane
onke akhoyo apha eNdlwini, mandibulele eli thuba ndilinikiweyo lokuza
kuthetha apha. Okokuqala, ndifuna ukubulela uMphathiswa, uMama uLindiwe
Hendricks ngendima athe wayidlala kwithutyana nje elingephi ekhokela iSebe
leziMbiwa naMandla. Akulunganga ukuba abanye abantu bagxeke ngenxa yolwazi
lwabo oluncinane. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mrs B TINTO: Chairperson, hon members present in this House, all comrades
present here in the House, let me express my gratitude for the opportunity
given me to speak here. Firstly, I want to thank the hon Minister, Mrs
Lindiwe Hendricks, for the role she has played within just a short space of
time of heading the Department of Minerals and Energy. It is not good that
other people criticise due to their lack of knowledge.]

I think it is not correct to try and bog her down to the semiotics and
semantics on this particular statement, and then not to follow the
developments thereafter.

Hayi thula wena! [No, be quiet!]

The interpretation of this particular statement by the DA bear signs of a
metaphysical and mechanistic nature that is not backed by substantive
inquiry on what transpired with regard to disciplinary processes and
investigations that followed. Clearly these are forces of maintenance bent
on keeping the status quo resorting to petty politicking in order to try
and destabilise transformation programmes through focus on menial issues.
The issues that are central to the development of our country and its
people are not cast aside to satisfy the cosseted hunger of discrediting
the government of the day.

Dialectical logic tells us that one will have to engage the fundamental
tenants of an issue to make correct interpretations. This is clearly
lacking in the DA on this particular issue. The former Minister’s tenure
has been characterised by intensive progress with regards to transformation
agenda. It is during her tenure that the revolutionary Diamond Amendment
Act and the Precious Metals Act were passed, and transformation of mineral
ownership forever for the benefit of our people and that requires
acknowledgement.

For the first time in the history of our country all energy institutions
are integrated under one regulator and that is Nersa. It is during her time
as Minister of Minerals and Energy that these developments transpired.
Furthermore, the Electricity Regulation Act was passed to transform the
electricity distribution sector.

UMphathiswa wasebenza kakhulu ukuqhubela phambili ukufakelwa kombane
kwiindawo ezihlala abantu, ngakumbi ezilalini kanti nalapha ezidolophini
kubantu abahlelelekileyo. [The Minister worked very hard to advance the
installation of electricity in residential areas, especially in rural areas
and even here in the urban areas for disadvantaged people.]

This draft resolution follows hot on the heels of similar occurrences. One
of those was to accuse the Speaker of the House of lowering the integrity
of Parliament by accompanying Tony Yengeni. The House proved that their
motion does not hold water, and it is weak. They were defeated and
humiliated. This is consistent with people who are not familiar with the
fundamental ethos of Ubuntu.

Okwehashe xa lifayo, likhabalaza kakhulu. Bayaphazamisa Mhlalingaphambili,
aba bantu. [Like a dying horse, it kicks very hard. These people are
disturbing, Chairperson.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): The hon member is complaining that
you are disrupting her while she is delivering her speech. Please give her
a chance to be heard. Please proceed hon member.

Mrs B TINTO: Thank you, Chair.

Oku kwehashe xa lifayo ... [Just like a dying horse ...]

... they went to the house of the President, accompanied by the media,
conducted a circus and made fools of themselves. They were chastised by the
nation, and the House was in agreement on the fact that this was
nonsensical, and should not be allowed. And now we are debating a statement
by the former Minister precisely on the tired issue of Koeberg outages.
Comrade Alec Erwin dealt with this issue at some length.

Kufuneka sijonge utshintsho kunye nenkqubela phambili ayenzileyo. Bubuvuvu
ukuzama ukugxeka uMphathiswa ngethuba elifutshane ekhokela iSebe leziMbiwa
naMandla. [We must look at the changes and the development she has
facilitated. It is a fallacy to try to critisise the Minister when she has
headed the Department of Minerals and Energy for such a short time.]

As this House we must also ask ourselves whether it is appropriate to
debate these kinds of resolutions, as they bear the hallmarks of pettiness,
and undermine the integrity of the House. We are setting a precedent that
is not correct, as everything that is said by members of the executive,
wherever they are, will be debated in this House. Thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the MF reiterates its footing on the
responsibility of all state persons to deliver to the people the facts and
to operate as efficiently and effectively as possible. Excuses cannot be
made for the power cuts in the Western Cape from November 2005 to February
2006. South Africa is to be governed on a system of transparency and when
the public notes an error, we have a duty to respond positively.
Statements regarding power supply to neighbouring countries have indicated
the commitment to the neighbours being prioritised over domestic needs. The
MF requests that the electorate be educated on how to communicate with the
public as it has a detrimental impact on our government as perceived and
acknowledged in our efforts to serve our people. Thank you.

Mr S K LOUW: Chairperson, it is imperative to approach this draft
resolution philosophically to set a mature basis and deal with its semantic
character. This draft resolution emanates from the spate of power outages
that have dogged the Western Cape, particularly Cape Town. The particular
outage in question occurred on 27 February 2006, on the eve of the local
government elections. Due to the timing of these outages, they attracted
huge public interest and both Ministers Alec Erwin and Lindiwe Hendricks,
the former Minister of Minerals and Energy, addressed the press conference
in Pretoria. I emphasise and I repeat, in Pretoria. Not in Parliament.
[Interjections.] What is important? It is a fact that prior to the press
conference, the CEO of Eskom alerted the Ministers to the foreign object in
the reactor. The bolt had been found inside the generator.

For the hon Adv Schmidt, from the DA, to bring a motion of this nature for
debate in this House, is really a questionable action. It is a clear
indication that there is a serious lack of maturity in his political
knowledge. The motion before this House today, needs to be questioned. What
is the DA’s political agenda? Their objectives are nothing less than a
continuation of the DA’s attempt to portray the executive in a negative
light. [Interjections.]

They are scraping their political barrels. One tends to question their
performance lately and can only come to one conclusion that they are
politically bankrupt, if they bring flimsy allegations against Minister
Hendricks to the Chamber for debate. She has done an extremely good job
during her time in the Department of Minerals and Energy. The Minister set
the transformation agenda ... [Interjections.] If you keep quiet, then you
might learn something!

The Minister set the transformation agenda of government and continued her
task and responsibility given by the hon President of this country.

She never failed this government and the organisation she represents. She
rather excelled in all fields of her deployment. During her term ...
[Interjections.] That is not your business!

During her term of office, there was also a significant legislation related
development, which saw the passing of the Diamond Amendment Bill and the
Precious Metals Amendment Bill and the Electricity Regulatory Bill. The
baton that was passed on to her by the Deputy President was a very, very
tough one. She has to deal with the minerals of this country that form part
of an industry that is threatened. In fact, it is a real mafia industry
that needs to be changed. She contributed to change that industry. She
contributed to change that industry and ensure that there is a continuation
of black economic empowerment. [Interjections.]

This legislation has created a framework for greater beneficiation in South
African minerals. It has opened new challenges in the industry for us and
has created massive job opportunities for our people. You know that you
have closed the cutting houses so that our people couldn’t get jobs. You
know that you have done it. [Interjections.]

Now let us ask the question: Are these people taking Parliament seriously
if they come with gossiping stories of their own interpretation and bring
it to this Chamber for a debate? Why are they abusing the status of this
institution? They don’t have any way forward; they have reached the end of
the road. That is why they bring nonsense to this Chamber. [Interjections.]

This is clearly an indication that they have reached the end of the road.
They are bankrupt. It is in this context that one would approach this draft
resolution setting a level that would do justice to the fruitful tenure of
the former Minister of Minerals and Energy and compliment her on the role
she played in leading our country to a total change in terms of
opportunities for our people.
We, the members of the majority party, would therefore like to express our
total confidence in the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry, the former
Minister of Minerals and Energy, and we are totally committed to
transformation together with the ANC. The ANC is the leader of
transformation and is the champion in leading the way forward to ensure a
better life for all our people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Mevrou die Voorsitter, dit is uiters bekommerenswaardig
dat enige ANC-LP, dié industrie, wat verantwoordelik is vir soveel
werkgeleenthede en wat so baie inkomste vir hierdie regering besorg, ‘n
mafia sou noem. Dit is ‘n duidelike aanduiding waarnatoe hierdie ANC-
regering van voornemens is om daarmee te gaan. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chairperson, it is extremely concerning that any
ANC-MP would call this industry, which is responsible for so many job
opportunities and that generates so much revenue for the government, a
mafia industry. It is a clear indication of the direction in which the ANC
government intends to take this.]

I want to say it, and it is maybe good that it has been said by the hon Mr
Louw at this point in time, but to call any industry which amasses wealth
to the benefit of its citizens, not only with regard to pension fund, but
also guarantees of employment a mafia, Madam Chair, is shocking if not
disgraceful. I will return to this fact.
It is a pity that the speakers from the ANC and the ID were totally off the
mark due to incorrect facts and dubious points of departure. It is
astounding, if not deeply concerning, that very few speakers even referred
to the words used by the hon Minister in blaming the electricity crisis on
so-called, and I repeat it again, ``agents opposed to the transformation
drive of the government’’. In fact, judging by the performance of some
opposition parties, such as the ID, the whole notion of trying to hold the
executive to account is a shameful indictment on this Parliament.

In the light of the fact that the Minister has had ample opportunity to
apologise to the people of South Africa, which she has still not done, for
having made the misleading statement but has failed to do so, I propose, as
part of the censure:

  That the House censures the former Minister of Minerals and Energy, Ms
  Lindiwe Hendricks, for –


  (1) misleading the public, in her capacity as the responsible Minister, by
       stating without reasonable cause that there was growing evidence that
       the Koeberg nuclear plant’s breakdown was wilfully perpetrated in
       resistance to the government’s transformation agenda;


  (2) making this statement on 28 February 2006, on the eve of the local
       government elections; and
  (3) not apologising for misleading the public in making this uninformed
       statement.


Debate concluded.

Question put: That the motion moved by Adv HC Schmidt be agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! I now put the question. Those
in favour shall say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): And those against shall say “No”.

HON MEMBERS: No.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I think the noes have it.



Division demanded.


The House divided:

  AYES - 34: Blanché, J P I; Boinamo, G G; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Cupido,
  H B ; Davidson, I O; Doman, W P; Dreyer, A M; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
  Gibson, D H M; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-Barnard, D;
  Labuschagne, L B; Leon, A J; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Mgabadeli, H C;
  Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J;
  Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W;
  Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M.

  NOES - 157: Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Bapela, K O; Bekker, H J; Benjamin,
  J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bloem, D V; Bonhomme, T J; Cele, M A;
  Chalmers, J; Chikunga, L S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J; Dambuza, B
  N; Davies, R H; Dhlamini, B W; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W;
  Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G Q M; Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs,
  J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T;
  Gumede, D M; Hanekom, D A ; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A;
  Jacobus, L; Johnson, C B; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D;
  Khoarai, L P; Khumalo, K K; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Landers, L T;
  Lekgetho, G; Lekgoro, M M S; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Lucas, E J; Luthuli, A
  N; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L; Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F;
  Madumise, M M; Magau, K R; Magubane, N E ; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M;
  Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Makasi, X C; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D
  K; Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D;
  Mdaka, N M; Meruti, M V; Mkhize, Z S; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S;
  Modisenyane, L J; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
  Molefe, C T; Monareng, O E; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Moss, M I;
  Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
  Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N M;
  Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E
  N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
  Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli,
  R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ;
  Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D;
  Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S ; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramodibe,
  D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Rwexana,
  S P; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Seadimo, M D; Sefularo,
  M; September, C C; Siboza, S ; Sithole, D J; Smith, V G; Solomon, G;
  Sonto, M R; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V; Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J;
  Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van Wyk, A; Vezi, T E;
  Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L.

  ABSTAIN - 4: Gore, V C; Greyling, L W; Mulder, C P; Spies, W D.

Motion accordingly negatived.

 APPOINTMENT OF AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE WHETHER THE HON MINISTER
  OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES DELIBERATELY MISLED PARLIAMENT ON THE DAMAGE TO THE
                                KOEBERG UNIT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSTITION: Chairperson, I move:

   That the House appoints an ad hoc committee to investigate whether the
   Minister of Public Enterprises, Mr Alec Erwin –

   (1)      deliberately misled Parliament and the Members of Parliament on
        17 August 2006 by stating the following in respect of the damage to
        the Koeberg unit in December:

           “Of as much interest has been whether I said that this was an
           act of sabotage. I did not say this ... Why I deliberately did
           not say it was sabotage will be evident ...”
           (Excerpt from “Statement to Parliament on the Damage to Koeberg
           Unit in December 2005”, by Minister Alec Erwin, MP);


   (2)      made a false statement to the National Assembly in that the Hon
        Minister on 28 February 2006 at a media briefing informed South
        Africa as follows:
           “This was no accident. The investigations proceed well and
           action will be taken of a legal nature and a criminal charge
           nature. Any interference with any electricity installation is an
           exceptionally serious crime. It is sabotage”.


           This statement was captured by the SABC on video footage
           flighted by eTV on 28 February 2006 and the evening of 17 August
           2006; and, was quoted in the print media on the following dates:
           Mail & Guardian, 10 March 2006; Business Day, 18 August 2006;
           and


    (3)     should be censured in a manner commensurate with the seriousness
        of such a transgression.

Chairperson, to the political advantage of the ANC, on the eve of the
election, the hon Minister for Public Enterprises told South Africa that
the cause of the electricity blackouts was sabotage. This electrified the
voters, and caused great concern, but many of us wondered at the time about
this reference to sabotage, and many of us realised that the ANC was in a
hugely embarrassing position.

What they were trying to do was to deflect criticism about Travelgate and
the fact that only a few ANC MPs had been charged as well as the other
thing, and that was the ANC’s inability to keep the lights burning.
I have a recording of the hon Minister’s remarks which he made on
television. I would like to know from you whether I can play that recording
to the House. [Interjections.]

What I propose is to do so when I respond to the debate a little later.
[Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: This is not a bioscope. You are
serious ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I am absolutely serious, Madam Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Gibson, we suggest that if the ad
hoc committee is appointed, you give that to them. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam. Then I will read from
the transcript, which says as follows – this is what the Minister said on
television:


  This is not in fact an accident. Any interference with any electricity
  installation is an exceptionally serious crime. It is sabotage.

That was on the SABC News. We all heard it.

When this matter was subsequently raised in the House, the hon Minister
denied that he had alleged sabotage. We all heard him deny it. Hansard
reports that he says:


  The cause of the damage to the generators is the question that has caused
  massive public interest. Of as much interest has been whether I said that
  this was an act of sabotage. I did not say that. All attempts I made to
  our erudite media to say what I did say merely got me into deeper
  linguistic difficulties.


The Minister told this House that he did not use the word ``sabotage’’, and
we all heard him use the word ``sabotage’’.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Gibson, may I remind you
and any other participants in this debate that they should not cover the
subject too widely, because they would be exceeding the scope of your
motion. As far as I recall, you are requesting the appointment of a
committee, and not the debate itself at this point.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you, Madam. There is a long
tradition that Members of the National Assembly must observe proper
standards of personal integrity and truthfulness. Misleading the House
deliberately is simply not acceptable. It is for this reason that I have
proposed the appointment of an ad hoc committee to investigate the
Minister’s statement and conduct. I can’t believe that the House could
possibly reject a motion like this, because it would be up to that ad hoc
committee to listen to the recording and to decide whether the Minister did
use the word ``sabotage’’ on television, and to look at Hansard, and decide
whether he misled the House in saying that he didn’t use the word
``sabotage’’.

The committee will then report to the House, and tell us what action should
be taken. I don’t believe that the majority in this House could possibly
object to this motion. I expect them to vote in favour of it, because if
they vote against it, they are creating an extremely bad and unfortunate
precedent. I move the motion standing in my name. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, like always, this time
again Mr Gibson is wrong. He was wrong to invade the privacy of the
President. He was wrong to suggest a fictitious motion about hon Hendricks.
Again, he wants the House to engage in an egg-dance and waste time by
distracting us from the key challenges of the day.

The challenge that our country faces today, is not to discredit anybody,
including the members of the executive. The challenge is the creation of
jobs and fighting of poverty.

It is with that understanding therefore that we rise to bring an amendment
to this resolution as follows: To omit all the words after “That’’ and
substitute:
   The House –


     1) is of the view that -

        (a)      there is no merit in appointing an ad hoc committee; and


           b) there has been extensive media coverage  and  explanation  of
              the matter in which various views have been expressed; and


   (2)      is therefore of the view that the matter  has  been  extensively
        discussed;

   (3)      resolves that the matter should not be pursued any further.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Bekker, before you take
the podium, I would like to remind members that they must confine
themselves to the question of whether a committee should be appointed and
should not embrace the merits of the matter to be attended to by the
committee as these are not before the House.

Mnr H J BEKKER: Mevrou die Voorsitter, die IVP is besorg oor die dubbele
uitsprake oor Koeberg en Eskom. Ministers en politici wêreldwyd word
gekenmerk deur hul somtyds teenstrydige menings en dubbelpratery. Die agb
Minister Erwin is nie die uitsondering op die reël nie en hoewel ons nie sy
uitsprake goedkeur nie, is daar nie genoegsaam rede on hom as enkeling te
sanksioneer nie.

Tydens die vorige debat wou ek van die Minister weet of hulle al die moer
gekry het wat Koeberg gesaboteer het. Ek gaan nou nie vandag help om die
Minister en Eskom se moer te probeer soek nie. Ek laat dit maar aan die
ander opposisiepartye oor. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Chairperson, the IFP is concerned about these
ambiguous pronouncements regarding Koeberg and Eskom. Ministers and
politicians the world over are characterised by their sometimes
contradictory meanings and their double - speak. The hon Minister Erwin is
not the exception to the rule and although we do not approve of his
pronouncements, there is not sufficient reason to sanction him as an
individual.

During the previous debate I wanted to know from the Minister whether they
had found the bolt that had caused the sabotage at Koeberg. I will not help
look for the Minister and Eskom’s bolt today. I will leave that to the
other opposition parties.]

At the time preceding the local government elections, the Western Cape went
through a difficult and challenging time of disruptions in power.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon member, may I ask you
whether this is motivation for the committee or not?

Mr H J BEKKER:  Yes, it will indeed motivate for the committee and you will
see how it will fall into place from this. [Laughter.]

At the time preceding the local government elections, the Western Cape went
through difficult and challenging time of disruptions in power supply,
including the now notorious bolt of Koeberg Nuclear Power Station.
Understandably, at the time with winter fast approaching, ongoing load
shedding and the overall inconvenience suffered by the public, the
situation became heavy with emotion.

We in the IFP, although disapproving of the Minister’s statement on the eve
of the local government elections, cannot support the motion that is now
requesting the appointment of an ad hoc committee to investigate whether
the Minister deliberately misled members of Parliament on 17 August 2006.
On the contrary, we believe that the Minister tried to rectify the
impression created on television on 28 February 2006. An ad hoc committee
from Parliament will serve no purpose, since the IFP would much rather rely
on the outcome of a specialist investigation, as reflected in the Nersa
report or any other authoritative body.

On 17 August 2006, the hon Minister technically backtracked from his
original sabotage statement, which was made on the eve of the municipal
elections. Although contradictory to his television statement, the IFP
accepted the answers given by the hon Minister in his August statement.

We further accepted that the hon Minister did not deliberately mislead
Parliament.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon member, I must ask you not
to go into the details of a possible investigation by the committee. What
you should be motivating for is whether there should be a committee or not.

Mr H J BEKKER: We accepted that the hon Minister did not deliberately
mislead Parliament on 17 August 2006, and the IFP accepts that the
situation at Koeberg was indeed the result of an accident, perhaps
exacerbated by negligence on the part of Eskom as highlighted in the Nersa
report.

The IFP can therefore not vote in favour of this draft resolution but
neither can we support the amendment as put by the ANC. We will therefore
abstain from that particular aspect.
I must repeat what I said in the House on 17 August 2006. But thankfully,
normal power supply has now been restored to the Western Cape.
As die agb Minister en Eskom nie waaksaam is nie, mag daar dalk weer so ‘n
situasie wees. [If the Minister and Eskom are not vigilant, a similar
situation may arise again.] [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, thanks for a second bite at the cherry. The
ACDP does not see the necessity of appointing an ad hoc committee for a
matter that is of such absolute clarity that it requires no investigation.
Let us indulge ourselves today in an exploration of semantics, but let the
matter be resolved without further delay.

The hon Minister Erwin publicly used the words, “This was no accident” and
“It is sabotage”. Therefore, it is true that the Minister deliberately
misled the House and that the Minister made a false statement to the people
of South Africa.

In determining the appropriate means of censure, we have to ask ourselves
the question: What is Minister Erwin guilty of? If a man makes a statement
on national television and in the print media, and then publicly denies
having made the statement ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, you are not the
committee. Therefore, please just motivate whether there should or should
not be, a committee. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, let me then just finish by saying that I
believe that the Minister made a statement in favour of the election at
that time. Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, Ministers are human beings, as such they can
make all mistakes that any human being normally makes. Negligence is one of
these mistakes. Making an incorrect statement, which appears to be wrong or
ill-founded afterwards, is another example.

In South Africa’s recent past, various Ministers have made mistakes.  The
Minister of Labour, for instance, published an inaccurate list of companies
that were allegedly failing to comply with employment equity requirements.
Failing to realise that, the KZN office of his own department together with
58 other government institutions were also implicated by his own list – a
well-aimed shot in the foot, many would call it.

The Minister of Health entertained the world with an exhibition of garlic
and beetroot as cures for Aids, while 900 South Africans are dying of this
terrible disease every day.

Net so het die agb Minister van Openbare Ondernemings ook ’n foutjie begaan
toe hy die Huis meegedeel het dat hy nooit na sabotasie verwys het nie,
terwyl dit nou blyk dat hy uitdruklik op 28 Februarie die woorde gebruik
het. Ek het gesê alle Ministers is mense en alle mense maak foute. Die
vraag is egter of ’n persoon bereid is om daardie fout te erken. Ongelukkig
het dit nie gebeur nie. Die VF Plus vind dit jammer en steun daarom die
voorstel. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The hon Minister of Public Enterprises had similarly made a mistake when
he informed the House that he had never referred to sabotage, while now it
would appear that he expressly used the words on 28 February. I said that
all Ministers are people and all people are fallible. The question is,
however, whether a person is prepared to admit to that mistake.
Unfortunately this did not happen. The FF Plus regrets it and therefore
supports the proposal. I thank you.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chair, the hon Minister Alec Erwin should have at the very
least apologised for the reckless and misleading statements that he made on
17 August in this House, as well as on the eve of the local government
elections.

On Tuesday, 28 February 2006, the Minister was shown on television stating
unequivocally that the damage to the Koeberg generator was an act of
sabotage. In fact, he is shown to have said, “it is sabotage.” Upon the
media broadcasting these words on Friday, 3 March 2006, he denied outright
having said this. It was as clear that he was less than honest to the South
African public just before the elections were held.

The report by the Nuclear Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, or any
other agency did not point to sabotage, and could not come to a conclusive
finding as to the cause of the existence of the bolt in the generator of
Koeberg Unit 1.

For a government minister to make unsubstantiated allegations of sabotage
at the major national security flashpoint on the eve of an election is very
serious, if not outrageous.

The hon Minister’s denial in Parliament on 17 August 2006, as to whether he
had said that the failure at the Koeberg generator Unit 1 plant was an act
of sabotage is clearly not correct, and indeed in doing so, we allege he
misled Parliament. Having said this, I am of the view that the House should
support the motion to appoint a committee to investigate and report on
whether the hon Minister Erwin misled the House and the public in making an
alleged false statement in the House on 17 August.

The ANC members in particular, and this side of the House, should support
the motion as it would gain the public’s trust in ensuring that the matter
is investigated, and the findings reported to Parliament. Failing to do so
would not only ensure that an opportunity for the hon Minister to regain
his credibility, which was lost, but will unfortunately also place the
credibility of Parliament at stake.

However, it is still not too late for the hon Minister to apologise to the
House for his misleading comments. I just want to end off by saying that
hon members are called honourable for a particular reason. And when it is
alleged that an hon member did not do the honourable thing by misleading
this Parliament, it should be dealt with in a calm and collected fashion by
appointing a committee to establish whether he in fact said the word as he
is alleged to have done. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, the MF does not approve of an investigating
committee. The MF believes that we were placed here with the responsibility
to serve the people. From among ourselves, we have to elect the best-suited
candidates to manage various portfolios of government.

In turn, each member of the electorate has a responsibility to manage his
or her duties effectively and efficiently. We do not believe the Minister
to be incompetent, but we certainly kindly request the Minister to explain
to the House his statement made at that time. Thank you very much.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, thank you to hon members who
participated in this debate. I would like to begin with the hon Mr Goniwe,
the ANC Chief Whip. He accused me of wasting Parliament’s time by
discussing the matter, which went to the crux of what happens in
Parliament, and he said what we should be doing is fighting poverty and
creating jobs.

I was under the impression that the ANC have been in power for 12 years.
Our debate this afternoon is not stopping your party, your administration,
and your government from fighting poverty and creating jobs. Why don’t you
get on and do that? When are you going to start fighting poverty and
creating jobs? [Interjections.]

The amendment, which the hon Chief Whip moved, has the effect of approving
deliberate lies in the NA, provided that they are told by ANC members. The
ANC majority will be used to enforce its will.

I want to say that the hon Mr Bekker over there ... I was surprised that a
politician of his seniority should adopt such a casual attitude towards the
question of whether an hon member told the truth or told lies in
Parliament. I think that somebody who has served for such a long time, both
here and in the Transvaal provincial council, should value the word of an
hon member more than that. We have a job as Members of Parliament to
protect the integrity of this House.  When we say something, people must be
able to know that at least we believe that it is the truth.

I would like to thank the hon Mr Spies for the clear support that he gave,
and of course to thank the hon Adv Schmidt for drawing our attention once
again to the reason why hon members are called hon members. It is because
we must be regarded by the public of South Africa as people who tell the
truth in Parliament.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I am rising on a point of order: A number of
members during the debate this afternoon have explicitly said that the hon
Minister told deliberate lies in Parliament. I am of the opinion that’s
unparliamentary. The amazing thing is that the ANC has not raised any point
of order, nothing at all. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Is that your point of order that the
ANC hasn’t taken a point of order? Hon member, you must discuss that with
the ANC, not with me. Please proceed, Mr Gibson.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: But of course, the Chair could take the
point of order as well.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Are you instructing me to do so, hon
Gibson?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: No, I am not giving any instructions. I
said the Chair could have done that as well. The Chair doesn’t have to rely
on somebody reporting the matter to her...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): But that is my prerogative, and I
shall do so when I want to. [Interjections.][Laughter.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: That is exactly what I have said.
[Applause.] [Laughter.] Yes, the very reason for appointing an ad hoc
committee was to determine whether the Minister did tell deliberate lies or
whether he did not tell deliberate lies. The ANC doesn’t want to find that
out. And it seems that they are going to use their majority to vote this
motion down.

I want to warn them that they are creating a very awkward and a very bad
precedent for this Parliament, because what it will mean is, irrespective
of whether an ANC or a member of the majority party tells the truth or
doesn’t tell the truth, as long as they have the majority, it doesn’t
matter. I think that that is a sad day for parliamentary democracy in our
country. It is not something that this Parliament should be proud of or
that our people should be proud of. I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the amendment moved by the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party be agreed to.

Division demanded.

The House divided:


   AYES - 150: Anthony, T G; Asiya, S E; Benjamin, J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y
   S; Bloem, D V; Bonhomme, T J; Cele, M A; Chalmers, J; Chikunga, L S;
   Combrinck, J J; Cronin, J P; Dambuza, B N; Davies, R H; Diale, L N;
   Dikgacwi, M M; Direko, I W; Dithebe, S L; Dlali, D M; Doidge, G Q M;
   Fihla, N B; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H;
   George, M E; Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L; Goniwe, M T; Gumede, D M;
   Hanekom, D A ; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Hogan, B A; Jacobus, L;
   Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Kalako, M U; Kasienyane, O R; Kekana, C D;
   Khoarai, L P; Khumalo, K K; Khunou, N P; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G;
   Lekota, M G P; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Luthuli, A N; Maake, J J; Mabe, L L;
   Mabena, D C; Madasa, Z L; Madella, A F; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
   Magubane, N E ; Mahlaba, T L; Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S;
   Makasi, X C; Maloney, L; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, D K; Martins, B A D;
   Masutha, T M; Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D;
   Meruti, M V; Mgabadeli, H C; Mkhize, Z S; Mnyandu, B J; Moatshe, M S;
   Modisenyane, L J; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A
   D; Molefe, C T; Monareng, O E; Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N;
   Moss, M I; Mshudulu, S A; Mthembu, B; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E;
   Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A; Nel, A C; Nene, M J ; Nene, N
   M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N;
   Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G;
   Njikelana, S J ; Njobe, M A A; Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli,
   R S; Ntuli, S B; Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N ;
   Nyambi, A J; Olifant, D A A; Phadagi, M G; Phungula, J P; Pieterse, R D;
   Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S ; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S
   M; Reid, L R R; Rwexana, S P; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D;
   Seadimo, M D; September, C C; Sibanyoni, J B; Siboza, S ; Sithole, D J;
   Smith, V G; Solomon, G; Sonto, M R; Thabethe, E; Tinto, B; Tobias, T V;
   Tolo, L J; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z;
   Van der Merwe, S C ; Van Wyk, A; Zita, L.


   NOES - 38: Blanché, J P I; Botha, C-S; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O; Doman,
   W P; Dreyer, A M; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
   Gore, V C; Greyling, L W; Jankielsohn, R; Kalyan, S V; King, R J; Kohler-
   Barnard, D; Komphela, B M; Labuschagne, L B; Lekgoro, M M S; Leon, A J;
   Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Mulder, C P; Mulder, P
   W A; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Smuts, M; Spies, W D;
   Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swathe, M M; Trent, E W; Van der Walt, D;
   Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M.


   ABSTAIN - 7: Bekker, H J; Dhlamini, B W; Lucas, E J; Mpontshane, A M;
   Vezi, T E; Vos, S C; Zikalala, C N Z.


Amendment agreed to.

Motion, as amended, accordingly agreed to.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT – DRAFT NOTICE ON REMUNERATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL
                           COURT JUDGES AND JUDGES
CONSIDERATION OF REPORT – DRAFT NOTICE ON REMUNERATION OF MAGISTRATES

There was no debate.

Draft Notice on Remuneration of Constitutional Court Judges and Judges
approved.

Draft Notice on Remuneration of Magistrates approved.

The House adjourned at 17:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                        WEDNESDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2006
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Films and Publications Amendment Bill [B 27 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 29169 of 31 Augustus 2006.]


          b) Immigration Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 29169
             of 31 August 2006.]


        Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
        Affairs of the   National Assembly, as well as referral to the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
        Rule 160.


        In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
        the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
        working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Auditor-General for 2005-
        2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 202-2006].


2.    The Minister of Health

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Medical
        Research Council (MRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 146-
        2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Health Laboratory
        Service (NHLS) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members`  Legislative
   Proposals and Special Petitions on the petition by Brig. J D Krige, dated
   29 August 2006:

Details of the petition are as follows:

   1. Brig. Krige was an employee of the South African Police Services until
      he retired in 1981.


   2. Brig. Krige’s wife passed away on 17 January 2004.



   3. He has a son living with a disability, and, therefore, cannot  provide
      for himself.

   4. No one will provide for his son should he (petitioner) die.

   5. Brig. Krige requests that his monthly pension benefit  be  transferred
      to his son upon his death.

The  Committee  consulted  with  National  Treasury,  Department  of  Public
Service and Administration, Government Employees Pension Fund,  and  MKhonto
Wesizwe  Military  Veterans  Association  on  this  matter.  The   Committee
deliberated on the matter and recommends that the petition  not  be  granted
for the following reason:

    - The petitioner can make provision for  his  son  from  his  government
      pension and from his family assets.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water  Affairs  and  Forestry  of
   Public Hearings on Water Quality and Security in South Africa held on 20,
   21 July and 7 August 2006 - Towards a Joint Action Plan to Improve  Water
   Quality for South Africans, dated 30 August 2006:

1.    Introduction

Water quality is  a  term  used  to  describe  the  chemical,  physical  and
biological characteristics of water, usually in respect to  its  suitability
for an intended purpose. These characteristics are controlled or  influenced
by substances either dissolved or suspended  in  water.   Water  quality  is
changed and  affected  by  both  natural  processes  and  human  activities.
Generally, natural water quality varies from place to  place,  depending  on
seasonal changes, climatic changes and with the types of  soils,  rocks  and
surfaces through which  it  moves.   A  variety  of  human  activities,  for
example, agricultural activities, urban and industrial  development,  mining
and recreation, may significantly alter the quality of natural  waters,  and
changes the water use potential.  According to information supplied  by  the
Department of Water Affairs (DWAF)[1], the key to:

Sustainable water resources is, therefore to  ensure  that  the  quality  of
water resources are suitable for their intended  uses,  while  at  the  same
time allowing them to be used and developed to a certain extent.   Effective
management is the tool  through  which  this  is  achieved.   Water  quality
management, therefore involves the maintenance of the  fitness  for  use  of
water resources on a sustained basis, by achieving a balance between  socio-
economic development and environmental protection.  From a regulatory  point
of view, the ‘business’ of water  quality  management  entails  the  ongoing
process of  planning,  development,  implementation  and  administration  of
water quality management policy, the authorisation of water  uses  that  may
have, or may potentially have, an impact on water quality, as  well  as  the
monitoring and auditing of the aforementioned.

South  Africa  has  put  in  place  various   mechanisms   to   ensure   the
prioritisation  of  water  quality  and  water  security.   The  legislative
framework and policy requires the Minister of Water  Affairs  and  Forestry,
and her Department, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF),  to
undertake the following:

(a)   Establishing national monitoring systems for water resources;
(b)   Collecting appropriate data  and  information  that  is  necessary  to
assess the
      quantity, quality and use of water in water resources; and
(c)   Complying with resource quality objectives.

Water  resource  management,  including  water  quality  management,  is  an
exclusive national competency.  Due to the extent and  multiplicity  of  the
management functions associated with water  quality  management,  it  is  no
longer considered to be the sole obligation of a single  authority,  but  is
now  increasingly  the  responsibility  of  all  levels  of  the  community,
including industry, local government as well as individual water users.

Water quality management is governed and/or  influenced  by  a  hierarchical
suite of environmental legislation, ranging from:

    •  South  Africa's  water  resource  management  related   international
      obligations, of which Agenda 21 is a prominent example.
    •  The  South  African  Constitution,  1996  (Act   No.108   of   1996),
      constituting the supreme law  of  the  Country  and  guaranteeing  the
      rights of all people in South Africa.
    •  Framework   environmental   legislation,   such   as   the   National
      Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No.107 of 1998),  which
      had principally been promulgated to enact Sections 24,  (environmental
      rights) and 41 (containing provisions on co-operative  governance)  of
      the Constitution.
    • Sectoral environmental legislation, of which the  National  Water  Act
      (NWA), 1998 (Act No. 36 of 1998) is the most prominent example.

As part of its oversight function, and to contextualise  water  quality  and
security to the lived realities of South Africa’s  populace,  the  Portfolio
Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry undertook public  hearings  in  June
and August 2006.Various stakeholders,  ranging  from  Governmental  to  Non-
Governmental Organisations presented overviews and specifics of the  current
situation in relation to water quality and security in South Africa.   These
inputs ranged from policy and legislative environmental  goals  with  regard
to surface and groundwater, protection, partnerships between Government  and
communities, dam safety  and  security  to  research,  technology  transfer,
technical assistance, health and education plans on water quality  to  water
quality in rural areas.

2.    Oral and Written Submissions[2]

Oral

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  (DWAF)  indicated  that  there
were discrepancies in the quality of drinking water.  The challenges,  noted
by DWAF included a lack  of  understanding  of  the  requirements  of  Water
Quality  Management  Systems  (WQMS),  and  inadequate  interventions.   Raw
surface water and groundwater were compromised  by  a  variety  of  factors,
including mining, industry  and  farming.   The  legislative  framework,  in
respect to water quality was summarised.

Emanti, a Water  and  Environmental  Engineering  Services,  summarised  the
importance of WQMS, and the various ways in which effective and  sustainable
water management would  be  assisted.  It  outlined  the  Free  State  Water
Quality Management case  study,  highlighting  the  supportive  intervention
approach. The presentation further argued  that  water  service  authorities
often  under  budgeted  for  water  quality  issues,  resulting  in  a  poor
understanding of water and sanitation matters, and water safety issues.

The Centre for Scientific and  Industrial  Research  (CSIR)  summarised  the
scope and impact  of  their  research  and  noted  some  of  the  programmes
undertaken. Their resources and capacity were summarised, together with  the
ways in which they assisted DWAF, and other projects.

The Water Research Commission (WRC) funded and outsourced  research  on  all
aspects of water. Research had shown that urban water quality was good,  but
rural water quality posed problems.  Most  of  the  problems  emanated  from
insufficient management, operational staff skills, monitoring  and  funding.
The WRC recommended the establishment of expert teams in each Province,  the
establishment of management and  technology  assistance  centres,  improving
salaries and conditions of operational staff, as well as the  implementation
of DWAF’s WQMS.

The  Environmental  Monitoring  Group,  in  focusing  on   water   security,
summarised the issues around the WCD  Report,  ‘Dams  and  Development’.  In
expanding on issues of water security, the  presenter  focused  on  existing
dams and their impact on  social  issues,  with  a  view  to  exploring  and
implementing mechanisms for recognising  entitlement  and  sharing  benefits
for new dams.  Another area noted was the enhancing of governance  of  water
and energy resources development. Finally,  the  focus  was  placed  on  the
promotion of  river  health  and  sustainable  environments.  An  additional
priority was promoting regional good governance on water quality  and  water
security.

The South  African  Local  Government  Association  (SALGA)  summarised  the
challenges faced by Local Government and Water Service  Authorities  (WSAs),
with regard to drinking water quality.  It was noted that there was  a  lack
of understanding of the legislation, drinking water quality  standards,  and
effective water management.  Sufficient standards had been  set,  but  Local
Government required support in order to establish and maintain  the  correct
systems to meet the standards.  The monitoring  systems  used  in  the  Free
State were summarised. SALGA recommended increasing  the  profile  of  WQMS,
creating awareness of implementation  of  assessments,  consultative  audits
and interventions by DWAF.

The Department of Education summarised the areas of the National  Curriculum
Statement dealing with the issue of water and  human  settlements.   It  was
noted that the  way  in  which  the  assessment  standards  had  been  drawn
provided for a  wide  interpretation  of  applications.  The  Department  of
Education provided information on the manner in which the quality  of  water
is being addressed in the sector. Within the education sector, for  example,
the issue of water quality, environment and  conservation  was  incorporated
for learners.

The Departments of Agriculture and of Land Affairs reported that  their  aim
of leading  and  supporting  sustainable  agriculture  and  promoting  rural
development  could  be  achieved   through   equitable   access,   improving
competitiveness and better resource  management.  The  agricultural  support
programmes and  the  challenges  to  agrarian  water  were  summarised.  The
aforementioned  Departments  recommended  changes  to  the  allocations  and
pricing  and  suggested  better  quality   measures.   The   Department   of
Agriculture stressed the  importance  of  water  quality  for  the  economic
sustainability of domestic and international agricultural production.

Rand Water reported on its current activities and scope, and its  commitment
and  contribution  to  water   provision.   It   summarised   the   customer
expectations and how it met them, the water safety plans  and  the  criteria
set. The supply chain was tabled and explained in detail.  It elaborated  on
its reticulation processes and elements  of  their  support  programme.  The
Rand Water Board, in its presentation  maintained  that  quality  commitment
entails that water must be safe for lifelong consumption, must be  palatable
and should not contain any chemical or radiological  substances  that  would
be  deleterious  to  health.   Water  should  also  be  free  of  pathogenic
organisms, and be as stable as possible.  In  the  work  undertaken  by  the
Rand Water Board, an entire process  is  undertaken  to  ensure  that  water
offered by Rand to their stakeholders is of the highest  quality.  According
to Rand, the approach to quality management cannot be managed at  the  point
of delivery. One needs to manage from catchments to points of delivery,  and
one set of criteria needs to be utilised.

According to Chapter 4 of the World Health Organisation Report of 2004,  the
following was highlighted in terms of safety of drinking water:

The most effective means of consistently ensuring the safety of  a  drinking
water supply is through the use of a comprehensive risk assessment and  risk
management  approach  that  encompasses  all  steps  in  water  supply  from
catchment to consumer.  In these  Guidelines,  such  approaches  are  termed
Water Safety Plans (WSPs).  The WSP approach has been developed to  organise
and systematize a long history of management practices applied  to  drinking
water and to ensure the applicability of these practices to  the  management
of drinking water and to ensure the applicability of these practices to  the
management of drinking water quality.  It draws on many  of  the  principles
and concepts from  other  risk  management  approaches,  in  particular  the
multiple-barrier approach and HACCP (as used in the food industry).

The City of Cape Town  summarised  the  water  qualification  processes  and
challenges.  The  reticulation,  wastewater,  storm  water   and   catchment
management programmes were detailed. It  contended  that  the  City’s  water
quality  was  high  and  that  management  was  committed  to  reaching  ISO
standards.  The  City  aimed  to  prioritise  challenges,   ensure   correct
budgeting, carry out continuous programmes, retain skilled staff  and  align
to water sector plans.

The City of  Cape  Town,  in  focusing  on  water  quality,  looked  at  the
following:


    • The City of Cape Town Water Quality Status through  the  entire  water
      value chain;
    • Addressing challenges on water quality from abstraction to  discharge;
      and
    • The present city’s capabilities on managing water quality.

The presentation noted the following:
    • The entire Water Quality value  chain  of  the  city  is  measured  at
      Scientific Services of Water Services Department situated in Athlone.
    • In terms of bulk water,  there  are  11  water  treatment  works  with
      monitoring programmes of samples which equate to 64 844 per year.  The
      frequency of sampling is done on a weekly basis for composite raw  and
      final water.  The frequency of sampling on  operations  is  undertaken
      every hour.  There is 96% compliance with SANS 241: 2005.


The  presentation  noted   the   challenges   pertinent   to   bulk   water,
reticulation, wastewater,  catchments,  storm  water  and  river  management
service.  These encompassed the following:


    •  Bulk  water  challenges:   water   quality   from   abstraction   has
      deteriorated and impacts on cost of treatment of potable water.  Algae
      proliferation from the Dams impacts treatment,
    • Reticulation:   the  ageing  of  the  infrastructure  needed  frequent
      analysis.
    • More public awareness on  health  and  education  as  the  society  is
      becoming water quality aware.  Stability  of  water  PH  and  chlorine
      through the distribution line.
    •  Wastewater  challenges:   ageing,  maintenance,  and  demand  of  new
      infrastructure.  Rapid  population  growth  and  increase  in  housing
      demand.

Despite these challenges, the advances made in addressing  the  vital  issue
of water quality in the city of Cape Town, was being given precedent by:

    • Prioritising and addressing all challenges of water quality  in  terms
      of abstraction and discharge;
    • Ensuring an adequate budget for infrastructure;
    • Proceeding with education and awareness programmes;
    • Developing a strategy within water services to ensure that skills  are
      retained and capacity developed; and
    • Ensuring the alignment by the city with  a  provisional  water  sector
      plan.

The Wildlife and  Environmental  Society  of  South  Africa,  Western  Cape,
(WESSA) recommended  that  DWAF  should  ensure  Departments  and  suppliers
comply with all legislation, that data should be correlated,  that  a  water
pollution tax be levied and  that  a  compliance  body  be  established.  It
recommended  research  into  climate   change.   They   pointed   out   that
municipalities needed better controls and assistance, and suggested  changes
to tariffs. Further recommendations were  tabled  relating  to  issues  that
could be addressed by DWAF.

A  useful  submission   from   the   WESSA   presenter   provided   valuable
recommendations, which were previously  raised,  and  brought  back  to  the
table.  However, if one  systematically  engages  with  the  recommendations
raised, one  notices  that  DWAF  as  sector  leader,  together  with  other
departments and stakeholders has begun the  process  of  integrating  policy
and implementation to address issues around water quality.

    • A need exists for intersectoral and interdepartmental compliance  with
      the range of national and international legislation at  its  disposal.
      There is also a need to publicly promote the  principle  that  without
      water sustainability, there can be no sustainable development.
    • At a national, provincial and local level, there is a huge  amount  of
      available  data,  which  should  suffice  to  make  important   policy
      decisions.
    • A review of current water-related climate change  research  should  be
      undertaken with a view to filling gaps, if necessary.
    • The water-climate change link is possibly one area needing more formal
      research.
    • Before any new expensive research  projects  are  commissioned,  there
      needs  to  be  an  integration  and  reconciliation  of  the   current
      information available.
    • A water pollution tax should be used to enable the establishment of  a
      robust inter-provincial monitoring and compliance body.
    • Proper ecological functioning of aquatic ecosystems should be made the
      primary concern.
    • Socio-economic development drivers, having taken this sine qua non  on
      board, should incorporate its principles into the ‘business  plan’  so
      that conservation, water demand management,  rehabilitation  and  good
      husbandry   can   be   creatively   integrated   into   socio-economic
      development.
    •  Municipalities  are  notorious  offenders  when  it  comes  to  water
      contamination and there must be a concerted  effort  to  ensure  their
      compliance (as seems to  be  happening  in  Stellenbosch).  Integrated
      Development Plans (IDPs) and growth/development plans must accommodate
      water realities (for instance in Paarl, Table View).
    • Prodigality must  be  acted  against  robustly  and  high-end  tariffs
      applied to discourage wasteful water use.
    • All municipal domestic, hazardous  waste  and  landfill  sites  should
      reach compliance with national standards by a specific date to be  set
      by DWAF.
    • DWAF should support and  help  resource  the  State  2020  zero  waste
      programme.
    • Registering of all bore holes and well points should become mandatory.
    • Closer co-operation  with  the  Department  of  Agriculture  regarding
      farming threats as well as best practice should be initiated, as there
      are many overlapping areas of concern.
    • DWAF should develop a  national  media  strategy  about  water  demand
      management along the  lines  of  the  ESKOM  initiative  with  similar
      incentive schemes  (low  flow  shower  heads,  leak  fixing  kits  and
      courses, learnerships, water tank subsidies, etc).
    • DWAF should seek out and deliberately  support  small  existing  water
      resource supply and management initiatives, especially in rural areas.
    • More catchments to coast approach on  the  use  of  rivers  should  be
      adopted.
    • Any inclination to privatise any aspect of  water  supply  or  service
      delivery should be approached with extreme caution and transparency as
      the tendency is to link such enterprises not only  with  the  disputed
      notion of full cost recovery, but also with profit making.  This  puts
      additional pressure on resources and can lead to the transfer of water
      allocations that adversely affect both social  equity  and  ecological
      integrity (for example, the Keurbooms water allocation transfer).
    • It must be recognised that  the  building  of  large  dams  is  not  a
      sustainable activity and that even with mitigation and the observation
      of WCD principles  there  are  far  reaching  negative  impacts.  (for
      example, Gariep, BWP and Staalpoort)  Current  impoundment  and  inter
      provincial transfer plans should be reviewed.
    • The programme for the clearance of alien invasive vegetation could  be
      stepped up and create far more jobs.
    • The many existing volunteer groups  associated  with  river,  wetland,
      estuary and water system integrity should  be  formally  acknowledged,
      used as examples for other areas and assisted with employment creating
      funding.
    • Water needs to find a place in a more detailed and nationally specific
      way in the formal education curriculum.
    • This calls for a precautionary approach  to  desalination  initiatives
      and the licensing  of  these  because  of  the  additional  wastewater
      production.
    • A  credible  plan  for  the  reversing  the  current  trend  of  river
      degradation needs to be instituted in consultation with the full range
      of stakeholders.
    • All municipalities should be encouraged to factor a climate change and
      water   conservation/management   strategy   into   their   Integrated
      Development Plans (IDPs).

The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism  (DEAT)  summarised  the
scope and effect  of  biodiversity  activities  and  recommended  integrated
plans. DEAT’s current focus activities were summarised.  The  management  of
coastal water programmes was identified as a priority.

The Agricultural  Research  Council  (ARC)  focused  on  water  quality  and
agricultural water  use.  It  tabled  its  current  research  and  projects,
including a project on food security.  Challenges  included  soil  salinity,
loss of natural biodiversity, and discharges from  mining  and  agriculture.
It recommended research into water quality, interlinking of soil,  crop  and
wastewater, the development of monitoring tools and  a  monitoring  network.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC)  provided  the  following  input  on
their ccurrent research activities related to water quality:

    • Assessment  of  the  effect  of  different  water  qualities  on  crop
      production – constraints and types of crops.
    • The effect of  wetland  systems  and  mining  effluent  water  use  on
      irrigated agriculture.
    • Water quality analysis for agricultural use  in  rural  areas  of  the
      Eastern Cape,  KwaZulu-Natal,  and  Western  Cape  (250  samples  from
      boreholes used for both domestic and agricultural production  analysed
      in 2005 for the Department of Agriculture).
    • Current research activities related to water quality are in progress.
    • Assessment of water quality and  land  degradation  in  wetland  areas
      (working group to focus on the conservation of wetlands).
    • Impact of water quality on irrigation schemes (Limpopo province).
    • Water quality analysis  for  Southern  African  Development  Community
      (SADC) countries (Zambia, Lesotho, and Botswana).
    • Monitoring the effect of water quality on soil/land productivity.
    • Current  research  activities  related  to  water  quality  should  be
      continued.
    • South Africa is a water scarce country.
    • Wastewater re-use for agricultural production is very important.
    • ARC Infruitec is running a  project  on  the  use  of  treated  winery
      wastewater for cash crop and vines irrigation.

Some of the challenges noted by the ARC:

    • Soil salinity.
    • The unsustainable management and utilisation of wetlands contribute to
      loss in natural biodiversity, with harmful consequences  for  peoples’
      livelihoods.
    • Insufficient knowledge or lack of water quality issues.
    • Discharges of mine water into the river system.

The ARC noted the following recommendations:

    • Research in water quality to establish the extent  of  degradation  in
      our river systems, wetlands and irrigation schemes.
    • Soil-crop-water  quality  studies  with  the  emphasis  on  developing
      monitoring tools/technologies and assessing impacts of  soil  erosion,
      mining and water from industries.
    • Establishment of a comprehensive countrywide water  quality-monitoring
      network.

The Chamber of  Mines  of  South  Africa  is  charged  with  waste  disposal
facilities,  removal  of  stockpile,  high  salt  loads   and   high   metal
concentration. It noted that although the mining activities are  destructive
in nature, the industry addresses the enforcement  of  regulatory  tools  in
terms of cooperative governance, when addressing the issue of water  quality

The Department  of  Health  highlighted  and  provided  data  on  water  and
sanitation provisions in health care facilities. It was found that  data  on
water and sanitation in health facilities is not  routinely  collected  and,
consequently, the response to the request for information from the  Province
was mixed and varied.

Masimbambane Civil Society provided a snapshot of a catalogue  of  community
experiences across South Africa  on  water  quality,  access  and  security.
From  its  empirical  data  collation,  it  noted  that  in   some   places,
communities drink oily water, there was no water  at  all  in  some  places,
whilst  in  other  areas;  neither  operation  nor  maintenance  plans  were
available.

Written submissions

The Chemical and Allied Industries’ Association (CAIA), in  its  submission,
recognised the need for a water conservation and water  demand  strategy  in
support of the achievement of national objective such as the development  of
key  sectors  of  the  community,  poverty  alleviation   and   unemployment
reduction. The CAIA  noted  that  it  remained  concerned  at  the  lack  of
coordination  between  environmental  impact  assessments,  and   subsequent
authorisations and water licences.  CAIA further noted the intention of  the
Department to require industrial users who require a licence to  use  water,
to develop and submit a Water  Management  Plan  (WMP)  in  accordance  with
Guidelines to be  developed  by  the  department.   The  CAIA  welcomed  the
intention to integrate the requirements  of  a  WMP  with  an  Environmental
Management Plan.

The Federation of Unions of South Africa noted that the lack of clean  water
could create conditions that lead to the destabilisation in regions  of  the
world  that  are  already  poor,  and  have  problems.    The   presentation
maintained that the lack of potable water could result in  famine,  conflict
over  resources,  and  poor  governance.   Global   trends   of   increasing
population,  increasing  resource  consumption,   and   decreasing   natural
resource availability – including fresh  water  –  have  pushed  many  human
social, economic and political systems to an ‘important tipping point’.

The presentation highlighted the following as an  important  foundation  for
human prosperity:

    • Adequate, high quality water supplies provide a basis for  the  growth
      and development of human, social,  economic,  cultural  and  political
      systems.  Conversely, economic stagnation and political stability will
      persist or worsen in those regions where the quality  and  reliability
      of water supplies remain uncertain.
    • Water problems are geopolitically destabilising.  Water  scarcity  and
      poor water have the potential to destabilise isolated  regions  within
      countries or regions sharing limited sources of water.
    • Poor governance and poor economies in regions around the  world  where
      water is scarce impair the application of  innovative  technology  and
      innovative policies.
    • Effective water planning and management at local and  regional  levels
      require collaboration from a variety  of  people,  including  farmers,
      urban developers, environmentalists, industrialists, policy-makers and
      citizens.

The South African Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu) highlighted three  issues
of concern, that of water quality, water quantity  and  the  enforcement  of
statutory  requirements.   In  highlighting  the  above,  the   presentation
illustrated the manner in which early warning signs  of  contaminated  water
by the CSIR and Samwu were not taken seriously,  which  inevitably  resulted
in typhoid outbreaks.  Dr  Kevin  Wall,  of  the  CSIR,  also  presented  in
February 2006, a critique of South Africa’s water and  wastewater  treatment
plants.  Samwu, after this presentation, attempted to intervene  by  writing
to the former Director-General Mr Mike Muller, but nothing was done.

While Samwu recognises that the issue is a complex one that  does  not  lend
itself to quick-fix remedies, the  presentation  noted  the  following  four
aspects of the problem  that  needed  attention,  before  adequate  remedial
action could be taken:

    • The water and sanitation budgets need to be considerably increased.
    • The commodification of water, within the broader context of  the  ‘now
      fashionable neo-liberal ethos’, in which  municipalities  operate,  is
      highly problematic.  Full cost recovery places a burden on the  masses
      of the poor.  The basic water, free to the poor is inadequate.
    • The problems  are  exacerbated  with  the  incompetence  of  municipal
      managers and councillors.
    • DWAF, it noted, compounded these problems by failing to  exercise  its
      statutory enforcement role.

Mr Mike Muller: School of Public and Development Management,  University  of
the Witwatersrand: This  presentation  focused  on  the  need  to  implement
effective measures to ensure the provision of safe drinking water,  and  the
need to ensure that organisations that are  responsible  for  water  service
providers have the competences they need to do the job.

Mr Muller expanded on the following two issues:

1.  Effective measures to ensure the provision of safe drinking water

The presentation used the findings published in the  2004/05  Annual  Report
of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, in which it was noted  that
only 37% of municipalities complied with  standards  for  the  provision  of
drinking water as set out in SABS241.  This was based on  a  self-assessment
by the municipalities. The actual situation  in  terms  of  the  quality  of
water actually being used was not determined.

The presentation noted  that  the  identification  of  the  problem  was  an
important  first  step  and  action,  to  address  this,  must  include  the
following:

    • Briefing of all municipalities as to their responsibilities  as  water
      service authorities and/or providers.
    • Organising  of  training  for  officials  engaged  in  water  services
      provision.
    • Monitoring and reporting of compliance by auditing the quality control
      process to ensure that the actual quality of water provided  to  users
      is managed on a systematic basis as required in the SABS241.

2.    Ensure that organisations  that  are  responsible  for  water  service
provision
     have the competences they need to do the job

In  current  interactions  with  municipalities,  and   with   professionals
attempting to assist, a repeated concern has been that  many  municipalities
do not have professional staff with the necessary competences  to  undertake
systematically and effectively the many  and  varied  planning,  investment,
financial and operational tasks required to ensure  service  provision  that
meets national standards.

3.    Findings

The findings of various inputs reflected the following  in  terms  of  water
quality in South Africa:

A differentiation was pointed out in terms of the  disparities  between  the
reticulation of good water quality in  the  metropolitan  areas  and  larger
municipalities to other areas.  The following reasons  were  cited  for  the
failure of ensuring good quality water to all areas:

    • Lack  of  understanding  requirements  for  effective  drinking  water
      quality management.
    • Inadequate management, including monitoring of drinking water quality.
    • Inadequate institutional capacity.
    • Lack of interventions to address poor drinking water quality.

In terms of monitoring of water by municipalities, the following update  was
given:

    • The drinking water quality survey of 2005 indicated that only  58%  of
      municipalities are monitoring drinking water quality.   In  2006,  85%
      claimed to be monitoring.
    • The implementation of the  Drinking  Water  Quality  (DWQ)  regulation
      system will replace the annual Drinking  Water  Quality  Survey.  More
      reliable information will then be available.

Drinking Water Quality Management Systems have been implemented in the  Free
State, Western Cape and parts of the Eastern  Cape  and  KwaZulu-Natal.  The
project has been extended  to  provide  the  local  Drinking  Water  Quality
management system to all provinces.

The following challenges were noted by the presentations in terms  of  water
quality in South  Africa.   These  presentations  were  based  on  empirical
research as well as data collation from secondary sources:

    • In a number of areas, insufficient management skills  and  motivation,
      insufficient operations skills and funding  for  water  treatment  and
      supply were recorded.
    • There is a close link between water  quality  and  food  security  and
      therefore there is a need to ensure safe drinking water.  This is  not
      always the case in  some  urban  and  rural  areas,  since  these  are
      confronted with the following challenges:
    • Operators are unskilled and chemical dosing is not understood.
    • Analytical laboratories and skills are inadequate in some areas.
    • Monitoring and evaluation tools are not utilised effectively.

Nonetheless, what was heartening to note in a number of  presentations  were
the creative solutions that were being initiated to address  the  challenges
of  water  quality  faced  by  South  Africa.   It  was  stressed  that  the
governance  of  water  in  South   Africa   incorporates   intergovernmental
cooperation between the local, provincial and national governments.  It  was
noted that various under-researched or unspoken problems in  the  governance
of water quality have now been exposed,  and  therefore  various  strategies
are being utilised to confront and  intervene  in  situations  before  these
erupt as crises situations.  The following examples of the manner  in  which
various sectors are addressing challenges were highlighted:

    • Collaboration of a water quality management programme  between  SALGA,
      DWAF, Department of Health, Education, etc to monitor water quality in
      the Free State Province.  The best practice  methodology  utilised  by
      the Free State Province was specifically highlighted as this could  be
      used as a framework in other provinces.
    • The rollout of electronic water  quality  management  systems  to  all
      water service authorities.  These track over time the samples of water
      compiled and  compliance  of  municipalities  with  quality  of  water
      policies.
    • Electronic water quality management systems are available at 220 local
      municipalities,  which  use  the  Open  Source  approach  to  generate
      knowledge.  Open Source is available at little or no cost.

The need exists for one view that adequately conveys the overall  status  of
water systems of different stakeholders.

The hearings therefore provided an overview on the work recently  undertaken
on water quality to ensure that water quality in South Africa is  maintained
at the optimal level:

 • Sustainable economic development in  South  Africa  depends  on  ensuring
   water quality.
 • To  ensure  equitable  distribution  of  resources,  such  as  the  water
   allocation reform programme.
 • A balance needs to be sought between issues of the environment and socio-
   economic development in pursuit of improving the quality of life  of  all
   people.
 • To begin  to  bring  together  and  strengthen  relationships  to  create
   innovative chains between academia  and  policy  makers  to  ensure  that
   research has an important implementation component and reaches the target
   audience struggling with water quality issues.
 • To ensure that various stakeholders are undertaking whatever actions work
   together the national interests of performance and success in  issues  of
   water quality and security.
 • To come up with strategies and solutions within a think-tank approach  at
   all sectors, ranging from academia, policy makers and at community levels
   to position the future of the water cycle to ensure that the  quality  of
   life of the citizens of South Africa and Africa, within  New  Partnership
   for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), is successfully implemented.

A  persistent  water  quality  problem  is  salination,  increases  in  salt
concentrations through discharges of water containing  waste  by  industries
and  diffuse  pollution  fro  poorly  management  urban  settlements,  waste
disposal on land and mine residue a threat for groundwater.

Man made compounds such as pesticides is increasingly causing water  quality
problems.
Not sufficient submissions were made with  regards  to  water  security.  It
should  be  noted  however   that   water   resources   are   under   threat
internationally. Water is likely  to  be  a  source  of  strategic  rivalry,
depending on the degree of scarcity.

Water is a key element towards a  country’s  development  wwith  regards  to
irrigation, food security, and cheap energy rollout. Actions of one  country
to another as rivers flow from one area to another can have major impacts.

Thus further studies need to be  done  on  challenges  to  security  policy-
makers within the region (water shortage and availability; water supply  and
quality; population growth, cross border migration and urbanisation and  the
threats thereof.

4.    Policies and Legislation informing Water Quality in South Africa

The above submissions and findings, however, need to be located  within  the
manner in which the sector leader, that is, the Department of Water  Affairs
and Forestry, has worked, and is  still  working  toward  water  governance,
reforming water policies and institutions, to  implement  sustainable  water
development and management.

    • Water Services Policy of 1994 focuses specifically on the backlogs  in
      water services provisions in South Africa  and  the  institutions  and
      mechanisms required to address these backlogs.
    • Access to adequate and sustainable water has  become  a  human  rights
      issue enshrined in the country’s new Constitution (Act 108  of  1996).
      Therefore, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is required to
      report to the South African Human Rights Commission on the quality  of
      water provided to the citizens of the country.
    • Water Services Act of 1997 (Act 108 of  1997)  ensures  the  right  of
      access to basic water supply  and  sanitation,  and  also  provides  a
      regulatory  framework  for  and  establishment   of   water   services
      institutions such as water boards, water services providers, etc.
    • The National Water Policy of 1997 (DWAF, 1997) declares that all water
      wherever it occurs in the hydrological cycle is public water, and that
      the national government will act as a  public  trustee.  The  national
      Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,  as  the  custodian  of  the
      country’s water resources, should regularly report  to  Parliament  on
      the state of the nation’s water resources.
    • The National Water Resource Strategy (NWRS) (DWAF, 2004a) provides the
      implementation framework for the  management  of  water  resources  in
      South Africa as required by the National Water Act of 1998.  Published
      in  September  2004  the  NWRS  divides  the  country  into  19  Water
      Management Areas (WMA) in which  quantitative  information  about  the
      present and future availability of and requirements  in  each  of  the
      water management areas is provided, and propose interventions by which
      these may be reconciled.
    • The NWRS recognises the  need  to  implement  and  maintain  different
      monitoring programmes to provide information on different  aspects  of
      water resource quality, as there is no single monitoring programme.
    • The National Environmental Management Act of 1998 (Act 106 of 1998) is
      an overarching legislation relating to the protection  and  management
      of the environment. This law requires  regular  state  of  environment
      reporting in which  the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  and  Forestry
      reports on the state of rivers report and  progress  report  regarding
      aquatic ecosystems such as wetlands and estuaries.

On the international front, South Africa is required to contribute data  and
information to:

    • United Nations World Water Development Report.
    • United Nations Millennium Development Goals.
    • United Nations Education Programme  –  Global  Environment  Monitoring
      System (GEMS) Water.
All  these  national  and  international   reporting   obligations   require
strategic  water  quality  information,  which  has  to  be   systematically
collected over time. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry (DWAF)  is
currently  in  the  process  of  reviewing  the  country’s  water  resources
monitoring networks and programmes in  order  to  appropriately  respond  to
these national and international water obligations.

4.1   National Water Quality Monitoring Programmes[3]

South Africa has recognised the need for monitoring and  assessment  of  the
quality of water in order to determine the fitness for use and  support  the
management of water resources. The DWAF is operating a  number  of  national
water quality monitoring programmes, which include:

4.1.1 National Chemical Monitoring Programme (NCMP)

The programme was initiated  in  the  1970s  to  assess  the  general  water
quality of South Africa’s water resources in  which  samples  were  analysed
for  conservative  water  quality  constituents  such  as   pH,   electrical
conductivity (EC) and inorganic  ions.  However,  the  programme  was  later
expanded to incorporate analysis for  plant  nutrients  such  as  total  and
dissolved  phosphate,  ammonium  and  total  nitrogen  as  the  demand   for
information concerning eutrophication increased.

4.1.2 The National Water Act of 1998 (Act 36 of 1998)

The Act is founded on two pillars: sustainability (long-term  protection  of
the resource) and equity (sharing of scarce resource in  terms  of  quantity
and use of quality). The Act recognises the protection  of  the  quality  of
water resources to ensure sustainability of the  nation’s  water  resources,
and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has primary  responsibility
for managing and monitoring the water resources. For example, Chapter 14  of
the Act spells out monitoring responsibilities of  the  national  government
using the hydrological cycle as a unit. The Act requires  the  establishment
of a  National  Water  Resource  Strategy  (NWRS)  to  set  out  a  national
framework for managing water resources.

4.2   Towards Integrated Water Resources Monitoring

The National Water Act  (NWA)  of  1998  (Act  36  of  1998)  requires  that
monitoring of water quality should be an integral part  of  water  resources
management in South Africa. Chapter 14 of the NWA specifically mandates  the
Minister of Water Affairs and  Forestry  to  establish  national  monitoring
systems to monitor, record, assess and  disseminate  information  regarding,
amongst others, the quality of water  resources.  To  effectively  implement
this legislative requirement in an environment with so many diverse  players
performing monitoring activities, it was recognised that the country  should
develop a holistic  strategy  to  harmonise  monitoring  programmes  and  to
ensure that they are compliant with the requirements of the  National  Water
Act of 1998. A new framework called Strategic Framework for  National  Water
Resource  Quality  Monitoring  Programmes,  within  which   all   monitoring
programmes will be developed, was published. The basic  dimensions  of  this
framework are as follows:

    • Information user-centric approach

All monitoring should be justified by serving  specified  information  users
needs  with  information  they  need  to  perform  their   water   resources
management functions. This is to avoid or eliminate the  problem  of  ‘data-
rich but information-poor syndrome’.

    • Core functions of monitoring

The shift  in  focus  to  information  user-centric  approach  in  designing
monitoring programmes has led to a need to re-define the scope of  the  core
functions of monitoring programmes (for which there are three) as follows:

    • Data acquisition.
    • Data management and storage.
    • Information generation and dissemination.

These three core functions are supported by an IT support infrastructure.

    • Institutional set-up for monitoring governance

The framework has defined the institutional roles and responsibilities  with
respect to water resources monitoring in line with the three tiers of  water
resources governance in South Africa as follows:

(1)   National Monitoring Programmes (mainly status and trends)  are  to  be
      performed and maintained by the central government through Policy  and
      Regulation Branch of the Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  in
      order to provide information required for (amongst others):

    •  International  and  national  level  water  resources  strategic  and
      development planning.
    • Its custodianship role, and  other  national  government  Departments’
      reporting roles, for example, Department of Environmental  Affairs  on
      the State of the Environment in terms of international agreements, for
      example, WWAP, UNEP/GEMS, SADC, Incomati Maputo Tripartite  Agreement,
      etc

(2)    Regional  or  Catchment  Monitoring  Programmes:   Water   management
      institutions such as CMAs will be primarily responsible for:
    • Status and trends monitoring  at  local  catchments  with  resolutions
      finer than used by the national programmes.
    • Programmes to assess  compliance  of  water  users  to  water  licence
      conditions.
    •  Programmes assessing impacts of water uses for  purposes  of  issuing
      water use licenses.

(3)   Local Monitoring  Programmes:  These  monitoring  programmes  are  the
      responsibility of such  local  institutions  as  Water  Boards,  local
      authorities and industries, and other water users.  The water  quality
      monitoring of the country’s water resources will only succeed if there
      is  effective  governance  of  the  entire  process,  and  to   ensure
      information delivery at the three management tiers.

5.    National Reporting Initiatives[4]

There are three-tiers of water  quality  information  needs  with  differing
resolution levels that is information user-centric approach  core  functions
of monitoring and institutional set-up for monitoring governance (these  are
all detailed above). However, to ensure information delivery at these  three
management  tiers,  an  effective  governance  of  the  overall  process  is
required. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is in the process  of
establishing a governance institution to  coordinate  and  share  resources,
infrastructure, data and information across  water  management  institutions
and other role players. This governance process will ensure that:

    • Common standards for data  acquisition,  management  and  storage  and
      information dissemination are adopted.
    • Common quality assurance criteria  are  implemented  across  tiers  of
      monitoring.
    • Coordination of relevant  stakeholder  activities  relating  to  water
      resources monitoring takes place.

This reporting initiative provides  the  most  relevant  details  about  the
status and production of the country’s water resources.

6.    Conclusion

Water quality is  a  term  used  to  describe  the  chemical,  physical  and
biological characteristics of water mostly in relation  to  its  suitability
for intended purposes.   Effective  management  is  the  main  tool  towards
sustainable water resources so as  to  ensure  that  the  quality  of  water
resources is suitable for their intended use. Water quality management  thus
involves the maintenance of the fitness for use  of  water  resources  in  a
sustainable  manner,  by  achieving   a   balance   between   socio-economic
development and environmental protection.

Sustainability, equity and efficiency are recognised as the central  guiding
principles in the protection,  use,  development,  conservation,  management
and control of water resources. These guiding  principles  are  inherent  to
the  management  of  water  quality.  Water  resources  must  therefore   be
judiciously managed and equitably shared by all  water  users  in  the  most
optional manner. In water quality management, sustainability means that  the
protection of water resources must be  balanced  with  its  development  and
use.  This  ‘balance’  is   attained   through   a   process   of   resource
classification,  the  determination  of  an  associated  Reserve   and   the
determination of Resource Quality Objectives. Resource  Quality  Objectives,
inter alia, stipulate in-stream water quality objectives  aimed  at  meeting
the water quality requirements of the  five  water  user  sectors,  and  are
aimed  at  ensuring  fitness  for  use  of  South  Africa's  surface  water,
groundwater  and  coastal  estuaries.  The  concepts  of  Resource   Quality
Objectives and Resource Quality that were introduced by the  National  Water
Act, 1998 (Act No. 36 of 1998), necessitate that water  quality  management,
henceforth, also takes responsibility for  the  management  of  the  aquatic
ecosystem  quality  (in-stream  and  riparian  habitat,  and  aquatic  biota
quality).

The  following  prominent  principles  form  the  basis  of  water   quality
management policies and practices in South Africa:

    • The management of water quality must be carried out in  an  integrated
      and  holistic  manner,  acknowledging  that  all   elements   of   the
      environment are interrelated.
    • Decision-making must ensure that the  best  practicable  environmental
      option is adopted by taking account of all aspects of the environment,
      including all the people in the environment.
    • The precautionary approach to water  quality  management  applies,  in
      terms of the active measures taken to avert or minimise potential risk
      of undesirable impacts on the environment.
    • In general, the principle of Polluter Pays applies. In accordance with
      this principle,  the  cost  of  remedying  pollution,  degradation  of
      resource  quality  and  consequent  adverse  health  effects,  and  of
      preventing, minimising or controlling pollution is the  responsibility
      of the polluter.
    • Participative management in the management of water  quality  must  be
      advocated, ensuring that  all  interested  and  affected  parties  and
      previously  disadvantaged  persons  have  an  equal   opportunity   to
      participate.
    • Transparency must underpin  all  decision-making  processes,  and  all
      information must be made accessible in accordance with the law.

In addition to the recommendations made by  presentations  listed  above  to
the hearings, secondary source material research, as well  as  Members’  and
the Department’s input  to  the  proceedings  also  provided  the  following
important insights.

The following recommendations are a combination of inputs of  formal  public
hearings, oversight visits and  information  gauged  from  secondary  source
material:

Recommendations

The Department of Water Affairs and  Forestry  must  provide  leadership  in
ensuring adequate water supply of acceptable quality for all.  They  include
domestic, agriculture, industry,  recreational  use  and  aquatic  ecosystem
constituting the water resource base.

As sector leader, charged with monitoring and regulating the national  water
sector in South Africa, it is recommended that DWAF:

    • Comply with the provisions of the policies and  legislation  informing
      water quality in South Africa. This would incorporate  the  provisions
      of its constitutional obligations, Water Services Act, the NWRS,  with
      particular  emphasis  on  the   catchment’s   management   areas   and
      international obligations..


    • Monitor and evaluate the national monitoring  systems  to  assess  the
      impact on quality of water in the country. DWAF is operating a  number
      of national water quality monitoring  programmes,  which  include  the
      National Chemical Monitoring Programme, the National Water Act of 1998
      (Chapter 14 specifically mandates the Minister of  Water  Affairs  and
      Forestry to establish national monitoring systems to monitor,  record,
      assess and disseminate information,  regarding,  amongst  others,  the
      quality of water resources).

    • Evaluate the components of the  new  framework  called  the  Strategic
      Framework for National Water Resource  Quality  Monitoring  Programmes
      which was published.  The basic dimensions of this framework, that of,
      information user-centric approach, core functions  of  monitoring  and
      institutional set-up for monitoring governance needs to be evaluated.

    •  Track  progress  in  terms  of  its  establishment  of  a  governance
      institution to coordinate and share  resources,  infrastructure,  data
      and information across water management institutions, and  other  role
      players.

    • Report regularly to Parliament on progress made  on  implementing  the
      principles of water quality management in the country  integrated  and
      holistic;  environmental   options   that   take   the   people   into
      consideration;  risk  management;  the  polluter  pay  principle;  and
      participative management with previously disadvantaged people  gaining
      equal participation.

    • Report regularly to Parliament on the implementation of the Water  Act
      (1998) with  regards  to  its  provisions  on  protection;  management
      strategies and  institutions;  licensing  of  water  use;  a  national
      pricing strategy and an establishment of a national monitoring  system
      and information system.

    • Ensure that all water users accept  responsibility,  upon  issuing  of
      licenses. Monitor progress needs to be made in  the  establishment  of
      catchments management agencies, so as to allow for  devolution  of  an
      understanding  of  water  quality  issues   through   engagement   and
      involvement of people as well as institutions.

    • Prepare a framework for implementation  which  will  include  resource
      water  quality  objectives;  management  objectives;  sectoral   water
      quality management plans and water  use  license  objectives  for  the
      tasks that will face the catchment management agencies.


    • Promote ISO 14001 certification so as  to  extend  its  water  quality
      management capacity. With regards to public  participation  and  civil
      society involvement in particular,  the  National  Water  Act  (1998),
      enables participation. The Environmental Management  Act  (1998)  also
      provides for transparency and participation. These  are  to  occur  at
      catchment’s management and water user association - DWAF  must  ensure
      its implementation.

    •  Implement  and  sustain  through   co-operative   and   participative
      government departments and at local level  in  decision  making,  use,
      development  and  protection.  Such  integration  will  ensure  socio-
      economic objectives and environmental balancing.


    • Conduct the review  on  water  quality  for  the  entire  water  cycle
      especially dam safety.

    • Focus on  ensuring  that  all  levels  of  government  make  budgetary
      requirements towards water quality and operations and maintenance.

    • Considers rural strategy to be involved as there are disparities  that
      exist between urban  water  quality  and  rural  water  quality.  Such
      consideration must been given on a rural strategy that  would  involve
      Water Boards extending human and financial support  to  provinces  and
      municipalities; skills transfer; infrastructure overall  and  ensuring
      that water quality is included in IDP and  water  service  development
      plans.

   The impact of  water  quality  and  security  and  the  choices  made  on
   sanitation on women and children requires much  more  attention,  thus  a
   gender dimension towards water quality management needs to be part of all
   policies, strategies and implementation.

Report to be considered.

________________________________________________________
Sources

http://www.dwaf.gov.za
Water    quality    management    in    South     Africa,     sourced     at
http://www.dwaf.gov.za/Dir_WQM/wqm.htm
http://www.pmg.org.za
Nomquphu W (2005), Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Pretoria.  The
paper is entitled, Overview of the Situation and Cha

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Carriage by Air
   Amendment Bill [B 18 - 2006] (National Assembly-sec 75), dated 13
   September 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the subject of
      the Carriage by Air Amendment Bill [B 18 - 2006] (National Assembly-
      sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
      as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill without amendment.

                         THURSDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human Rights
        Commission (SAHRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


2.    The Minister of Arts and Culture

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre Foundation
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Human Science Research
        Council (HSRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 104-2006].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for the Promotion
        and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
        Communities (CRL) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 124-
        2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly


1.    Annual Report of the Standing Committee on Private Members’
   Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions

CREDA PLEASE INSERT - INSERT T060914E-insert – PAGES 2046-2048

                          FRIDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good
             Laboratory Practice Bill [B 29 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 29170 of
             31 August 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R.843 published in Government Gazette No
        29139 dated 18 August 2006: Amendment of prescribed fees in terms of
        the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).


     b) Government Notice No R.847 published in Government Gazette No 29145
        dated 18 August 2006: Financial Services Ombud Schemes Regulations,
        in terms of the Financial Services Ombud Schemes Act, 2004 (Act No
        37 of 2004).

2.    The Minister of Education

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour Relations
       Council (ELRC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 169-2006].


3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific and
       Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2005-2006, including the Report of
       the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP
       120-2006].

                          MONDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
        Communications Authority of South Africa for 2005-2006, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2005-2006 [RP 133-2006].


 2. The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board for
        2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 119-2006].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited
        for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the International Trade
        Administration Commission of South Africa for 2005-2006, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
        2005-2006 [RP 95-2006].

     d) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Bureau of
        Standards for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 46-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development on Draft  Notice  on  Remuneration  of  Constitutional  Court
   Judges and Judges, dated 13 September 2006:

     The Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
     having considered the request for approval by Parliament of  the  Draft
     Notice on Remuneration of Constitutional Court  Judges  and  Judges  in
     terms of the Judges’ Remuneration and  Conditions  of  Employment  Act,
     2001 (Act No. 47 of 2001) tabled in Parliament on 24  August  2006  and
     referred to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 2(4)  of
     the Act, approve the whole of the said Draft Notice.


 Report to be considered.

2.    Report of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
   Development on Draft Notice on  Remuneration  of  Magistrates,  dated  13
   September 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the request for approval by Parliament of the  Draft
      Notice on Remuneration of Magistrates in terms of section 12(1)(a)  of
      the Magistrates’ Act 1993, (Act No 90 of 1993), tabled  in  Parliament
      on 24 August 2006 and referred to it, recommends that  the  House,  in
      terms of section 12(3) of the Act, approve the whole of the said Draft
      Notice.


   Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Nomination of Persons to fill
   vacancies on the Commission on Gender Equality, dated 18 September 2006:


      The Ad Hoc Committee on Nomination of Persons to fill vacancies on
      the Commission on Gender Equality, was appointed by the House on 2
      November 2005 to make nominations to the House in order to enable it
      to recommend to the President, persons to fill vacancies on the
      Commission on Gender Equality in terms of section 3(2) of the
      Commission on Gender Equality Act (Act No 39 of 1996), read with
      section 193 of the Constitution. The committee was to report to the
      House by no later than 15 February 2006.

      On the 17th February 2006, the House extended the committee’s deadline
      to the 22nd March 2006 in order to accommodate the Local Government
      elections. The committee’s deadline was further extended by House
      resolution on the 23rd March 2006 to the 12th May 2006. The committee
      reported on 11 May 2006 and asked the House to extend the deadline by
      which it must complete its task. These last extensions allowed time
      for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development to re-
      advertise invitations for the public to nominate suitable candidates
      for consideration by the committee.


      The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development received
      nominations and curricula vitae in response to the Minister’s
      invitation to the public to nominate suitable candidates, and
      submitted those to the National Assembly during August 2006, for the
      committee to consider. Of the 75 nominations received, the committee
      shortlisted 19 candidates, and interviewed the following 17:

      1. Ms Thembi Sarah Masilela
      2. Prof. Engela Pretorius
      3. Ms Nomazotsho Memani-Balani
      4. Adv Salome Khutsoane
      5. Dr Nombulelo Siqwana-Ndulo
      6. Ms Rosieda Shabodien
      7. Ms Yvette Abrahams
      8. Ms Bosa Daisy Ledwaba
      9. Mr Xolisani Holland
     10. Mr Bafana Gideon Khumalo
     11. Ms Kenosi Vanessa Meruti
     12. Mr Dizline Mfanozelwe Shozi
     13. Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane
     14. Ms Dudu Masintle Zinneth Mokoena
     15. Ms Janine Louise Hicks
     16. Dr Teboho Maitse
     17. Ms Nomboniso Papama Gasa

      The following candidates withdrew:


  18. Ms Thelma Themba Kgasi
  19. Prof Peggy Nomfundo Luswazi

      The committee, in assessing the candidates, took into consideration
      various criteria which would assist the CGE to fulfil its mandate.


      The committee notes that in terms of section 3(4)(a) of the Commission
      on Gender Equality Act, the members of the Commission may be appointed
      as full-time and part-time members and shall hold office for a period
      not exceeding five years, as the President may determine, provided
      that the term of office of full-time members shall not expire
      simultaneously.


      Having interviewed the candidates, the committee nominates the
      following candidates for recommendation by the House to the President
      to appoint as Commissioners:
      a) Full time:

           1. Dr Teboho Maitse
           2. Ms Nomboniso Papama Gasa
           3. Ms Janine Louise Hicks
           4. Mr Dizline Mfanozelwe Shozi
           5. Ms Yvette Abrahams
           6. Ms Ndileka Eumera Portia Loyilane


      b) Part-time:


           7. Adv Salome Khutsoane
           8. Ms Nomazotsho Memani-Balani
           9. Ms Rosieda Shabodien
          10. Mr Bafana Gideon Khumalo
          11. Ms Kenosi Vanessa Meruti

      The committee further recommends that consideration be given to the
      staggering of the term of office of the full-time Commissioners over
      the period of 5 years.

 Report to be considered.

                         TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
         Authority for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 125-2006].


      b) Draft Regulations regarding the Promotion of Access to
         Information, made in terms of section 92 of the Promotion of
         Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry

      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Industrial Development
         Corporation of South Africa Limited (IDC) for 2005-2006, including
         the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
         for 2005-2006.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs Board
         for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
         the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 11 – Public Service
        Commission (PSC) for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements of Vote 11 for 2005-2006 [RP
        129-2006].

-----------------------
[1]   Water   Quality   Management   in    South    Africa,    sourced    at
http://www.dwaf.gov.za/Dir_WQM/wqm.htm

[2] Parts of the summation were sourced from: http://www.pmg.og.za

[3] The information was  largely  extracted  from  a  paper  by  Nomquphu  W
(2005), Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Pretoria.   The  paper  is
entitled, Overview  of  the  Situation  and  Challenges  for  Water  Quality
Monitoring and Reporting in South Africa.
[4] The information was  largely  extracted  from  a  paper  by  Nomquphu  W
(2005), Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Pretoria.   The  paper  is
entitled, Overview  of  the  Situation  and  Challenges  for  Water  Quality
Monitoring and Reporting in South Africa.


