---
title: 'National Assembly - 18 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-10-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2006

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:04.

Acting Speaker Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

      Passenger railway stations under SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd
                                jurisdiction

251.  Mr V C Gore (ID) asked the Minister of Transport:
      (1)   How many passenger railway stations fall under the jurisdiction
           of the SA Rail Commuter Corporation Ltd in (a) metro and (b) non-
           metro areas;

      (2)   whether any of these passenger railway stations comply with the
           National Building Regulations and Building Standards Act, Act 49
           of 1995, in terms of access to people with disabilities; if not,
           what policies have been put in place to address this
           shortcoming; if so, how many?

                       N676E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, the SA Rail Commuter Corporation
has 319 stations that fall under its jurisdiction. These stations fall
within the metropolitan areas as the SARCC currently operates in the six
major metropolitan areas of Cape Town, Greater Johannesburg, Tshwane,
eThekwini, Buffalo City and the Nelson Mandela metropolitan area. The
answer to part (b) is: None.

Regarding the second part of the question, it is acknowledged that many of
the above-mentioned stations currently do not adequately address the issue
of access for people with disabilities, as many of these stations were
constructed prior to relevant legislation and regulations pertaining to
people with disabilities from an accessibility perspective. However, the
SARCC is addressing these problems. Also, policy relating to the
accommodation of special-needs passengers on the rail system has been
developed addressing the issues contained in this Act, such as in the
Constitution, and the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair
Discrimination Act. The term “special-needs passengers” also includes the
elderly and the young, just to name a few, in addition to people with
disabilities.

This policy that I’ve just highlighted takes a total service concept
approach and takes into account and responds to areas such as
infrastructure and facilities, that is stations, passenger information and
bridging the gap between the platform and rolling stock.

Furthermore, the policy also acknowledges the need to ensure that all
personnel, rail police and the SA Police Service are appropriately trained
in disability awareness to assist all special- needs passengers as well as
ensuring the availability of all these elements. For example, recently, a
pilot project was implemented in Cape Town to upgrade two key stations,
making them more special-needs passenger friendly. The two stations were
Mandalay and Lentegeur stations. The lessons learned from this project and
the effectiveness of the measures introduced will be incorporated into the
designed guidelines and standards.

Another project, the new Khayelitsha railway line extension, with two new
stations, including the associated pedestrian bridges, has been designed
using universal design principles and is currently being built to be fully
inclusive and ensure barrier-free travel for passengers. Thank you. There
is a lot of noise, Chair, in this House.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Especially on my left, hon Minister.

Mr V C GORE: Thank you, hon Chair, and thank you, hon Minister, for the
informative information and for your acknowledgement that not enough is
being done in this regard. Hon Minister, there can be no disagreement or
argument about the fact that people with disabilities remain one of our
largest marginalised sectors of our community today. If we wish to build a
society – a completely inclusive society - we need to ensure that people
with disabilities and their families are able to travel from their homes to
their places of work, to places of worship, to their places of recreation
and to their places of education and learning.

If we are unable to achieve this, we have failed this sector of our
community. This question, hon Minister, has highlighted a very important
component of the public transport system and how people with disabilities
continue to be marginalised from mainstream society.

Hon Minister, in response to your answer, I’d like to ask whether there
would be a commitment from yourself and from your department that, in the
future, no new railway stations will be built that do not provide adequate
accommodation for people with disabilities, as well as that any old railway
stations that are refurbished will be done in such a way that they provide
for reasonable accommodation for people with disabilities? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Hon Chairperson, I want to assure the hon member
that we’ll ensure that we abide by the law. Also, we believe that it is
correct and right to correct what has happened previously by not providing
adequately for people living with disabilities.

This coming weekend, on Sunday, we will be having a public transport indaba
in Soweto, and we have invited your association so that we can incorporate
all the elements and things that are needed in order to ensure that when we
implement our public transport plan, we take into account the issues that
you’ve just addressed.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Thank you, Chairperson, Thank you, hon Minister, for your
answer. I think there has been great progress in whatever initiatives you
have been tackling. Nevertheless, hon Minister, may I ask you whether,
while acknowledging the shortfall, any interim initiatives to assist
disabled persons have been initiated?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, I have already indicated in my
reply that, for example here in Cape Town, in upgrading the old stations of
Mandalay and Lentegeur, we’ve made sure that we provide the necessary
infrastructure that will make them accessible and responsive to people
living with disabilities. As we progress with other upgrades, we’ll make
sure that we do the same.

But, as I’ve indicated, with all new infrastructure in the form of railway
stations that are going to be built, we’ll accommodate all the issues so
that passengers who are disabled are able to travel without any hindrance.

Mr M M SWATHE: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, during one of President
Mbeki’s state of the nation addresses some years ago, he referred to the
Expanded Public Works Programme, which would ensure accessibility to all
public facilities by disabled people as part of job creation programmes.

I have been made aware that the ramp into the Marks Building took nearly
four years to be built. Does this department or the Office of the President
have a special budget for providing access for the disabled? If so, what is
the amount, and how has it been adequately spent over the past financial
years? Could some of these funds be transferred to the SARCC to speed up
the process? Thank you very much.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Minister, do you want to attempt to
provide some information on that? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: I was last the Minister of Public Works from
1994 to 1999. There is a brand new Minister of Public Works called Thoko
Didiza, and also there is a Minister called Dr Essop Pahad, who is the
Minister in the Presidency and to whom this question should be directed.
[Interjections.]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Minister. Order!

Mr J P CRONIN: Thank you, Chairperson. Thanks to the Minister for his
replies, including the last response to a question that didn’t seem to
relate to the actual question. Also, thanks to the hon Gore for raising
this question, because I think it actually is a very pertinent issue.

The portfolio committee took an oversight trip to have a look at the
developments around the Gautrain. One of the things that most interested us
was how the Gautrain was going to interface with existing Metrorail
infrastructure. So we had a look at Park Station, which is going to be one
of the major stations that will interface with the Gautrain.

As it happened, we had a disabled member with us on the oversight trip. And
I must say just negotiating Park Station and travelling to where the new
Gautrain connection would be proved to be a huge mission for all of us, but
particularly for the disabled member.
In following up, I would like to ask the Minister whether he agrees that
the Gautrain project also puts additional responsibilities on the SARCC to
ensure that their existing stations are upgraded in the direction that the
hon Gore has asked.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Yes, I agree with the hon Cronin that we are
dealing with a huge backlog, but I’m making an undertaking that whenever we
do the upgrades, we’ll endeavour, to the best of our ability, to follow the
letter of the law by upgrading stations so that people with disabilities
can access them, even Park Station.

Regarding the Gautrain, it will be incorporated so that we do not come back
again, because the costs of upgrading specifically for the disabled would
be more costly than the cost upfront, at the beginning.

I must indicate that I’m also personally very sensitive to this issue. I
was conscientised long ago by an architect by the name of Phillip Thompson
who assisted a great deal in improving the accessibility of especially
public buildings for people living with disabilities.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Minister. Question
266, which has been asked by the hon E N N Ngcobo, has been withdrawn.

    Enterprise funding, monitoring mechanisms and communications strategy

255.  Ms M M Mdlalose (Nadeco) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      (1)   Whether his department records how many women per province
           received funding for start-up enterprises by his department; if
           so, (a)(i) how many of these enterprises have failed and (ii)
           what were the reasons for their failure, (b) how many of these
           enterprises are successful, (c) what mentoring mechanisms are
           currently in place to ensure the success of start-up
           enterprises, (d) what criteria are used to select mentors and
           (e) how regularly do mentoring interactions take place;

      (2)   whether his department has put any mentoring mechanisms in place
           to monitor implementation agencies such as Khula, the Nations
           Trust and others to ensure that loans that were granted yield
           successful businesses; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details;

      (3)   whether his department has put a communications strategy in
           place to (a) encourage entrepreneurship amongst the youth,
           especially graduates with degrees that do not necessarily
           guarantee them employment and (b) inform the poor and unemployed
           about empowerment programmes offered by his department; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        N1431E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson,
with respect to parts 1 and 2 of the question, information on services
provided to women entrepreneurs is recorded by some agencies. For example,
women currently make up around 35% of the Khula indemnity portfolio client
base, and Khula actively encourages women entrepreneurs to apply for start-
up finance.

With respect to failures, the department does not keep records on failed
start-up businesses. It does, however, operate from the established
assumption that there is a high failure rate amongst small businesses the
world over, especially amongst start-up enterprises.

High failure rates amongst South African small business enterprises persist
in spite of support services such as the Khula mentorship. There is a
multiplicity of reasons for these failures. For example, according to banks
participating in the Khula indemnity scheme, many start-ups fail due to
poor financial management.

The high failure rate amongst start-ups is also generally due to the lack
of skills in business administration. Most small business people in South
Africa are survivalists and lack the necessary entrepreneurial training.
This is especially true of women entrepreneurs. A number of failures are
also due to cash-flow sensitivity of SMMEs in general, and a tendency
amongst some to mix up personal and business financial management.

With respect to successful enterprises, SMMEs can be regarded as successful
if they survive beyond three years and meet their loan obligations during
that time. While the failure of start-ups is high, there are several women
entrepreneurs who fall into the category of being successful.

Khula has a mentorship programme which assists would-be entrepreneurs with
information, preparation of business plans, and postfunding mentor
services. Khula accredits independent contractors, who operate from
regional offices in the provinces, to provide these services on a needs
basis. The regional offices are open during office hours and SMMEs can make
contact for whatever mentoring services they may require.

Regarding part 3 of the question, over and above a number of SMME
initiatives of the DTI, the department has launched an annual
entrepreneurship programme in July and August of every year. This is
dedicated to public communication, information dissemination, consultation
and advisory services.

In addition, the DTI has another outreach initiative: “Taking the DTI to
the people”, which is led by my colleague, the Deputy Minister Elizabeth
Thabethe. This seeks to inform existing and aspiring entrepreneurs about
support services that the DTI and its agencies provide in provinces.
Further to these initiatives, a partnership with the institutions of higher
learning has been established through the Chairs of Entrepreneurship
programme currently being developed in conjunction with the Wits Centre of
Excellence, which focuses on targeting places of higher learning in
disadvantaged areas. I thank you.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon members! Please, will all
members be seated, and will you please lower the noise levels.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you, Chair. Minister, the development of the
second economy is cardinal to the wellbeing of South Africa’s populace. One
wonders what the Small Enterprise Development Agency has actually achieved
in bringing this about.

I have found that the average person I have spoken to within my
constituency,  which embraces a large element of the second economy, has
really no idea of Khula, Apex, the IDC or Seda. There is a lot of
government support out there, but they just don’t know about it - the very
people we are trying to uplift in the second economy.
You also mentioned that the failures were due to financial management, lack
of skills and enterprise training. Now the question I would like to put to
the Minister is this: Should Seda not be repositioned to provide a one-
stop, walk-in service for potential entrepreneurs, and also to harness
private-sector experience? I am thinking of grey power in particular. It
should go further than just handing out forms. I don’t think Seda, as
currently structured, is fully in that position.

The question really is and I’ll repeat it: Should Seda not be repositioned
to provide a one-stop, walk-in service to assist the small entrepreneur?
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson, my
reply is that that is exactly what Seda intends to provide. I think the
fact of the matter is that Seda has emerged from a long self-critical
reflection on services that were provided to small businesses in the past.
I think one of the points that we have acknowledged is that the services
were not sufficiently targeted at very small and micro enterprises in the
second economy. One of the major objectives of Seda is to be able to
provide a service that makes sense to those parts of the economy as well.

The Seda programme is still in the roll-out phase, but the intention is to
move in the direction of providing a one-stop service. It is trying also to
build on the experience of the manufacturing advisory centres, the Macs,
which provided a diagnostic service which was then able to identify further
needs for small businesses. I think this was one of the most successful
programmes which we had. However, it is a highly skills-intensive and
resource-intensive service that is provided. We are trying as much as we
can to roll out services of this sort within the human and financial
resource constraints that we face. Thank you.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Chairperson, hon Deputy President ... [Laughter.] Deputy
Minister, sorry! My question is exactly the opposite. I do not want to know
about a one-stop service, but have you considered reaching the people by
putting up mobile units?

You said you have an outreach programme. Does that include mobile services?
Because there are thousands of micro enterprises involving women, but they
lack accounting skills, and if they have to pay for auditing services, this
can cost as much as R10 000 a year.

If they could apply for special support and special help in the form of a
mobile unit which could assist them with accounting services and auditing
services - would boost the entrepreneurial skills of millions of women in
the country. I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Well, the
eventual aim of the Seda roll-out is to establish a Seda outlet at the
level of each municipality in the country. How this will operate in terms
of further outreach, I think, is a matter for the local management of the
Seda concerned. If they consider some form of mobile outreach service, that
would be fine.

Some of our programmes, including the one I mentioned that my colleague
Deputy Minister Thabethe is leading are designed precisely to get the
information out in as many people-friendly ways as we can. So I am sure
that some of these ideas would be considered and, where relevant, would be
taken up. I thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to know from the hon
Deputy Minister whether any progress has been made with the establishment
of one supportive fund for women’s entrepreneurship organisations, as
expressed by Elizabeth Thabethe in her address, Advancing Women’s Economic
Empowerment Through Entrepreneurship, delivered in June this year. Could
the Deputy Minister perhaps enlighten us on the fund?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson,
there is a process under way, which my colleague is leading, which is
generally dealing with the issue of women’s empowerment and the promotion
of women’s entrepreneurship. We are not yet at the point where we are able
to make any announcements about that programme, but work is under way and I
think within the fairly near future we will be making some announcements in
this regard.
 Cofisa and its impact on addressing problems of social delivery and poverty
                                 alleviation

266.  Mr E N N Ngcobo (ANC) asked the Minister of Science and Technology:

      (1)   Whether, with reference to the second economy sector, the Co-
           operation Framework on Innovation Systems between Finland and
           South Africa, Cofisa, that was launched on 28 September 2006 is
           expected to make a real impact in addressing problems of social
           delivery and poverty alleviation, especially at provincial and
           local government level; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details;

      (2)   whether, in light of the fact that South Africa’s gross domestic
           product of GDP of 0,94% in terms of its gross national
           expenditure, GDE, on research and development, R&D, is far below
           that of Finland, he will use Cofisa to persuade the National
           Treasury to adjust the current percentage of GDP in GDE on R&D
           to strengthen our own national system of innovation against that
           of Finland; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?

                 N1795E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson. The
answer to the first part of the question is yes, the Co-operation Framework
on Innovation Systems between Finland and South Africa, known as Cofisa,
has the overall objective of strengthening the national system of
innovation in South Africa.

A critical focus of the Cofisa instrument will be on provincial and local
government level innovation challenges, providing appropriate policy advice
and identifying a range of strategic interventions to address these
challenges, drawing on Finland’s experience in frontier science and
technology and rural development innovations.

Cofisa has the potential to make a real and significant impact on service
delivery and poverty alleviation at provincial and local government levels.
It emphasises the importance of integrating national innovation activities
into provincial-level economic strategies and to facilitate close working
relationships and strong partnerships between the Department of Science and
Technology, other national departments and the affected provincial and
local government authorities.

Cofisa also fosters a spirit of collaboration between national public
agencies, provincial and municipal spheres of government, the private
sector and academia in order to generate sustainable economic growth and
development.

Cofisa will draw on the Department of Science and Technology’s experiences
of partnering with other institutions within the South African National
System of Innovation including the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, the Agricultural Research Council and universities in the
implementation of a variety of technology-based poverty alleviation
projects.

The answer to the second part of the question is no. Hon member, we do not
intend to use Cofisa in any direct way to persuade the Treasury to increase
allocations to research and development. However ... [Interjections.] ...
Thought you might like that. However, the close relationship we have with
Finland and the demonstration of the social and economic benefits derived
from investment in science and technology will, no doubt, be influential in
our discussions, not only with the National Treasury around increased
public-sector investment in R&D, but also with the private sector.

We must remember that in the early 1990s, Finland was in an economic
crisis. At the time, the mainstay of its economy was natural resources and
forestry-based products. The collapse of the former Soviet Union meant the
loss of Finland’s primary foreign market. Finland made the conscious
decision to invest in research, science and technology as the core of its
economic recovery and development strategy. Thank you.

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Thank you, Chair. Hon Deputy Minister, according to the
Frascati Manual of the OECD, research and development is one of the
innovation activities that may be carried out at different phases of the
innovation process and it comprises creative work undertaken on a
systematic basis in order to increase the stock of knowledge, including
knowledge of man, culture and society, and the use of this stock of
knowledge to devise new applications that seek to improve quality of life
in society.

Many countries have failed to create a better future for their people. This
is not because they have failed to predict the future, but because they
failed to imagine their place in that future. It seems therefore that the
hon Minister, by jointly launching with His Excellency the Ambassador of
Finland the so-called Cofisa between Finland and South Africa on 28
September 2006, has been able to both predict and imagine South Africa’s
place in global innovation systems of the future.

The question is: Will the hon Minister therefore review South Africa’s
national systems of innovation with regard to the second economic sector to
copy from some of the successful approaches followed in the global system
of innovation, such as the Chinese example in which they adopted the so-
called Corporate System of Innovation to develop the second economic
sector? [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson. I am
not so sure about our ability to imagine the future, but I do think that
our research and development strategy has a good sense of where we are
going and certainly manages to create a vision for where we want to be in
the future and certainly takes into account the likely changing scenario
that we are facing.

We will not copy from any other country. We will obviously draw lessons
from other countries in how they have designed their innovation systems and
there are lessons to be drawn from many countries including Finland and
countries in the East.

I don’t think that it’s incumbent upon us to try to impose or introduce
lock, stock and barrel a system that works in some other countries, but I
do think it is wise for us to examine systems and the extent to which they
have achieved successes in their own countries and draw lessons from those
countries and apply them to our own situation. Thank you, Chair.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Mr Chairman, we are delighted to hear that the Minister
is willing to reconsider some of the policies of his department. I do
believe that we should not only concentrate on Finland, but that we should
in fact be concentrating on what is happening in South Africa as far as
technological innovation is concerned.

I want to refer to an example so that the Minister can see what I am
referring to. Last weekend, the Smart Award was handed to a South African
company from Kempton Park. The company is making road grader equipment
which not only grades the road, but rolls the road and waters the road at
the same time. This innovation is extensively used in Kenya and by our
neighbouring countries. But the orders for the machine are very low ...

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Your time is running out, hon member.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: One would like to know how we are going to assist such
organisations to be able to come forward with their innovations and, have
them tested in South Africa so that they can produce and export.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson, and
thanks for the question. Indeed, we are a country of innovators and great
inventors. I think one of our challenges is to convert those good ideas
into commercially viable products. There the challenge is to get a good,
strong intellectual property rights regime in place.

I noticed the Minister of Transport pricking up his ears when you spoke
about this magnificent road grading equipment, etc. I am sure he will have
a direct interest in the work that they are doing. However, the Department
of Science and Technology’s side is to fund the necessary research to
further the work and enhance the work that a variety of departments are
doing to recognise genuine innovation and to create a framework which will
give expression to that innovation.

You started off your question by saying you are glad to hear that we are
reconsidering policies. Well, I didn’t say that. There is no particular
policy that we are reconsidering.

However, to improve our work, we would certainly want to see ourselves on
an ever-improving curve. If there are particular policies that you have in
mind that you think don’t quite address the challenges that we face, please
bring this to our attention and we will relook at them. Thank you.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Minister, there is a form of innovation that doesn’t
need imagination; it just needs restoration and preservation and this
relates to the indigenous knowledge within our country.

About eight or 10 years ago, we began to hear about an indigenous knowledge
Bill from the Department of Science and Technology. I don’t believe that
that Bill has yet materialised, and there is a vast amount of traditional
knowledge relating to herbs and medicines that is not being developed
because of problems with IP. Is there some thrust in your department or
some added impetus that will be given to this sector through this new
partnership? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson.
There is a lot of poetry in your question: preservation, conservation and
innovation. But the question is good. We have greatly strengthened, as you
will notice if you read our annual report, our Indigenous Knowledge Systems
Unit in the Department of Science and Technology.

That Bill is in a sort of late stage of preparation and will come to
Parliament. I can’t give you a date right now, because I didn’t prepare
myself with that information. We will pass that information on to you and
let you know exactly at what stage that Bill is – but it’s very advanced at
this point.

You are quite right in saying that indigenous knowledge holds tremendous
potential to address the variety of social challenges that we have in our
country, and we recognise that in our department.

The Bill is intended to give that knowledge that we have in our society due
recognition, to give it the necessary protection in terms of the
intellectual property rights systems that we have in place and to encourage
further research work to draw on the existing knowledge that we have within
our communities. Thank you.

 Economic partnership agreement between the European Union and South Africa

 262. Mr S J Njikelana (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:


        In light of a recent report tabled by the European Commission
        (details furnished), what is the current state of development of an
        economic partnership agreement, EPA, between the European Union and
        South Africa?                               N1791E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson, in
South Africa’s view, and one which is shared by other SADC members involved
in negotiating an economic partnership agreement – EPA - with the EU, the
Southern Africa region can use the EPA negotiation process to develop a
regional approach to our trade relations with the EU.

The SADC-EU-EPA negotiations were launched in July 2004 and the mid-term
review of the South Africa-EU Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement
was initiated in 2005. The timing of the review and the concurrent EPA
negotiations offer an opportunity to consolidate a regional trade
arrangement between the countries in Southern Africa and the EU.

To this end, the SADC-EPA Trade Ministers met in February 2006 and adopted
a proposal that would draw South Africa and other SADC members into a
negotiating process, which is intended to lead to a single trade regime
with the EU. This proposal represents a political consensus among the SADC-
EPA members, including South Africa. It establishes a set of technical and
legal parameters to achieve a positive negotiation outcome by December
2007. At the time, the current arrangement between the EU and the African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries expires. Thank you.

Mrs F MAHOMED: Thank you for the response, hon Deputy Minister. We
acknowledge that we are no longer isolated from the global community and
that, in fact, we have become an active global player with major economies.
Indeed, the European Union is South Africa’s most important economic trade
partner, and this partnership is expressed in the following ways: trade,
development, co-operation, sociocultural co-operation and political
dialogue.

Deputy Minister, I wish to express my concern. My concern is: How effective
is implementation of international trade agreements, and do they really
take place in terms of their implementation?

Deputy Minister, I would also like to ask you to please detail your comment
on the review process of the South African–EU trade development co-
operation agreement. Perhaps you could explain to us if this process will
contribute to effective implementation and realisation of the contents of
that particular agreement. We have a tremendous challenge in the SADC
region to understand the impact of these agreements on the second economy,
that is the poorest of the poor. Thank you. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): The Trade
Development Co-operation Agreement, or TDCA, as the member indicated, has a
number of aspects to it. One of them is the trade component. The trade
component consists, in part at least, of a series of tariff reduction
commitments. I think that both sides are on track to implement the tariff
reduction commitments that were agreed to and began to be implemented in
the year 2000. So, I think that as far that aspect of market access is
concerned it’s moving ahead.

However, regarding where the hon member wants to go, the fact that you have
formal market access in terms of tariffs regimes doesn’t necessarily mean
that all enterprises and particularly those in the second economy are
poised to take advantage of these opportunities. That depends on issues to
do with real economy capacity constraints. This is actually a fairly
massive challenge, becoming more so in view of the fact that there is a
tendency in Europe to be raising the bar on issues of standards and
potential technical barriers to trade.

Some of these issues are under discussion in the mid-term review. But, the
point about the mid-term review and the EPA negotiations is that the two
are basically aimed at reaching and improving on free-trade agreements.

The understanding which is now being reached between ourselves and other
members of the SADC negotiation configuration is that we will now harmonise
these two processes, and whatever we seek to improve in the TDCA we would
also seek to extend those improvements to the other members. And, whatever
they manage to succeed in in the EPA negotiations, we would hope that that
would be extended to us as well. Thank you.

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Chairman, hon Deputy Minister, one of the reasons for the
collapse of the Doha talks in Geneva in July this particular year was that
some of the developed countries like EU members and the USA were very
reluctant to lower tariffs on agricultural products.

Now my question to you, hon Deputy Minister, is: In your talks with the EU,
is there a possibility that some of the tariffs on agricultural products -
and you have alluded to the fact that the bars have been raised by some of
the EU members - will be relaxed on some of our agricultural products and,
in particular, on our canning industry in the Western Cape which has been
badly hit by the high tariffs of the EU?
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Well, I think
that it is not just tariffs, but also subsidies that are under discussion
in the WTR. Both of these are major barriers, among other things, in the
canning industry, which the hon member has mentioned.

I think that our approach has always been, when we negotiated the TDCA,
that we were unlikely to achieve major reform of agricultural trade on a
bilateral basis with the European Union and, in fact, we didn’t. Most of
the products that were left out of the TDCA on the European side are
agricultural products, and that is why we put our effort into the WTO
process.

The member uses the term “collapse”. I think the actual term is
“suspension”. There is work under way now; lots of consultations and
discussions to see whether there are various windows of opportunity to
restart those negotiations. But I think we would be looking to the
multilateral process to achieve a significant breakthrough both on the
issue of agricultural tariffs and perhaps on the more difficult question of
agricultural subsidies. Of course we will be raising these matters in the
bilateral processes as well. I think our expectations are a bit higher in
the multilateral process. Thank you.

         Basic fuel price mechanism and high fuel prices in country

270.  Mr M H Matlala (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:
      (1)   What is her department doing to address the problem of high fuel
           prices;

      (2)   whether the current basic fuel price mechanism is still the
           right pricing mechanism for the country; if not, why not; if so,
           what are the relevant details?               N1800E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The
answer to the first part of the question is as follows. South Africa, being
a non-oil-producing country, has this particular matter as its biggest
challenge. We continually investigate ways of mitigating the impact of high
oil prices, but we have limited options that are available to us. The
department has in the past used the equalisation fund to minimise price
increases, but this mechanism does not address price increases. It only
cushions the effects of the price volatility.

The answer to the second part of the question is, yes, the import parity
price is still relevant to fuels. A recent global fuels pricing report
indicated that South African basic fuels price, in US dollar terms,
compares very favourably with the basic fuels prices in other countries
worldwide. Since the beginning of 2006, South Africa has begun to import
finished products, because our local refining capacity is almost exceeded
by local demand, and indeed we are quite concerned about the security of
the supply of fuel.

The country will, henceforth, need to import the finished product until a
new refinery is built, or existing refineries are expanded. If our local
prices are lower than import prices, these imports will not be made,
thereby putting the country at risk. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mnr J J COMBRINCK: Voorsitter, hy is nie vandag hier nie, so ek sal die
opvolgvraag stel.

Voorsitter, agb Minister, met dié dat die plaaslike vraag na brandstof al
hoe meer styg, is daar enige planne om nuwe raffinaderye op te rig en gaan
enige van die oues wel uitgebrei word? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr J J COMBRINCK: Chairperson, he is not here today, so I will ask the
follow-up question.

Hon Minister, seeing that the local demand for fuel is increasing steadily,
are there any plans to build new refineries and will any of the old ones,
in fact, be expanded?]

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): I am not sure if the Minister was
able to follow.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: My Afrikaans is nie baie sterk nie,
meneer. [My Afrikaans is not very good, sir.]
The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Let’s ask the member to repeat the
question. Will you get your device working?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Yes, please. I was distracted when the
question was asked. I am sorry, hon member.

Mr J J COMBRINCK: Agb Minister, met dié dat die plaaslike vraag na
brandstof al hoe meer styg, is daar enige planne om nuwe raffinaderye op te
rig en gaan enige van die oues wel uitgebrei word? [Hon Minister, seeing
that the local demand for fuel is increasing steadily, are there any plans
to build new refineries, and will any of the old ones, in fact, be
expanded?]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Well, definitely, hon member, being
concerned about the security of supply of fuel in the country, we indeed
have a problem of storage, which means therefore that we need refineries.
But we also have a problem with the transportation of fuel from the coast
to the inland areas. That also is infrastructure that this country needs.

Yes, there are quite a number of projects that are still in the pipeline,
and I still have to crack the pipeline open, and bring the information to
the House. At this point, I am not able to disclose that particular
information, but indeed we are doing something about it.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Minister, do you have any plans or strategies for
developing the use of renewal forms of energy, such as removing levies from
people who produce biodiesel, or providing special incentives and maybe tax
incentives to people who use renewable energy of other forms? That would
make a huge contribution to reduce the pressure on the use of oil and other
fuels.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Well, we are working on a strategy for
biofuels and biodiesel and all of those things. In November we will be
submitting that. Anything that is related to levies is a money issue, so it
would be the Minister of Finance that would be looking at either levies or
subsidies, working together with the Department of Minerals and Energy.

I hope that the strategy for biofuels, which would also look into
biodiesel, would look into the matter that you are raising. Indeed, as I
said, we will be presenting it to Cabinet in November. We hope to start
implementing it next year in January. We will be taking on board all of
these concerns that people are raising, and all of these matters that would
help enhance what we are doing. I have taken note of your point on this.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Thank you, Mr Chair. The DA agrees with the view that the
high fuel price is a problem, in fact, a major problem, and that an
alternative pricing mechanism ought to be developed to, if possible, reduce
the price of fuel. We believe that a greater degree of self-sufficiency and
reliance in the supply of fuel would prevent an increase in the current
balance of account deficit that exists and the resultant positive economic
spin-offs.

The question is basically, although along a different line, whether any
progress has been made with regard to the development of a new refinery,
such as Sasol IV, versus a policy in which, as I think Ms Nhlanhla Gumede,
the director of hydrocarbons has indicated, there is a possibility of
importing fuel and not more on the issue of self-reliance with regard to
the production of fuel. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Surely, you need a number of
initiatives. You can’t rely on one answer in this particular matter. As for
the issue of Sasol IV, again, I am not able to respond to that matter.
Indeed, we are looking at all of this as answers. One of the things that we
are looking at is entering into a strategic partnership between the private
sector and the public sector to address this matter. It is a matter that is
uppermost on my agenda.

We are facing 2010, and there will be a challenge. We will need an
increased fuel supply in the country. It does preoccupy my mind a lot, but
indeed the House will get a report when I am ready. Thank you very much.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Thank you, Chairperson. I listened to the answer of the hon
Minister when she referred to the fuel levies. I wonder if the Minister
would be prepared to just enlighten us on why the pump price in South
Africa is much higher than the pump price for fuel in landlocked countries
like our neighbour Lesotho, for instance?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: That is a very difficult question for
me, but maybe I will respond to that question from the experience of South
Africa. The fact that you are transporting fuel from the coast to inland
areas does have an impact on the price or on the cost of fuel inland. So
surely the consumer will incur the cost? That is the situation, and I am
sure that it is the situation with Lesotho.

If the hon member wants a specific response about Lesotho, I could come
back if you put your question again, and I can respond specifically. As for
South Africa, that is the situation.

                   Shortage of strategic technical skills

265.  Mr E N N Ngcobo (ANC) asked the Minister of Science and Technology:


      Whether, in view of the critical shortage of strategic technical
      skills (details furnished) for our fast growing economy, he has any
      plans of a holistic approach involving other relevant ministries in
      the relevant clusters, as well as other stakeholders and advisory
      bodies such as the National Advisory Council on Innovation, NACI, and
      Parliament, over and above the effort of the Joint Initiative on
      Priority Skills Acquisition, Jipsa, in addressing these difficulties;
      if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
      N1794E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, the answer is
yes. The Department of Science and Technology, or DST, is part of the
economic and employment cluster which established the skills focus group in
2005. The skills focus group consists of the Department of Science and
Technology, the Department of Education, the Department of Labour, the
Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Home Affairs, and is
primarily responsible for national human resource development.

The skills focus group deals with all long-term human resource matters and
submits its recommendations to the cluster for endorsement. For instance,
the skills focus group has developed quota scarce and critical skills and
master scarce and critical skills lists which are at advanced stages of
finalisation.

The quota scarce and critical list is used to facilitate the issuing of
work permits by the Department of Home Affairs and is gazetted annually.
The Master Scarce and Critical list addresses both absolute and relative
scarcity of skills, now and in future, and will be submitted to Jipsa and
subsequently to Cabinet for approval. The DST submitted its input into this
process.
Other DST plans include the following. Chairperson, just stop me when I run
out of time because there are a lot of them. There is the science,
engineering and technology human capital strategy, which is being finalised
and will consist of a technical skills section with measurable indicators.
There is the 2005 human resources for knowledge production conference
follow-up project which is currently under way. The main aim of the project
is to identify and recommend implementation plans for various resolutions
taken at the conference. This should be done by April 2007.

The Department of Science and Technology recently hosted an academic
support and life-skills workshop that focused on the current low science,
engineering and technology student retention and throughput rates. All
higher education institutions and the Department of Education attended the
workshop.

The DST and Tshumisano are currently establishing a tooling institute. It
is expected that some of the 30 students that the department sent to India
between 2004 and 2006 will join this institute. The Department of Science
and Technology, and the Department of Provincial and Local Government and
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry awarded bursaries and are
currently giving stipends to 15 masters students in disaster and risk
management.

The DST and the Department of Transport are currently training 10 students
on freight logistics. The DST is currently running an internship programme.
There are about 74 interns with strategic technical skills placed at the
DST, the CSIR, Mintek, LifeLab, the SA Bureau of Standards, the SA Nuclear
Energy Corporation, the SA Institute for Aquatics, and the SA Agency for
Science and Technology Advancement. These are some of the things the DST
does in order to make a significant contribution to human resource
development in our country.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): You just made it, hon Minister, with
one second to spare.

Mr E N N NGCOBO: Chair, in view of this urgency of critically scarce skills
in fields like veterinary science, nuclear energy technology, cryogenic
engineering and so forth, would the Minister, as a matter of urgency,
convene a national workshop that would involve all the relevant
stakeholders, such as the chemical industry which has a serious shortage of
skills, and all other relevant departments like the Department of Labour
and the Setas, so as to try to address this problem as a matter of urgency,
with all viewpoints from all relevant stakeholders? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Chairperson, I suppose we
can take that as a recommendation or an appeal. But I must say that the
main departments responsible for skills development and the shortage of
scarce skills would be the Department of Labour and the Department of
Education.

However, we make our contribution as the Department of Science and
Technology. We participate in these processes and we will continue to do
so. In so far as there are scarce skills that are critical to the needs of
the science environment in our country, we will engage with those relevant
departments, which are the primary departments responsible for this
programme. Thank you.

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: I want to thank the Minister for that frank reply,
because I think everybody in this Chamber agrees with him that there is an
extreme shortage of technological people in this country. To send 30 people
to India to become toolmakers is totally inadequate if we want to address
the present situation in the manufacturing industry in South Africa.

The world is opening up its markets, Mr Minister, and skilled nations are
racing not only to get their share of that market but to increase their
share of that market. The Public Works committee just recently returned
from Wales where we visited a factory at which they produce 600 bridges a
year. This just shows how the skills have changed in Europe compared to
where we are in South Africa.

We still need to rebuild some 280 bridges in South Africa and we will be
doing it the old way, not in the way the Welsh are doing it. For that
reason, I think, this cluster of Ministries should realise that there is an
urgent need for skilled people. We import vast numbers of motor cars into
South Africa. Where are the trained motor mechanics, the trained spray
painters, etc, etc? Thank you. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: There are few developed
countries if any in the world that do not import cars. We certainly have a
fast growing automotive industry in our country. That, we can say, is one
of our success stories in terms of our economic performance in our country.
But it is true that we lack certain skills. It is difficult. I wouldn’t
want to refer to it as a crisis, but it is a huge challenge, a challenge I
think that the Minister of Labour and the Minister of Education are acutely
aware of.

I think the initiative called Jipsa is very important to address this
shortage of scarce skills. I think the participation of the private sector
and labour in Jipsa is very important as well. They make a major
contribution to this process of identifying and analysing the particular
problems that exist and putting in place a framework which will help to
address the problem.

You can name just about any trade and you will find that we do have
shortages – a severe shortage of welders, toolmakers, etc. These are areas
of critical shortage, that is true. But it is also true that this is partly
a reflection of our fast-growing economy, in the sense that the demand for
such skills is totally outstripping supply.

However, I don’t want to say that we have done well enough on the supply
side and on the training side. I think it remains a very significant
challenge. We are aware of it. I think that you are right to emphasise the
need for us to keep driving it and to ensure that we have the necessary
skilled personnel in our country to meet these economic challenges. Thank
you.

               Auditor-General’s audit opinions on agriculture

283.  Dr A I van Niekerk (DA) asked the Minister for  Agriculture  and  Land
      Affairs:

      Whether, with reference to the audit opinions expressed by the Auditor-
      General on the financial statements for the 2005-06 financial year for
      the (a) Agricultural Debt Account, (b) Agricultural Research Council
      and (c) the Land and Agricultural Development Bank, she will be taking
      any steps against any of the relevant accounting officers, financial
      management and internal audit officials; if not, why not; if so, what
      are the relevant details?
            N1815E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chairperson. No
steps will be taken against the accounting officer, financial manager and
internal audit officials. The agricultural debt account is constituted in
terms of the Agricultural Debt Management Act, Act 45 of 2001, and
administered by the Department of Agriculture.

Debts resulting from loans granted by the former Agricultural Credit Board
are recovered and paid into the mentioned account. These loans are managed
in terms of contracts between the department and debtors, with recovery
periods of up to 20 years or more.

For the past three financial years the National Treasury granted the
department exemption for adhering to the standards prescribed in respect of
financial instruments for accounting purposes. Such exemption was, however,
not granted for the 2005-06 financial year and the account was therefore
qualified by the Auditor-General. This is, at most, a technical
qualification in the sense that the accounting system applied by the
department for the past few years has not fully met the general accounting
practices as prescribed by the National Treasury for trading entities.

It must be mentioned, however, that the department does not agree with the
classification of the account as a trading entity. It should be noted that
meetings have already started and have been concluded, and arrangements
have been concluded with both the Office of the Auditor-General and the
National Treasury in order to rectify the above.

It should be noted again that the Auditor-General did not criticise the
correctness of the accounting records such as loan accounts, etc, but the
application of the financial instruments on consolidated loan and other
account balances. The management of the account on a day-to-day basis was
financially sound.

The next question, which is the qualification on the financial statements
of the Agricultural Research Council, was on two matters. The first one is
noncompliance with the International Accounting Standard 16 Evaluation of
Property, Plant and Equipment.

The second matter was the existence of accounts receivable with respect to
VAT on PG. International Accounting Standard 16 relates to the re-
evaluation of assets and evaluation of useful life of assets. This standard
was not, until December 2005, harmonised to the South African general
applied accounting practice. The re-evaluation policy on assets by the
Agricultural Research Council prescribes that assets are evaluated every
two years, whilst the standards prescribe that they be evaluated each year.

However, prior to the end of the financial year, the Agricultural Research
Council had already started with the process of using a property company to
conduct valuations on the land and buildings of the Agricultural Research
Council. The Agricultural Research Council has further been in contact with
the accountant-general to get guidance about implementation of the public
sector standards.

The Agricultural Research Council’s VAT status was changed in October 2005
after the transfer from Vote No 25: Agriculture was made and paid over to
the Agricultural Research Council without VAT input. This change in VAT
status required that the parliamentary grant received from the department
should have included a 14% VAT on the PG.

At year-end, discussions were entered into between the Agricultural
Research Council, the department, and the National Treasury with regard to
VAT input owed by the Agricultural Research Council to Sars. The department
has agreed to make a submission for the funding of VAT through Adjustment
Estimates. However, there was no sufficient evidence to assist the external
auditors. Given these compliance-related matters raised above, it is
evident that compliance was dependent on authority outside the ARC as an
organisation. [Time expired.]

Dr A I VAN NIEKERK: Hon Chair, I want to say thank you to the hon Minister
for the explanation in this regard. As you have well stated, many of these
problems that have been experienced in the different accounts resulted
basically from technical points to a large extent.
Within your department you are suffering because of a vacancy rate of 25%,
and there has been an exodus of qualified people from the department. My
question to you is: Does this situation have anything to do with that? What
are you doing in this regard? For instance, the Agricultural Research
Council has outsourced some of its functions to get expertise in order to
comply with this. Are you considering outsourcing some of these functions
in view of the problems that you experience in filling the vacancies within
your department, because I think it is very important that we get the
agricultural family accounts on track again in this regard? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you, hon member. I
should just explain that the vacancies in the department are not 25% but
19%, as we speak. This was due to the restructuring within the Department
of Agriculture. At the moment we are busy looking and we have already
advertised quite a number of posts. We are in the process of interviewing.
We have already employed a few senior managers whose posts were vacant in
the last three months, and we will continue with the interviews in the
coming few months.

We have to ensure that there is transformation and we have to ensure that
there is gender representivity. So, perhaps some of the problems or
challenges arise from the fact that it is not easy to find the right
balance in terms of meeting our equity standards and the requirements for
transformation. Thank you, Chairperson.
Mr H J BEKKER: I thank the hon Minister for her reply. She has stated that
the problems probably occurred through the cash basis of accounting instead
of the required accrual accounting, as required by the Public Finance
Management Act.

I just want to enquire regarding the queries relating to value added tax
whether the hon Minister could give us the assurance that the next time the
Auditor-General investigates and audits these aspects, these institutions
will indeed be on the accrual system; and whether they will be able to
render better accounting systems for Parliament? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much,
Chairperson. Thank you to the hon member. Definitely, we have a new council
that has been appointed and a new CEO. Therefore I do believe and expect
that in light of the fresh blood that has been ushered into the
Agricultural Research Council, these will be new brooms that will sweep
clean. As I have already mentioned, arrangements are in place and
negotiations have been made for the new system. Thank you very much.

Mr S ABRAM: Chairperson, in concluding the question asked by the hon Van
Niekerk - he naturally seeks relevant details - I would like to say that
the hon member is a very old hand in parliamentary procedures. In fact, he
has a quarter of a century’s experience. I was a bit disappointed but he
apologised that he could not be present when the Land and Agricultural Bank
appeared before the portfolio committee last Tuesday.

Nevertheless, the hon member is also aware that the Department of
Agriculture, which will have to report on the agricultural debt situation
as well as the Agricultural Research Council, will be appearing before the
committee in the weeks to come. I therefore believe that the hon member
could have gotten all the details he wanted by engaging those entities when
they appeared before us. Hon Minister, could you just indicate ...

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

    ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly support for economic partnership
                              agreement process

264.  Mrs B M Ntuli (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      How will the delegation representing South Africa at the upcoming
      African, Caribbean and Pacific countries-European Union, ACP-EU, Joint
      Parliamentary Assembly in Barbados in November 2006 support the
      economic partnership agreement process in order to secure the best
      interests of South Africa and its neighbouring countries?
                             N1793E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (dr R H Davies): Chairperson, the
African, Caribbean and Pacific countries–European Union Joint Parliamentary
Assembly, or JPA, is a gathering of parliamentarians from ACP countries and
the EU member states. As such, it is up to the relevant parliamentary
bodies and hon members who are deployed to the JPA to assess how best to
advance the interests of South Africa and other developing countries in the
economic partnership agreement process currently under way between ACP
countries and the EU.

In general terms, South Africa has always supported the view that the
economic partnership agreement, EPA, process should result in enhanced real
access to the European Union market for products from ACP countries, as
well as improved resource flows to address supply capacity constraints. Any
reciprocal concessions from ACP countries should fully respect the
principles of asymmetry and differentiation, and not impose unmanageable
adjustment costs on ACP countries.

As far as our own SADC-EPA negotiating group is concerned, the EPA process
should promote and not undermine current processes of regional integration
in Southern Africa. In this light, the EU should positively respond to the
proposal agreed to by the SADC-EPA Trade Ministers in February 2006, to
draw together the EPA processes with the mid-term review of the South
Africa-EU Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement. We believe that
the EU should no longer treat South Africa differently from the rest of the
region as regards the region’s trade arrangements with Europe. Thank you.

Mrs B M NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy Minister, in previous
meetings of this forum, collaboration focused mostly on the joint
initiative for South Africa’s participation in the sixth framework
programme and the strengthening of the policy dialogue on harnessing
science and technology for sustainable development, as well as co-operation
in multilateral forums such as the World Summit on Sustainable Development
with the ACP group of states.

South Africa’s treatment was separate from SADC and funding was allocated
by the EU for South Africa’s FP5 thematic projects. The question is: If the
proposal that will be put forward to remove the dichotomous division
between South Africa and SADC trade arrangements with the EU to advance
regional development succeeds, is funding going to be directed to SADC? How
are the SADC countries going to manage this fund? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): I would imagine
that there would be a series of bilateral programmes with each of the SADC
countries and then also a programme of support for the regional integration
process as such.

The principle is that we would want to see the regional integration
programme driven from within the region itself and not as a kind of by-
product of negotiations which we are having with an outside party, in this
case the EU. I think that on the trade front we are calling for there to be
a harmonisation of trade regimes.

I think we would look to support for regional integration. Also, since
regional integration, at least at this stage, is not going to end national
efforts to overcome underdevelopment, we would want to see generous
contributions to national development programmes as well. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, thank you. Minister, it is
clear with the failure of the Doha round and the WTO talks aimed at
restarting the process that not many countries will give handouts to South
and Southern Africa. In return for concessions to us they want concessions
in return. It is, of course, imperative that we take all steps necessary in
concert with other nations, including those in the ACP-EU regions, to
promote ourselves and our trade. The Minister speaks with such passion
about that forum; I think perhaps he should accompany us for old times’
sake and help us to give the Europeans a little stir.

In addition to those initiatives, there is a much more important one. That
is one that we must take at home. I’d like to ask the Minister exactly what
steps the government is taking to make South African exports more
innovative, more attractive, more competitive and more sought after.
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Well, I think
that there are a number of legs. One of the legs is what the hon member was
referring to just now and that is the competitiveness agenda. There is a
lot of work that is involved in that through the sector work, which our
department is sponsoring, and the new industrial policy framework will
certainly have that as a key objective.

The other leg is that we need to recognise, in terms of the current
international trading environment, that South Africa was excluded from many
of the more favourable trade arrangements. We largely managed to deal with
that through negotiations in the first few years of our democracy. We are
now addressing the question of some of the imbalances and inequities in the
global trading system.

We would want to look to any initiatives, including the EPA initiative,
including the WTO process - that I don’t think, as I said earlier, is quite
dead; it’s under suspension and could go in a number of different
directions and we need to be preparing for all those possibilities - to
achieve a more equitable arrangement so that market access can be enhanced
in real ways through tariffs, through subsidy reductions and through the
reduction, if not the elimination, of technical barriers to trade. Thank
you.

         Security of energy supply relating to 2010 Soccer World Cup

269.  Mr S K Louw (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:
      Whether systems currently in place are adequate to ensure security of
      energy supply, specifically as far as the upcoming 2010 Soccer World
      Cup tournament is concerned; if not, why not; if so, what are the
      relevant details?                            N1799E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon member, regarding the
present situation, our liquid fuel supply is adequate to meet the current
demand, that is if there is no major upset to change the situation in the
near future. However, the upcoming 2010 Soccer World Cup will impose
additional energy demands on South Africa. My department is on course with
plans to meet the increased demand.

A fuel strategic supply task team, FSSTT, which is a private-sector-
government collaboration, was formed and tasked to develop and implement
short, medium and long-term fuel supply strategies. The fuel strategic-
supply task team has commissioned a study that is investigating the current
supply value chain which will now be concluded in December 2006. The study
will indicate the problem areas and provide options for solving all
identified supply and logistical problems. The fuel demands for the 2010
Soccer World Cup tournament are factored into the study.

The department also participates in the interdepartmental committee on the
2010 World Cup tournament. The outcomes of the FSSTT study, with regard to
the 2010 Soccer World Cup tournament, will also be given to this committee
to arrive at a consolidated government position on the tournament.

From the electricity perspective, a national study has been done regarding
the electricity needs. The national integrated resource plan is a supply-
demand projection of electricity over a period of 20 years. It is currently
being updated in light of the improved economic environment that is
anticipated around 2010.

At the disaggregated level, the electricity needs in the respective host
cities are also known, and we can confirm that there is enough capacity in
all of the host cities. Additional plans are being put in place to ensure
that the electricity supply, whilst available, is also reliable and that
the risk of blackouts during the World Cup is mitigated. Thank you very
much.

Mr S K LOUW: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, is the department making
progress with the Moerane commission’s recommendation to consider changing
the current policy regulating the importation of refined petroleum products
to include third-party suppliers?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Well, definitely, hon member. The
department, together with SA Petroleum Industry Association, Sapiais
working very hard to ensure that we implement the Moerane commission’s
recommendations, one of which you have alluded to.
However, there was also a programme that was running parallel to the
Moerane commission project in terms of which we had developed guidelines
for imports and exports. I have recently approved the promulgation of these
guidelines and they should be published in the Government Gazette before
the end of next week.

One of the major changes that we have made is to permit licensed
historically disadvantaged South African wholesalers to import finished
petroleum products and blending components, noting that only refiners are
currently permitted to import petroleum products and blending components.
So, yes indeed, we are doing something about it, hon member. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Hon Chair, it is envisaged that South Africa will become a
net fuel-importing nation within the next two years, by the latest 2009,
based on the current annual increase in the demand for fuel. The major
concern relates to the inland where it is expected that the availability of
fuel will be under pressure during the World Cup. This relates to problems
in the transportation of fuel inbound. This is due to the lack of
availability of rail transport and sufficient petroleum pipelines.

The question is, hon Minister: When do you expect to implement the
arrangements to provide for a sufficient supply of petroleum, particularly
to the inland during the World Cup? We take note of all the studies, but we
are concerned that by the time some of these studies are completed, the
time period for implementing some of the recommendations of these studies -
building pipelines and the rest - will be a bit too short. Thanks, hon
Chair.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: All of these matters are on the agenda
of the department, for me and Sapia, especially the issue of
transportation, as I said earlier on, as well as the capacity in
refineries. So we are really working very hard to ensure that this happens.

I am not able to disclose anything at this stage, but there are certain
things that are happening. At this point, it is very difficult to give
information. I will just appeal to the House to be a little patient. We
will come back to you.

We are busy with the pipeline, because it’s part of the recommendations
from the Moerane commission to ensure that we do have a system that will
help us transport fuel from the coastline to inland areas. But, again, the
issue of the fourth refinery with regard to Sasol is something that has
been spoken about, but at this stage it’s very difficult to disclose where
the developments are.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Mr Chair, I was wondering whether I can ask Mr Louw a
question relating to transport as to whether he has paid his taxi bills.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): No, Mr Louw is not taking any
questions this afternoon.

 Taxi recapitalisation programme, the vehicle construction industry and the
                                    SABS

286.  Mr S B Farrow (DA) asked the Minister of Transport:

      Whether he has been informed of major discrepancies which exist
      between recently gazetted technical regulations for the taxi
      recapitalisation programme and the vehicle construction industry, with
      particular reference to roll-over protection and seat space widths and
      configuration; if so, why were the SA Bureau of Standards and the
      vehicle manufacturers not consulted by his department before the
      regulations were published?

                  N1818E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, Chairperson. The answer is no, I am
not aware of any major discrepancies that exist between the recently
gazetted technical regulations for the taxi recapitalisation programme and
the vehicle construction industry.

I would, however, like to explain the critical issue related to roll-over
bar protection for minibus taxis. When the September 2005 requirements were
published, the SA Bureau of Standards still had some technical work to
complete. I subsequently met with the SABS and the vehicle manufacturing
industry at the end of September 2006 at which time we clarified all these
issues. Consultation between the department and the vehicle manufacturing
industry has been ongoing throughout the taxi recapitalisation process.
Thank you.

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Minister. I raised this question purposely
because, as you are aware, the portfolio committee was recently addressed
by Santaco and the other taxi association, and this was one of the issues
that came to the fore. Clearly, there were some regulations which were not
compliant and in particular the issues relating to seat configuration.

Now the new taxi vehicles have certain specifications relating to that, and
yet it appears that the owners are adding seats to these particular
vehicles, which automatically either makes them overloaded or they continue
to be safety infringers. The very fact, Minister, that the weights in those
seats are exceeding the 68kg limitation, specified in the Act, seems to be
a flaw.

It is impossible to enforce, because how do you weigh people when they go
into each and every taxi as they all have different weights? I would just
like to say that this industry, according to the report, seems to be
battling with rising costs and competing for the same ranks. So, obviously,
they are trying to squeeze more passengers in, which is why I brought this
question up.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, your time has expired.
Would you like to respond, hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: I didn’t hear the question.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): The member will miss that
opportunity.

Ms N P KHUNOU: Thank you, Chairperson. Could the Minister indicate whether
adequate time will be provided to manufacturers to adjust production lines
to some of the more challenging new regulatory requirements, for instance
the introduction of roll-over bars in minibuses? Thank you, Chair.

THE MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: I just want to assure the hon member that on 28
October 2006, in two weeks’ time, in Botshabelo in the Free State we will
be starting the actual process of scrapping the old taxis in South Africa
and introducing new taxi vehicles. As we speak the SA Bureau of Standards
is busy certifying minibus taxis and midi-buses so that we will be able to
unveil the new taxi vehicles. So, as I sit here I am very confident that we
are on track in terms of rolling out the taxi recapitalisation programme.
[Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chair. Sorry, I was in the wrong seat when I
pressed there. I put the point over to you, Minister. What I wanted to ask
was: Would you consider, rather than dealing with Santaco as a whole and
having this confusion down at the bottom, bringing to the notice of taxi
associations on a piecemeal basis a plan to integrate them with the present
public transport initiatives that are being considered at the moment?

We have seen success stories of this happening in other places in the world
like in Bogotá. I was just wondering whether you wouldn’t consider this as
a better medium to try to get the message through and ensure that these
people now focus on the issues of public transport as an integrated
process, together with the compliance and the law enforcement that goes
with this problem that we are sitting with. Thank you, Chair.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Santaco is the official voice of the taxi
industry in South Africa. I meet with them all the time. My director-
general and my senior officials meet with them all the time. Even yesterday
I was with Santaco in Johannesburg and with Sapia at which they were
starting a very exciting programme of self-regulation in support of the
industry as a whole.

The meeting that I referred to in my answer on 28 September was with
Santaco, the vehicle manufacturers, the commuter organisations and the
financial institutions, together with the SABS. So, all the decisions that
we take as government are with the consent and understanding of Santaco. In
any event, we fund them because they are the ones in 2001, during the time
of the late Dullah Omar, that wanted – and we also want – to be formalised
within the public transport system.

I indicated in the earlier questions that next week Sunday we are having a
public transport indaba and Santaco is going to be there. We are going to
further explore the plan for public transport in South Africa. So I am very
satisfied that they are very much on board and we are going to be rolling
out this programme.

           Distributing agency for funds from the National Lottery

259.  Mrs X C Makasi (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:

      Whether he has taken any steps to ensure that the distributing agency
      for the allocation of funds from the National Lottery to civil society
      organisations in the field of social development is appointed; if not,
      why not; if so, what steps?       N1446E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): Chairperson, the
distributing agency for charities was appointed on 15 June 2006. By the end
of July 2006 the appointments were all accepted and an orientation
programme was conducted on 14 August 2006. The distributing agency
continued with the work of adjudicating applications from 18 August 2006.
Thank you.

Mr D A A OLIFANT: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Comrade Deputy Minister,
there has been ongoing speculation in the papers that money distributed
from the National Lottery Fund is not forthcoming to the people that most
need it. Do you believe that this agency, that has been appointed, is
adequate to ensure that the money is forthcoming and on time to get to
these people that need it the most? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): I think that the
Act requires that fit and proper people are appointed, and these should be
people with knowledge of charities and social development issues in this
particular case. I think there is, without doubt, room for improvement in
terms of the general efficiency of allocating funds, but I do think that
quite often the media reports are quite exaggerated in that there is a
significant distribution of funds that has taken place.

It is not this particular block of funds for charities that is the problem.
There are some particular rules that govern some other parts of the Lottery
Fund. I think the funds that are available for charitable work generally do
get out. There is a bit of a debate as to whether community-based
organisations, without all the formal requirements, have an adequate crack
at this. That is a matter of debate and would require changes in the
legislation if we were to open up further in this direction. Thank you.

Ms H WEBER: Chair, I would just like to find out if anything has been done
with regard to distributing funds to the NGOs that have not gotten funding
for the past five months, and I would also like to know what interest is
accrued to the monies which are not distributed.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Dr R H Davies): I think the
decisions about allocating funds are left to independent distributing
agencies, and it is up to those distribution agencies to decide whether any
particular NGO or applicant would receive the funds. If there have been
backlogs and delays in the process, well, I am sure that the new
distribution agency would be willing to act as expeditiously as possible to
try to speed up processes, and we would certainly want to encourage them in
that regard. Thank you.

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Thank you, Minister. The Romans kept the populace happy
with bread and circuses. Unfortunately, we had a Lotto circus with very
little bread recently. The Lotto is of tremendous interest to hundreds of
thousands of South Africans, both players and beneficiaries, and the recent
debacle of not having distribution agencies in place timeously - not with a
three, four or five-month gap - caused great hardship to many charitable
organisations and the needy.

Minister, I recently introduced a private member’s Bill, amending certain
sections of the Lotteries Act. I don’t know whether you have seen it, but
it provides for the tightening up of timeframes, increasing the capacity of
distributors, and ensuring that there is no gap between the appointment of
one distributor and the assumption of office the successor. Minister, are
you prepared to give these amendments your favourable consideration?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: I am sure the hon member knows
the process of private members’ Bills. They are referred to a committee and
the department concerned is asked to comment on them. I am sure that
process will be followed and if there is merit in the proposals, I am sure
we will entertain them.

   Cost of flood damage and ground movement to the N2 in the Southern Cape

256.  Ms N C Nkabinde (UDM) asked the Minister of Transport:


      What (a) is the estimated cost of the flood damage and subsequent
      ground movement to the N2 in the southern Cape and (b) are his
      department and the responsible agency’s strategies in dealing with
      this matter?                                             N1435E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, the answer, firstly, to part (a)
is: the SA National Roads Agency Limited, Sanral, has estimated the cost of
the flood damage and subsequent ground movement to the N2 in the Southern
Cape to be between R60 million and R80 million, as some of the failures are
still under investigation.

The answer to part (b) is: It is the intention of Sanral to repair the N2
by stabilising the failed embankments, and to construct a half viaduct near
the Dolphin Point. This viaduct investigation and design is almost complete
and will be put out to tender by the end of this month, October 2006.
Sanral foresees the construction period to be between eight and 10 months.

The N2 was opened to two-way traffic on 10 October this year. As part of
the stabilisation process and repair and replacement work, the road will be
closed from time to time. Road users will be timeously informed of these
road closures via the media.

Ms N C NKABINDE: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Minister, for the
answer. Would the Minister indicate whether the estimate that he alluded to
includes the long-term socioeconomic costs, or is it just a short-term
solution? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: As I said, these are still the preliminary
investigation estimates. So when the composite investigations are complete,
we will know the enormity of the problems that we have to confront.
However, in terms of dealing specifically with the damage that was caused,
the estimate is between R60 million and R80 million.
Mr S B FARROW: Thank you, Chair. First off, I would just like to
congratulate the efforts of Sanral. I have been to that site a number of
times and have seen the efforts that have gone into that site. Obviously,
it’s using up their own budget, Minister. In this House, during August, we
called for a national disaster to be declared as a result of the
devastating impact not only of the closure of the N2 but also of the floods
on that area and the surrounding towns.

The resulting agreement was that the Western Cape province was actually
going to make the necessary application but on a district basis to
formalise that process. Could the Minister inform the House what the status
of this application is and in particular share with the House knowledge he
might have in terms of the funds flowing into the Eden district – that is
the people facilitating that - for the specific purpose of paying the bills
that have been incurred for the emergency roadworks that have been
undertaken in order to reopen that pass. Also, are there are any plans to
ensure that alternative roads are being planned around this route in the
foreseeable future? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Well, other than what Sanral is dealing with, I
wouldn’t know what the status of that application is. That will be within
the purview of the Minister for Provincial and Local Government.

Mr S A MSHUDULU: Minister, arising from your response, my question is
whether, after your investigations, you will then align your plan with the
Disaster Management Act to prevent or reduce the risk of future disasters -
to mitigate against the severity or consequences of future disasters - in
terms of road infrastructure, or emergency preparedness in these instances,
or rapid and effective responses to future disasters of this nature, or
postdisaster recovery and rehabilitation?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Part of the problem of disaster management is
that disasters are very unpredictable most of the time. However, Sanral has
put in place an emergency response mechanism in order to deal with these
issues. I am also aware that in provinces and especially in local
government, there are institutional arrangements that are in place to deal
with disaster management issues. So, to answer your question directly,
there is an effort by Sanral to ensure whenever emergency situations arise
out of disasters that those mechanisms are activated.

 Tax incentives for the promotion of research among private institutions and
                                their impact

252.  Mr V C Gore (ID) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (a) What tax incentives exist for the promotion of research amongst
      private institutions and (b) what is the envisaged impact that these
      tax incentives will have on the levels of research amongst such
      private institutions?                        N678E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chair, and thank you, hon
Gore, for the question. Of course in the Budget this year we announced
incentives for research and development. The incentives consist of an
increase in the deduction for tax purposes of research and development
expenditure, including salaries from 100% to 150%, and an increase in the
depreciation allowances for capital expenditure from the normal 40-20-20-20
to 50-30-20. So, it is accelerated depreciation for tax purposes.

The key issue with R&D is to try to define and revisit the definition so
that there is certainty for the investor. When one looks at the challenge
in a number of jurisdictions, there is an attempt to facilitate the
attraction of people involved in research into companies but also some
measure of national benefit.

So, it is a very hard thing because you don’t want to vest people employed
in the SA Revenue Service with such discretion that oversight is thereby
minimised. But now that we have it in the tax code, it is going to be
important that we are able to evaluate it from time to time and ensure that
we are marching in step.

The Department of Science and Technology has articulated a set of views.
Earlier questions related to Finland and whether the department can advance
its interests through Finland. I think that here, through amendments to the
tax code for R&D, we are in fact on much safer ground to be able to attract
new investment into research and development. Thank you, Chair.

Mr V C GORE: Thank you, hon Chair, and thank you, hon Minister, for the
very informative answer and for the initiative. I think it is critically
important that more money is put into research and development in this
country and not only to increase money coming into this country, but also,
as you quite correctly say, for social gain as well.

South Africa has a proud history of developing products and services as a
result of research and development for the local market and for the export
market. We think particularly of the Kreepy Krauly, the dolosse and open-
heart surgery.

One of the concerns that I have, despite this very good initiative which
must be welcomed, is how we protect our own intellectual property in this
country. We don’t want the research to be developed here at the cost of
South African taxpayers, to then become intellectual property to be
exported and then the products of that intellectual property to be
reimported into this country at a premium. How can we get around that, hon
Minister?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, it is more of a line-function
question. Amongst the difficulties is the fact that so many of the South
African inventions now find much wider usage. You mentioned the dolosse
being one. The other is, of course, the technology used for heavy haulage
in rail. It is an entirely South African invention.

There has been no intellectual property protection granted and, in fact, in
both of those instances – Minister of Transport - it was the old Railways
and Harbours that spent the money on developing the product. It is lost;
it’s gone.

The Ministry of Science and Technology placed before us a research and
development strategy, which is exceedingly important. Amongst the proposals
within the strategy is the fact that where there is public investment into
some design, some R&D, then there should in fact be some recoupment of what
has gone in by ensuring that the vesting of intellectual property rights
include that of South Africa as a whole.

Now, this applies very strongly to research undertaken in universities, as
it does in many of the science parks attached to universities. However, I
think, the other area where we increasingly need to find some resonance for
this is in the indigenous base of our knowledge. We know how large
pharmaceutical companies have run off with indigenous knowledge. So, we
have got to bring all of these together.

I think between the Department of Science and Technology and the Department
of Trade and Industry we have got to continue to lean on them, but from a
tax perspective I want to assure the hon Gore and this House that the
incentives are in place. We hope that we will be able to measure progress
in research and development, because we have to bridge that limit. It might
be unofficial for now, but the 1% of GDP spent on research and development
is the measure that we should seek to perform against. Thank you, Chair.

Mr N M NENE: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, Minister, for your
response and the matter has been canvassed especially on the issue of
skills. As a follow-up, in a country plagued by a chronic lack of
appropriate skills, to what extent are these initiatives going to benefit
the previously disadvantaged in creating opportunities for developing
skills in support of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition?
And, what monitoring mechanisms have been put in place to ensure that these
initiatives are not abused for market research, as this would only benefit
individual companies instead of the broader economy and the country at
large? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chair, I am going to sound like a bit of a
philistine when I make this point. Part of what we need to understand is
that growth and opportunity will arise from our ability to let go as well.
The ability to attract engineers and hard technical skills can actually
make a difference. This is because part of what we need to understand as a
country is that by having the investment, by frequently using South African
surroundings, the needs that obtain in this country, the resources that are
available, by adding value to them, we will in fact be creating further
opportunities.

If we think that South Africa is going to be a country that is entirely
dependent on muscle work, we will be left behind in the global need for
increased competition. I don’t think that these are binary choices. We must
be able to advance, and I think part of the advance is the ability to take
forward from the base we have.

If you look at skills shortages now, the skills shortages in areas like
information technology are indeed profound. There are a million job
opportunities begging in South Africa, there are 4 million unemployed
people - a complete mismatch.

Now, if you only focus on the 4 million, believing that it has to be in the
areas of digging trenches, I think we are going to make serious mistakes,
hon Nene. We must be big and bold and far-sighted enough to understand how
these things come together. It is by having the technology and the
technologists that you will create new industrial opportunities. Thank you.
Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, the Minister referred
in an earlier reply to the benchmark of 1% in terms of investment in R&D as
a national strategy. Could he just let us know how far we are as far as
that is concerned? I think the year is 2008, in which we are supposed to
have achieved that. There was also a figure mentioned in that national
strategy of 2% of GDP, but a date was left unsaid. Is there now a date
attached to that? What is the target date? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, I actually think that the Deputy
Minister of Science and Technology is better able to deal with it, because
it not just a measure of government. Clearly, we’d measure what the science
councils are doing, but you have to factor in what the private sector is
doing as well and there is the total GDP. Perhaps, with your permission, I
could ask Deputy Minister Hanekom if he has the number and to just share it
with us.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: I’m next anyway.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: You’re doing it next.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): It is coming up later on the Question
Paper.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chair.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, I am sure you are aware of
the programme that is being developed at RAU for the development of thin
film solar technology - a partnership between government, the Johannesburg
University and businesses in South Africa. That technology was developed
here and yet it is being produced by companies in Germany. The claim is
that it is done in this way because there are so many more incentives for
the production of a new technology in Germany.

You mention that you have put incentives in place. Will these equate with
what is offered in Germany and would this now negate the argument that it
is better to produce the technology in Germany? Also, generally, you spoke
about putting your head together with Science and Technology, so are you
also considering putting your head together with the hon Minister of
Minerals and Energy to promote the development of renewables in some way?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chair, I am not quite sure how far the questions
are going to deviate from the question on the Question Paper. The question
on the Question Paper was about tax and incentivising research and
development. Now, we can spend time and talk about these issues. I know the
Deputy Minister there. If the Minister were here he would be able to
confirm this - and it is not RAU, but the University of Johannesburg.

He would be able to confirm that since you last read that in a newspaper,
there has been phenomenal development, and that there has been significant
change. However, I will let him do that in subsequent questions.

On renewables, there is an ongoing battle. Part of our problem is, of
course, that we have a remarkable source of low-cost energy. Now, I don’t
think, again, that we must choose to put in wind generators when we should
be investing a bit more to ensure that when it comes to the hydrocarbon we
get - the black stuff that we dig up and that we heat to produce energy -
we should in fact be scrubbing the outlets to ensure that we can deal with
emissions.

You don’t have to walk away from coal energy. It has been a remarkable
success story. Pithead generation capacity has been a remarkable success
story and has driven our industrialisation in South Africa. Let’s not
abandon it.

We can, in fact, do a lot more to get clean energy from coal, and it is the
kind of technology that I think will provide the breakthroughs for us as a
country. At the same time, there is a wind farm in Darling. I am sure you
only have to look from De Waal Drive to see the potential for wave action
technologies here as well.

It is bringing all of this together and, in fact, the very example you
mentioned of thin fibre solar technology. However, all of those
technologies remain considerably more expensive than our low-cost coal-
driven thermal energy. Thank you, Chair.

The ACTING SPEAKER (Mr G Q M Doidge): Thank you, hon Minister, for
assisting with that response. Hon Deputy Minister, can we give you a minute
to respond to these issues if you wish before we carry on to the question
that is coming your way?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Thank you, Chairperson. My
reply to the question is quite a short one, so I thought my time would
permit it anyway. I have to reveal a very confidential matter to this
House, which is that the Minister of Science and Technology is seriously
considering appointing the Minister of Finance as his spokesperson on
research and development and science matters in general. [Laughter.] I
think he is well qualified to do that. The truth is that the Minister of
Finance is expected to know everything about everything.

On the percentages of GDP spent on research and development, at the moment
with the last survey, it is standing at 0,87%. It is steadily rising, and
the target is to bring it to 1% of GDP by 2008.

We are moving in that direction, but the hon Minister of Finance is
absolutely right. This is not just public spending on research; it’s a
combination of public spending and private-sector spending. The challenge
is not just how much you spend but the quality of that spending.

So, a lot has to do with the institutional framework, which allows for
targeted research, good quality research, relevant research, etc, obviously
not negating the value of basic fundamental research if you like and the
freedom of that research, which mainly is funded by the Department of
Education. So, the National Research Foundation funds applications for
research projects, targeted research if you like, but generally research is
the responsibility of the Department of Education.

On the energy question very briefly, of course the attempt to get cleaner
coal-generated electricity is very important, but at the same time we
should say that R40 million has been allocated to the SA National Energy
Research Institute which will be looking at these clean and renewable
energy options, which are very important. I would like to say that yes, it
probably is right that we have underspent in this area. We haven’t
allocated sufficient resources to properly explore and exploit the
potential of cleaner and renewable sources of energy.

The reply to the question, very briefly is that the Africa Institute of SA,
Aisa, is one of the science, engineering and technology institutions
operating within the national system of innovation and reports to the
Department of Science and Technology. That is the way it is at the moment.

The mission of the institution, derived from the shareholder compact that
it recently entered into with the Minister of Science and Technology, is
aligned with the vision and mission of the Department of Science and
Technology.

The Africa Institute of SA is currently involved with broad-based social
science research, forging linkages with other government departments, for
example, and primarily with Foreign Affairs.

The location of Aisa and future positioning is quite complex and requires
discussion and debate with various stakeholders. Such discussions have been
initiated and are continuing. Thank you.

Ms K R MAGAU: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to thank the Deputy
Minister for the answer. I am fully covered and I have no follow-up
question. Thank you.

                    Land Claims Commission uncertainties

260.  Mr M V Ngema (Nadeco) asked the  Minister  for  Agriculture  and  Land
      Affairs:

      (1)   Whether any mechanisms have been put in place to deal with the
           exodus  of staff from the Land Claims Commission because of the
           employment uncertainties pertaining to the life span of the
           commission; if not, why not; if so, what mechanisms;

      (2)   whether any capacity-building mechanisms have been put in place
           to capacitate the commission to complete all its tasks by 2008;
           if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             N1520E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, yes the
commission staff have the same skills that are required for the
implementation of other land reform programmes. Therefore, there has been
an agreement between the Land Claims Commission and the Department of Land
Affairs to ensure that staff of the commission will be absorbed into the
Department of Land Affairs in order to implement other land reform
programmes after the 2008 restitution programme has been completed.

There is also a retention strategy that has been agreed to and this,
amongst other things, has ensured that we look at the existing vacancies.
We also look at the conditions of service of current members of staff. We
have effectively replaced most of the vacancies, including senior positions
such as those of Land Claims Commissioners for KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng and
the North West province.

Secondly, all commission staff have been trained in all the various stages
in the settlement of a claim and are, therefore, in a position to speed up
the resolution of outstanding claims.

We have also developed a staff retention strategy that has ensured that we
will have the required capacity to resolve the remaining outstanding land
claims. Thank you.

Mr M V NGEMA: Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Minister, for your
comprehensive answer. I must say that as Nadeco we are very concerned and
hope very much that this programme succeeds because its success is part and
parcel of our overall poverty alleviation programme.

Minister, in your response you covered and pre-empted my follow-up
question, and I need to be honest and not waste the Chairperson’s time.
Thank you.

Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chair. I will ask my follow-up question to the
Minister, and not to Mr Abram. Minister, you know about the frustration of
both the claimants and the landowners, because of the changing of the
officials that they work with. One of the big problems is uncertainty, and
because of it, it is always the best people who go first.

It is also known that both the agricultural unions have said that they are
willing to help with the administrative work. My question then is: Why
don’t you accept their offer? Furthermore, why don’t you outsource some of
the work to NGOs and companies that are able to do this work? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Chairperson, as I have
indicated already, firstly, we do have a strategy in place and it is
working, because some of the senior officials that have resigned have
actually written to withdraw their resignations.

Secondly, yes, offers have been made. However, we have taken pains to train
staff to ensure that they are able to implement the restitution process
according to the restitution Act. Therefore, in order to ensure that we do
not cause confusion, we will not be in a position to adopt anyone who is
volunteering, because it takes time to train such officials.

I believe that at this point in time we have not had problems that have led
to delays. Delays have actually arisen as a result of endless negotiations
around prices - inflated land prices. As we move forward, we believe that
our personnel and staff are equal to the challenge and the task ahead.
Thank you very much.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Ms H WEBER: Chair, I hereby give notice that I will introduce the following
motion:

  That the House-


     1) requests that the Department of Justice and Constitutional,
        Development, as the core department piloting the Equality Review,
        should attend all public hearings on the Promotion of Equality and
        Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act; and

     2) expresses concern at the absence of the department when public
        hearings were held for people with disabilities, the most vulnerable
        and marginalised group in South Africa.

                      CELEBRATIONS OF DEEPAVALI AND EID

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House-


     1) notes that-

          a) it is the Hindu festival of lights, Deepavali, this Saturday
             and the Muslim celebration of Eid on Monday or Tuesday after
             fasting for the month of Ramadan; and


          b) the celebration of Deepavali and Eid is a further affirmation
             of our enduring faith in God, in ourselves, in our community
             and in our country;


    2) recalls that both Hindus and Muslims around the world are afflicted
       by poverty, starvation and war;

    3) conveys its prayers and good wishes for a Happy Deepavali and an Eid
       Mubarak; and

    4) wishes that the day may be filled with joy, love, family and
       festivity.

Motion agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:05.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Translation of Bills submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Safety and Security


          a) Wysigingswetsontwerp op Beheer van Vuurwapens [W 12 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75)


             This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
             Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during an
        investigation into procurement at the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) – September 2006 [RP 245-
        2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good Laboratory
    Practice Bill [B 29- 2006] (National Assembly – Section 75), dated 18
    October 2006:

       The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
       subject of the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment, Calibration
       and Good Laboratory Practice Bill  [B 29- 2006] (National Assembly –
       sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism
       as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with amendments [B 29A –
       2006].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on the
    Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21- 2006] (National
    Assembly – Section 75), dated 18 October 2006:

       The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, having considered the
       subject of the Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Bill [B 21-
        2006] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
       the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
       with amendments [B 21A – 2006].


3.     Report  of  the   Portfolio   Committee   on   Public   Service   and
   Administration on the Application for the Extension of  the  Contract  of
   Employment for Mr Abdul Samad  Minty:   Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,
   dated 18 October 2006:

THE REPORT

The  Portfolio  Committee,  having  considered  the   application   by   the
Department of Foreign Affairs, to  extend  the  employment  contract  of  Mr
Minty by five years, report as follows:

THE APPLICATION AND REFERRAL TO THE COMMITTEE

The Department of Foreign Affairs made  an  application  for  Parliament  to
approve the extension of contract of employment in respect of Mr  Minty  and
for the period of five years, reckoned from the 1st  of  November  2006,  in
terms of Section 16(7) of the Public Service Act, 1994.

The application was referred to the Portfolio Committee  on  Public  Service
and Administration as per the ATC of 11 September 2006.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON Mr MINTY AND THE
RESPONSIBILITIES

Disarmament, Nuclear and Arms Control Issues:
Has extensive experience in this field since the early 1960’s  when  he  was
involved in working on ending external military  and  nuclear  collaboration
with the apartheid  regime.  At  that  time  he  worked  through  the  Anti-
Apartheid Movement as well as the United Nations and its various  committees
as well as the OAU and the Commonwealth.

Recognised for authoritative and well researched exposition  of  issues  and
prepared numerous documents for various conferences  and  inter-governmental
meetings on the military and nuclear capacity of the  apartheid  regime  and
international collaboration with it.

After the imposition of the UNSCouncil’s voluntary arms embargo  against  SA
and the establishment of a special committee of the UNSC to  oversee  it  he
was invited on numerous occasions between 1977 and 1994 to give evidence  to
that committee, usually in closed sessions, on the operation of the  embargo
and especially on alleged violations. He served as  Director  of  the  World
Campaign against Military  and  Nuclear  Collaboration  with  South  Africa,
(established at the suggestion in 1977 of the UN and the OAU) until 1994.

After the democratic transformation of South Africa he was asked by the  DFA
to  join  several  delegations  as  Adviser,  including  the  IAEA   General
Conference in 1994.

In August 1995 he was appointed DDG for the Multilateral Branch in  the  DFA
until June 2004. He continued to serve as DDG with special  responsibilities
for Disarmament issues and also as the President’s  Personal  Representative
on the Nepad Steering Committee.

Earlier, in June 1995 he was appointed as Chairperson of the  South  African
Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of  Mass  Destruction  and  has
continued to serve in that capacity ever  since,  having  been  re-appointed
each time by respective Ministers of Trade and Industry.

In 1995, when South Africa resumed its seat on the  Board  of  Governors  of
the IAEA, Mr Minty was appointed as the Governor  for  South  Africa.  South
Africa retains the one seat on the Board that is allocated  permanently  for
the African country that is the most advanced  in  terms  of  its  “nuclear”
facilities and capability. In this capacity  he  participates  in  quarterly
meetings of the Board as well as in other meetings related to  the  work  of
the Agency.

At the last meeting of the IAEA General Conference  in  September  2006,  Mr
Minty was elected President of the Conference  on  behalf  of  Africa  whose
turn it was to preside over the annual conference.

In addition to the IAEA  Mr  Minty  also  supervises,  and  where  possible,
participates in meetings of  the  Nuclear  Suppliers  Group  (NSG)  and  the
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) as well as  other  bodies  such  as
the Conference on Disarmament  (CD),  the  Comprehensive  Nuclear  Test  Ban
Treaty  Organisation  (CTBTO)  and  the  Chemical  and  Biological   Weapons
institutions  as  well  as  the  Wassenaar  Arrangement  that   deals   with
conventional weapons.

With regard to the National Conventional Arms Control Committee  (NCACC)  Mr
Minty represents the  DFA  on  both  the  NCACC  as  well  as  its  Scrutiny
Committee. He also supervises the processing of import  and  export  permits
on behalf of the Department.

Following the September 11 events issues related to  Terrorism  and  Weapons
of Mass Destruction have taken on  new  importance  with  a  series  of  new
initiatives taken by some of the major powers. At the same  time  the  issue
of Iran’s use of nuclear technology  for  peaceful  purposes  has  been  the
subject of a long dispute within the IAEA and recently in the UNSC.

Under special resolutions adopted by the UNSC on the  subject  of  Terrorism
as well as Resolution 1540 on Weapons of Mass Destruction member states  are
required to present regular reports to the  UNSC  on  the  various  measures
taken by them. These reports are processed thoroughly by Mr Minty  who  also
follows trends and developments in this field.

While the Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) are  not  interested  in  implementing
their commitments to disarm, as stated in the NPT, they are  increasing  the
encroachment on the rights of non-nuclear weapon states under the  guise  of
non-proliferation. At the same time the US has declared that it  intends  to
develop new nuclear weapons, not so  much  for  deterrence  but  actual  use
including to counter terrorism as well as  serious  biological  or  chemical
threats ...
It is the general intransigence of the  NWS  that  also  led  to  the  total
failure  of  the  five  year  2005  NPT  conference.  Early  next  year  the
international  community  will  begin  the  process   of   holding   several
preparatory meetings in advance of the 2010 NPT Review Conference  and  this
process will be a critical one for developing  countries  to  protect  their
rights under the Treaty.

At the same time there are a series of measures being  proposed  by  the  US
and other powers to restrict the  rights  of  members  of  the  NPT  to  use
nuclear technology for  peaceful  purposes  and  in  particular  to  prevent
countries who do not enrich uranium already from doing so in  future.  South
Africa has been active in opposing  these  measures  and  has  defended  the
rights of NPT members,  especially  developing  countries,  to  protect  and
retain rights that are enshrined in international treaties and agreements.
These debates are highly controversial  and  extremely  sensitive  and  have
serious implications for countries such as South Africa which is also  being
pressed to pledge in advance that it will never enrich uranium  for  nuclear
energy. To do so would make the country dependent on other  countries  in  a
key area of strategic national interest and  it  is  therefore  of  critical
importance to  participate  in  all  such  discussions,  equipped  with  the
necessary technical expertise and experience. In  several  such  discussions
South Africa has played a major role and conveyed  the  case  of  developing
countries.

In most of these discussions and debates  institutional  memory  and  direct
experience is of considerable importance.  However,  it  is  in  the  actual
negotiations over particular issues, including matters which involve  minute
detail that  such  experience,  knowledge  and  vigilance  are  of  critical
importance. In the present international environment there is  no  issue  in
this field that can be said to be only  a  technical  one  –  they  are  all
fraught with danger  for  developing  countries  and  of  supreme  political
importance. Thus, these negotiations involve technical and political  issues
and  the  pressure  of  the  big  powers,  united  in  purpose,  is   almost
overwhelming for most developing and even some developed countries

In this context, South Africa has  been  able  to  stand  on  principle  and
defend its position on the basis of international law and specific  treaties
and agreements. Despite the fact that South Africa’s position is  often  not
welcomed by the big powers this is the main reason why it is  respected  and
held in high esteem. Thus the role of South Africa is unique.
In order to deal with these issues it is also  important  to  follow  global
trends and developments and Mr Minty has a long and keen interest  in  these
matters. He is therefore able to assist the Department  in  other  areas  as
well.  With  the  impending  membership  of  the  UNSC  for  two  years  the
experience and knowledge of Mr Minty in relation to the UN and some  of  the
major issues before it will be invaluable.

For reasons of coherence, co-ordination and strategic policy  implementation
it was decided last month  that  Mr  Minty  will  serve  as  Ambassador  and
Special Representative for Disarmament and Nepad.

FURTHER MOTIVATIONS

The Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  made  several  plans  to  address  the
succession of Mr Minty, but due to the  nature  of  work  and  the  required
combination of competencies associated with  the  relevant  environment  and
conditions of work, they are not in a position today to can  say  that  they
have a suitable candidate to replace him, and possibly not in the  next  two
years.   They  have,  however,  placed  some  officials  to  the  understudy
programme as an attempt to address this matter and, assuming that all  other
things will remain the same, they  see  themselves  being  able  to  achieve
their succession goals within the required period of extension,  hence  this
application.

OBSERVATION

From the aforesaid, the Committee accepts that  the  situation  under  which
the Department find itself in this case  is  extra-ordinary  and  should  be
considered as such without setting precedence.

In considering  this  application  favourably,  we  should  build  into  the
approval a mechanism to monitor and manage the development of  a  succession
plan to deal with this matter.

RECOMMENDATION

That Parliament  passes  a  resolution  to  approve  the  extension  of  the
employment contract of Mr Minty for the period of five years, reckoned  from
the 1st of November 2006, in terms of Section 16(7) of  the  Public  Service
Act, 1994.

That the following conditions be attached to the approval.

    ▪ The Department of  Foreign  Affairs  develops  a  coherent  succession
      strategy/plan and present it to the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Foreign
      Affairs, within a period of six months, calculated from  the  date  of
      approval of this application by Parliament.
    ▪  The  Department  include  the  implementation   of   the   succession
      strategy/plan in their strategic plans.
    ▪ The Department of Foreign Affairs report annually on progress  in  the
      implementation of the succession strategy/plan.


Report to be considered.


