---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 16 February 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-02-16
---

THURSDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.



ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the NCOP I shall move, on behalf of the IFP:


   That the NCOP –

   (1)      notes, with shock, that after a protection order was obtained
        against him by his wife, Inspector Phillip Mlangeni killed his wife
        and injured her aunt by firing shots in the house where she was
        staying;


   (2)      further notes that yesterday Inspector Mlangeni was sentenced to
        12 months imprisonment for murdering his wife;


   (3)      acknowledges, with dismay, that while government is trying to
        rid our country of illegal firearms, many of which are used in
        crimes, there are still incidences whereby the firearms of police
        officials are used in heinous crimes such as the murder of
        Inspector Mlangeni’s wife.


The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
member. Before we proceed further, I would like to welcome the hon
Minister, L B Hendricks, Minister of Minerals and Energy Affairs, in this
House, and also the Deputy Minister of Education, hon E M Surty. Please
feel welcome amongst us.

We will now proceed. Does any member wish to move a motion without notice?

                          RECTIFICATION OF DECISION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Deputy Chair, I move without notice –

   That the decision adopted by the Joint Programme sub-committee on 15
   February 2006, be ratified so that, in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2),
   the Division of Revenue Bill be fast-tracked, where necessary dispensing
   with any relevant House Rule or Joint Rule and shortening any period
   within which any step in the legislative process relating to the Bill
   must be completed, including the submission of the translated version of
   the Bill as introduced before the debate in the National Assembly takes
   place, as this process must be completed in order for the Bill to be
   enacted by 31 March 2006.


May I just say, in brief explanation, hon Deputy Chair, that this is to
allow the National Assembly to fast-track the Bill on their side. In terms
of us as the NCOP, we will still be taking it in the normal process of
allowing even our provinces to have their hearings, and we will pass it, as
scheduled, on 28 March, during our plenary in the Northern Cape.

This is just to operate and adhere in accordance to our joint Rules, which
apply to both Houses in Parliament. Thank you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


           HOUSES HANDED OVER BY FREE STATE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT


                             (Draft Resolution)
Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council notes that –

   (1)      the Free State provincial government handed 9 523 houses over
        during last year;


   (2)      in an endeavour to improve the livelihoods of the rural poor in
        the Free State, 2 000 houses were allocated to the Maluti-a-Phofung
        Municipality and 1 000 to the Thaba Nchu Municipality;


   (3)      during the 16 days of no violence against women and children
        last year, 16 units were allocated to women-headed households in
        the Free State; and


   (4)      the Premier announced during her  state-of-the-province  address
        on 10 February 2006, that a further 12 000 housing  units  will  be
        built during this year.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   TEACHING AND LEARNING PLATFORM IN NTAMBANANA AND BONAMBI MUNICIPALITIES

                             (Draft Resolution)
Ms A N T MCHUNU: Madam Chair, I hereby move without notice:


   That the Council –


    (1)     notes that a teaching and learning platform was experienced by
        the hon members during the NCOP’s visits to the Ntambanana and
        Mbonambi Municipalities;

    (2)     further notes the collaboration between Uthungulu and Umhlathuze
        City in order to ensure service delivery to the municipalities; and


    (3)     acknowledges and congratulates all the stakeholders who worked
        jointly to ensure service delivery, especially the Ntambanana
        Municipality and communities who worked together to build
        classrooms.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chair, may I request that I now also
move another motion without notice, that is, with regard to Order 3 on our
Order Paper? I have been reliably informed by the Deputy Chairperson of the
Joint Monitoring Committee on the Quality of Life and Status of Women that
there has been an incorrect publication. Instead of the actual report of
that committee being published in the ATC, the minutes of that meeting were
published. Hence they requested that they be given time to rectify that
before this is tabled for a decision to be adopted by this particular
House.


                     ORDER WITHHELD UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE


                             (Draft Resolution)

I move without notice:

That Order No 3 be withheld until further notice.

Thank you.

Motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): We now come to the
motion on the order paper, as printed in the name of the Chairperson of the
Council.


                        NCOP SITTING IN NORTHERN CAPE


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chair, I must say that I have no
intention of taking over from the Chairperson. He is just engaged in very
urgent work, dealing with the processing of the APRM. I thus would like to
move the motion on his behalf:

  That the Council –

  (1) in terms of Rule 21(2) resolves that  in  the  interest  of  enhancing
        public participation as provided for in section 72(1)(a) and (b)  of
        the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, as from 27 –
        31 March 2006 will conduct public hearings, hold  meetings,  conduct
        oversight visits and will sit in plenary  in  the  province  of  the
        Northern  Cape  on  Tuesday,  28  March   2006,   at   17:30   until
        approximately 19:30, and on Friday, 31 March 2006,  at  10:00  until
        the conclusion of the business of the day.


     2) notes that the estimated cost of effecting the change of  venue  and
        maintaining it for the specified period is R1 576 000.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, Chief
Whip. As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The
question is that the motion be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all the delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their
provinces’ votes. Are all the delegation heads present? Yes.

In accordance with rule 71, I shall first give provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote, if they so wish. None. We shall now
proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order,
per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether
they vote in favour or against or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: In favour.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms M P Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Mrs H F MATLANYANE: Steun. [Supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Mrs M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Wes-Kaap Steun. [Western Cape supports.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

               (Consideration OF Bill and of Report thereon.)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Ministers,
hon Premiers, members of the House, I table before you the long-awaited
Bill in the electricity sector of my department, namely the Electricity
Regulation Bill.

Allow me to remind you that South Africa is well-endowed with energy
resources which unfortunately were historically exploited for the benefit
of a few, to the exclusion of the majority of our people. With a broad
spectrum of our energy carriers, electricity is one energy carrier that has
contributed and will continue to contribute to a large extent to the
sustainability of our economical as well as social lives.

Our White Paper on Energy Policy, which was approved in 1998, was informed
by the realisation that the apartheid system had bequeathed to us a legacy
of an electricity industry that was characterised by chaotic regulatory
regimes, poor and fragmented service delivery and a limited access to the
privileged minority.

Subsequent to the promulgation of the energy policy, several Cabinet
decisions were taken as part and parcel of the tools necessary to implement
this energy policy.  These decisions took into account the dynamic global
environment impacting upon the electricity industry, such as the
participation of the private sector in the electricity sector, the
improvement of the efficiency of the industry, the improvement of the
quality of supply and also balancing social and economic interests of the
consumers and service providers.

As was stated in the energy policy, various legal instruments were required
to give effect to a number of objectives that were outlined in our policy.
The Bill that I table before you today is one such instrument designed to
weave together the various aspects of our plan to restructure the
electricity industry and to provide for oversight by an independent
national regulatory authority.

The limitations of the existing electricity regulation legislation, namely
the Electricity Act of 1987, as amended, are well known and include
inadequate regulatory oversight, separation of power between the Minister
and the regulator, lack of enabling environment for the restructuring of
the industry, not being in line with the recent local government
legislation, not being compliant with the Constitution.

You will recall that this Electricity Act, as amended, predates the
Constitution. So, after the Constitution was passed there is a whole lot of
things that, in terms of this Act, do not comply with the Constitution as
it exists today.

In that regard, one of the greatest challenges we face is to ensure that
our new legislative framework is in line with the prevailing constitutional
framework and provisions of other related and prevailing subordinate
legislation.

This Bill seeks to empower the National Electricity Regulator (NER) and its
successor, the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa), to
regulate this industry efficiently and effectively. The Bill also seeks to
regulate the total electricity value chain, starting from generation to
transmission, distribution and finally to the trading of electricity.

In that context, the powers of the regulator to address concerns such as
the blackouts that we have been seeing in many of our major cities like
Johannesburg, Tshwane and Cape Town as well as in other smaller
municipalities, are reinforced. It is critical for this industry that we
are able to give assurances that these blackouts and brownouts will be
addressed.

In line with the energy policy, Cabinet decided on a need to revamp the
role of the regulatory system in 2001, which includes the reform of the
legal framework defining the role of the NER and NERSA, the development of
a new licensing framework, adaptation of the predictable price setting
regime, creation of capacity to monitor the effectiveness of the
electricity industry and to ensure the security of supply.
With a view to giving effect to the above objectives, this Bill bestows
upon the regulator various powers, which I hope hon members will dwell on.
The Bill also sets penalties in the event of noncompliance.

What we are presenting here today is a section of the electricity
regulatory regime that complies with the provisions of section 75 of the
Constitution as passed by the National Assembly.

There are of course issues pertaining to electricity reticulation that are
very important, not only to hon members but also to people at home and more
particularly to municipalities. There are issues pertaining to electricity
reticulation as an area of competence of the local sphere of government
that have been excluded from this Bill and will be subjects of another
Bill, which will be introduced in due course.

Also to be introduced in due course will be the Electricity Distribution
Industry Restructuring Bill, which will enable us to accelerate the
reformation of the EDI in a manner that attains the objectives of our
energy policy.

It is a well-known fact that South Africa has been enjoying the cheapest
electricity prices in the world at wholesale level. It is also known that
domestic tariffs in most local government cases do not reflect these low
prices for a number of reasons. If we are to address poverty and facilitate
the improvement of the quality of life of our communities, we need to have
control over electricity prices to ensure that the end-users do not bear
the brand of high cost of electricity but instead benefit from the very
fact that we are the cheapest producers of electricity in the world. So,
that needs to be translated to the end-users, and with the measures that we
are putting into place, we should be in a position to do that, but creating
a balance without stifling the industry.

Let me briefly present to you what I consider critical issues in this Bill.
The first issue is the clarification of roles between the Minister and the
regulator. In terms of the governance framework, the Minister remains the
custodian of government policy and the Minister drafts regulations to
facilitate the implementation of powers and functions of the regulator. The
regulator, on the other hand, will be responsible for administrative
functions, which will include overseeing adherence to regulations. The
regulator will again be responsible for the execution of such regulations
and drafting of rules and procedures pursuant to such regulations. In
addition, the regulator will draft directives as provided for under the
regulations.

The second issue is the facilitation of renewable energy and independent
power producers (IPPs). We have taken an opportunity through this
legislation to ensure that we take Cabinet decision forward, where the
Cabinet decided that we must have a split between independent power
producers and Eskom in terms of electricity generation. So, we are
expecting at least 30% of our electricity to be generated by the private
sector in the future.  What the Bill seeks to do is to ensure that whatever
electricity generated by the independent power producers, they have access
to Eskom networks.
Given the significant capital requirements, estimated to be R240 billion
over the next 20 years, it has become inevitable that public-private
partnerships be considered to attain our objective of attracting new
investment in this energy sector. Government strategy therefore includes
the facilitation of foreign direct investment and black economic
empowerment, which will contribute towards our efforts of creating jobs.

The third issue is the legislation of key performance indicators. As
alluded to earlier, the Bill will allow government to address the current
quality of supply problems of the magnitude that have been experienced
across the country recently. It will empower the Minister to formulate
regulations relating to the norms and standards regarding the level of
investment in infrastructure relating to new assets, creation and
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. One of the major problems cited,
not only by analysts and commentators but also by Eskom itself, is the fact
that in the area where municipalities were responsible for providing
electricity, there has not been maintenance of infrastructure. So, there
has been a lack of investment in infrastructure and, as a result, the
infrastructure that we have is failing us, as it cannot deal with the
growth of the economy - the phenomenal growth of the economy that we see
and the resultant absorption of huge amounts of energy that were not
budgeted for. So, we are going to ensure that through the setting of norms
and standards, the level of infrastructure that is required is
accomplished. Again, the norms and standards will help us with the quality
of supply, other key performance indicators and penalties.

We believe that this would significantly enhance our ability as government
to address the problems that we are experiencing at the moment.

The benefit of the new legislation and having information on these
indicators will improve the quality of supply, and hence our ability to
continue to attract FDI in other sectors of the economy.

If we achieve higher levels of efficiency in the electricity sector, it
will make a significant contribution to us attaining the 6% economic growth
target and achieving the objectives of the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa, Asgisa.

Higher levels of growth and improvements in the electricity sector are
critical in supporting social development programmes such as the Integrated
National Electrification Programme. We are acutely aware of how such
programmes improve the lives of the poor, and, to quote our President from
his recent state of the nation address, ``such programmes provide a cushion
of support to those exposed to the threat of abject poverty’’.

I am looking forward to all hon members supporting this very important
piece of legislation coming right after the Budget debate, which indicated
major spending on infrastructure. We hope that through passing this
legislation we will be assisting the objective of growing the economy and
ensuring that our people have electricity and that poor people get
employment created through the use of this electricity and energy in their
areas so that we can halve poverty and unemployment by 2014. I thank you,
House Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Deputy Chair, I am standing in for the hon Chairperson of
the Select Committee on Economic Affairs, Nosipho Ntwanambi, who suddenly
took ill and is in hospital.

Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Ministers, one of the aims of the
Department of Minerals and Energy is to develop energy resources and to
promote their optimum use to maximise their contribution to social and
economic development.

Eyona ndlela yokuphumeza oku kukuba kungenziwa zinto zininzi
zingahlangananga, koko kwenziwe into enye equka ezininzi. Xa loo msebenzi
uphantsi kwesandla esinye, loo nto iya kulukhulisa uqoqosho lwethu.

Nanjengoko sisazi, umbane ulawulwa zizindlu ngezindlu, nguEskom kunye
noomasipala. Nakubeni ngaphambili oku kwakusenziwa ngempumelelo, kweli
xesha siphila kulo loo nto ayisebenzi ngempumelelo. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)
[The best way we could consider matters in order to realise that is to
integrate all the resources under one national Regulator. That would
encourage growth of the country’s economy.

As we know, electricity distribution is scattered between individual
households, Eskom and municipalities. Although this was done successfully
previously, nowadays it does not work well.]

Distributors are often insufficient in number, and tariffs vary widely
across the country. That is why we have this Bill before us today, to make
sure that no services are scattered unnecessarily and to try and have one
national regulator.

The Regulator will regulate the industry to meet the requirements of
existing and future customers. Its key functions will be to approve prices
at which electricity is sold, set standards for the quality of supply and
service, and to monitor these.

The Regulator is the custodian of enforcement of the regulatory framework
that is provided in the National Energy Regulator Act. It will consider
licences, regulate tariffs and register people who are required to be
registered.

The Regulator has to enforce performance and compliance, and shall take
appropriate steps in the case of nonperformance. It may also establish
customer or end-user forums, consisting of as many regulator licences as
possible, which will advise on matters affecting the regulator. It must
also require a licensee to establish and fund a customer or end-user forum
in the manner set out in the licensee held by such an individual.

The Regulator is empowered to deal with the transparency of licence
applications and procedures. An applicant for a licence is required to make
a notice of application in newspapers, as one would do with a liquor
licence. The Regulator approves tariffs for generator transmission and
distribution, which exclude reticulation.

Section 15 of the Bill outlines licence conditions relating to generation,
transmission and distribution. The Regulator shall not be obliged to settle
disputes, but if required to do so, its decision shall be binding on
parties concerned. It may appoint suitable persons to settle disputes on
its behalf.

Osesihlalweni, ikomiti yethu ithe emva kokwenza izihlomelo ezithile yavuma
ukuba iyahambisana nalo Mthetho uYilwayo kunye nezihlomelo esizenzileyo.
Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [Chairperson, after proposing certain
recommendations, our committee has taken the decision to support the Bill
with its amendments. [Applause.]]

Ms S H CHEN: Hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and all my hon colleagues,
this Bill is necessary because experience has shown the provision of
electricity by municipalities to be erratic.
This Bill attempts to address this by granting the National Energy
Regulator the powers to consider and issue licences set up advisory forums
as well as customer and end-user forums in order to ensure the development
and operation of the electricity supply infrastructure, ensure that the
interests and needs of present and future electricity customers are
safeguarded, and facilitate investment and universal access to electricity
as well as to promote competitiveness and customer choice in creating a
fair balance between the interests of customers, licensees, investors in
the electricity supply industry and the public.

The contentious issues relating to the right of municipalities to
reticulate electricity have been acknowledged by the Bill. Schedule 4B of
the Constitution states that the municipalities have the inherent power to
reticulate electricity, whilst this Bill attempts to regulate that right of
municipalities to ensure that the objectives of the electricity industry
are met.

The roles of the Regulator and that of the Minister have been clearly
defined to enhance economic regulation, and the roles and responsibilities
in determining the Regulator as the regulatory entity and the Minister as
the policy-making authority have been separated.

In so far as this Bill encourages competition in energy supply, this Bill
is supported. It should, furthermore, encourage efficient use of
electricity and meet social objectives such as electrification by providing
for the energy requirements of the most needy section of our society. The
DA supports this Bill. I thank you.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers present and hon Deputy
Ministers, MECs from the provinces, Chairperson of the Select Committee,
hon members, electricity is a form of energy that is clean and easy to use
and is available as quickly as one needs it. It is a need rather than a
luxury. But as it is centrally distributed, it turns to be costly to the
unemployed and the poor. The Bill, therefore, is long overdue and since it
is dealing with the very important yet scarce commodity, I very much concur
with our hon Minister when she said that this should have been done long
ago.

Electricity distribution as an industry needs to be regulated and that is
where the importance of this Bill is realised. All precautions have to be
taken in issuing licences, regulating prices and tariffs and ensuring
proper use and control.

The government has tried its best to make provision for basic electricity
supply of six kilowatts, but that does not go very far. So, the IFP concurs
with the NGOs and other stakeholders who have made an input into other
forms of saving electricity or of providing energy like using a wonder box
for cooking and keeping food warm, solar heating systems, gas and
recommended biogas energy, because this will save the electricity that will
be available, particularly to the poor people.

I’ve got information that at Khayelitsha some of these energy alternatives
are being used. It is good if the government and political leaders are
realistic about problems of accessing electricity and let people come up
with other lighting and energy providers to ease the lives of those who
cannot afford centralised electricity. The Soya group, and this is my
favourite, is going to come up with biogas, which will also be part of the
30% that will produce electricity.

Bahlobo bami abahle, kungakuhle-ke uma thina sonke lapha singeke sipolitike
ngogesi ngoba siyabona ukuthi zikhona izinkinga. Asingafuni amovoti
ngokuthi: “Laba bahlulekile ukunifakela ugesi,” kanti inkinga isezweni
lonke. Sonke kufuneka sibambisane, siyixazulule. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Good friends, it will be appreciated if we do not engage in electricity
cut-offs politics, because we all know that there are problems. Let us not
canvass votes by saying: “These people have failed to supply electricity”,
yet we know that this is a national problem. We need to work together in
order to solve this problem.]

The Bill is supported by the IFP.

Mr S W MXOLOSE (Salga): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers,
special delegates, hon members, indeed it is an honour for us as Salga to
have been involved in the legislative processes on the Electricity
Regulation Bill. The distribution of electricity has traditionally been a
local government function and indeed, even before 1996, distribution of
electricity was performed by municipalities.

However, a difficulty arose with local government being managed along
racial lines. Municipalities, which at the time were confined to cities,
towns and the immediate surrounding areas, only served their own areas,
whilst former black local authorities, including the former Bantustans,
were serviced by Eskom.

With the creation of wall-to-wall municipalities under our new Constitution
in 1996, covering the whole territory of the Republic, and our allocation
of electricity reticulation as a local government function, a question mark
was placed behind Eskom’s involvement in the electricity distribution
industry.

Currently the electricity distribution industry is fragmented between the
national and local spheres of government in that a substantial part of the
industry is managed by Eskom and the remainder by municipalities. It is
this very fragmentation that results in reduced efficiencies and
inequitable variations in electricity tariffs within and across
municipalities. This difficult scenario called for a review of the
electricity distribution industry, specifically around the roles and
functions of the different role-players in the sector.

Salga welcomes and supports the Electricity Regulation Bill, which is
intended to replace the Electricity Act of 1997, as amended, and represent
the framework and enabling legislation for the National Energy Regulator to
regulate electricity supply in South Africa satisfactorily.

The Bill will have implications for the way in which the Regional
Electricity Distributors, known as the REDs, should be regulated after the
Bill has been enacted. Of critical importance is that the Bill provides for
a specific legal framework for the generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity to individuals, communities and the business
sector.

From the local government point of view it is the reticulation part of the
Bill, which is still to be introduced to this House under the section 76
legislative processes, that will be of key interest to local government.
Local government eagerly awaits the introduction of this critical
component. We thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr D G MKONO: Deputy Chairperson, Ministers, hon members, it is imperative
for this House to note the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Freedom
Charter, and the Charter’s centrality to this fledgling democracy.

The Electricity Regulation Bill serves as a yardstick to the realisation of
the RDP pronouncement of electricity for all. This legislative development
seeks to consolidate and integrate the regulation of the energy industry.
This Bill advocates central regulation of the energy industry, and this
will ensure uniformity and control in the regulation of the industry.
Central to the essence of the Bill is the strengthening of the Regulator’s
ability to ensure improved quality of service provision.

The Bill provides for dispute resolution mechanisms that allow the
Regulator to mediate only when requested to do so by disputing parties. In
terms of the Bill, the Energy Regulator is not obliged to settle disputes –
the Regulator can only settle disputes when requested. The decision taken
by the regulator in dispute resolution shall be binding on any partly
concerned. It is imperative to note that the Bill allows the Regulator to
appoint a suitable person to mediate on its behalf in dispute resolution.

Furthermore, the Bill allows the Minister to prescribe the procedure to be
followed in the mediation and the settlement of disputes and fees to be
paid.

Section 44 of the Bill requires the Regulator to appoint a person to make
enquiries in situations where a complaint has been received related to
electricity supply. The appointed person is expected to submit a report to
the Regulator. On receipt of the report, the Regulator has prerogative
powers to institute a formal investigation. On completion of the
investigation the Regulator might refer the outcomes to the Director of
Public Prosecutions for his or her consideration.

The Bill allows any person authorised by the Regulator to enter any
property in which the supply of electricity is taking place and inspect the
facility, equipment, machinery, books or any other document related to
electricity supply, and that person must show his or her authorisation.

This Bill allows that, in consultation with the Regulator, the Minister
determines that new generation capacity is needed, determines the types of
energy sources from electricity that should be generated. This legislative
development caters for a fair and transparent tendering procedure for new
generation capacity. Most of all, this Bill encourages foreign direct
investment through independent power producers.

The underlying logic behind the Electricity Regulation Bill is the
improvement of the quality of service in the electricity and that
efficiency should predominate electricity supply. As the ANC-led
government, we are committed to ensuring that the masses of our people
become beneficiaries of quality service.

In this instance, I think we should congratulate the opposition in that it
behaved very well; I think this piece of legislation is very important.

Andazi ke, Mam’ uMchunu, le-biogas othetha ngayo siza kukhe sijonge ukuba
singenza ntoni na ngayo. [I do not know Mrs Mchunu, but we will think about
what we can do with regard to biogas.]

The committee supports the Bill. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Deputy Chairperson, I would like to
thank the hon Themba at the outset for always being there and for standing
in for the chairperson of the select committee. We heard that the
chairperson took ill earlier today, so we wish her a speedy recovery. We
hope it is nothing serious.

Sekela Sihlalo, ngifuna ukubonga amalungu ale Ndlu onke ngokuthi avumelane
nalo Mthetho obaluleke kangaka. Ngifuna ukuvumelana nomama uMchunu ngokuthi
ngempela, ngempela ugesi akuyona into yokupolitika. Ugesi yisidingo
esifunwa ngabantu bonke. Noma ngabe uyi-ANC, uyi-IFP noma uyi-DA, sonke
siyawufuna ugesi ngakho-ke akuyona into esingapolitika ngayo.

Ngifuna ukuvumelana naye lapho kakhulu. Ngifuna ukuvumelana naye futhi uma
ethi kufanele noma abantu bewuthola kodwa kube khona izinto abazenzayo
ukuthi ugesi bawonge bangawumosi.

Uma ungase ubheke nje into eyenzekayo lapha eNtshona-Koloni lapha sikhona,
u-Eskom uthi kuzodingeka ukuthi senze izinto ezithile kwenzela ukuthi ugesi
singawumosi, ngenxa yesimo esenzeke laphaya e-Koeberg. Ngakho lama cebo
abewanika lapha okuthi abantu bonge ugesi, ekhuluma ngalokhu okubizwa nge-
solar heating, ekhuluma nangezinye izinto ezingasetshenziswa zokusiza
ukuthi ugesi singawumosi kodwa siwonge siyavumelana nazo zonke lezo zinto
ebelikhuluma ngazo ilungu lomkhandlu uMchunu.

Kule nyanga ezoqala kaMashi, siwumnyango sizobe sinengqungquthela ezobe
igxile ekutholakaleni kwamandla kagesi ngokusebenzisa amanzi lapho sizobe
sinamazwe ngamazwe azobe eze lapha kithina eNingizimu Afrika. Ngesikhathi
saleyo ngqungquthela, sizokwenza umkhankaso ozobe ubheke ukuthi wenze ngqo
lento abekhuluma ngayo umama uMnchunu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[Deputy Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon members of this House
for agreeing upon this important Bill. I want to agree with the hon Mchunu
that the electricity cut-off is not something about which we need to
conduct political debates. Electricity is a necessity for everybody. There
is nothing that we can start political debates about because we all need
electricity, whether you are ANC, IFP or DA. I want to agree with her in
that respect.

I also want to agree with her when she said that those who have electricity
supply must make some effort to avoid a waste of electricity.

Let us have a look at the Western Cape, where we stay. Eskom says we must
save electricity because of the problem at Koeberg. That was a warning from
Eskom to advise the people that they should save electricity, and we also
heard the hon Mchunu talking about solar heating and other means of saving
electricity.

In March this year we, as the department, are going to hold an
international conference here in South Africa to discuss energy issues.
During the conference we are going to launch a campaign that will directly
address the issues that the hon Mchunu spoke about.]

We will be launching Energy Efficiency Week. Throughout that week we will
be talking to South Africans, helping them and giving them tips around the
issues of saving energy, because energy is indeed very critical to all of
our livelihoods.

I would like to say that I have heard all hon members - some talked about
the powers of the regulators; some raised the issues of very inefficient
distributors and fragmented distribution, amongst other things. As I said
in my main speech, this is but one tool that’s going to assist us to ensure
that we restructure the electricity distribution industry in South Africa.

There are, of course, several pieces of legislation that are not before us,
which will take this process forward. We know that we have the rates in
terms of which we are trying to formulate the rates per metro. That’s also
a process of ensuring that we restructure the electricity distribution
industry. Several other pieces of legislature will be coming before the
House, which we hope will also be supported.

With those few words, I would like to thank all hon members and all parties
for actually realising that this is a very important intervention that will
better the lives of different people irrespective of race, colour or creed,
and that they have gone all out to support this Bill. Hon Chen of the DA
and our hon members of the IFP - I thank you all. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Minister, and we also thank you for being with us today also.

Question put: That the Bill be agreed to subject to proposed amendments.
Bill, subject to proposed amendments, agreed to in terms of section 75 of
the Constitution.

   VISIT TO LIMPOPO IN TERMS OF THE PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE
                                   PEOPLE
                          (Consideration of Report)

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Ngiyabonga Mgcinisihlalo
ukunginikeza leli thuba lokuba ngethule umbiko waseLimpopo ngokuhlanganyela
kwethu nabantu baseLimpopo ngenkathi  sivakashele bona ukuthi bakhulume
nathi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Thank you, Chairperson, for affording me this
opportunity to present the report on the discussions held with the people
of Limpopo on the occasion of our consultation visit to them.]

The President correctly located the place that the NCOP plays in our system
of co-operative governance when he said during his annual address in
Limpopo on 4 November last year:

  The NCOP occupies a unique position with our constitutional system of
  governance. This derives from the fact that it is the only institution
  within this system that straddles all these three spheres of government,
  which consist of the national government, the provincial government and
  the local government.

He then went on to say:

  This places the NCOP in a very strategic oversight position. It has a
  possibility and the mandate to keep a constant eye on the processes that
  must integrate legislative and executive decisions in all spheres of
  government, and ensure the practical implementation of these decisions
  especially to the extent that they impact directly on the lives of the
  people.

That is what the President said. So, we have a clear mandate; we know what
we should be doing; we even have a constitutional mandate. I am very sure
that hon members would agree with me that through the programme of Taking
Parliament to the People the NCOP has begun to give an expression to the
comments made by the President and which can be traced back to our
Constitution.

Through this programme we have been able to provide a platform for public
participation on issues that affect provinces. We have begun to involve our
people in finding solutions to service-delivery challenges that face our
people. More important is that through this programme we have been able to
raise public awareness around government policies and the laws that we
pass. We have provided an opportunity to government to explain its
programmes directly to the people of our country.

More heartening was the acknowledgement by all the provincial delegates
during the debate of the President’s address from different political
persuasions that the visit to Limpopo was a resounding success. Nobody can
argue about that. For this I would like to extend a word of thanks and
appreciation to the people of Limpopo - especially those from the Tzaneen
area - traditional leaders, religious leaders and educators, the leadership
and staff of the provincial legislature, Ministers, mayors, premiers, ward
councillors, members of the executive committees and the national and
provincial officials, the SA Police Service, all traffic departments that
provided excellent security service and researchers who made sure that they
followed up the work of the NCOP.

The huge success of this programme, especially when looked at in relation
to the latest visit to Limpopo, places a responsibility on us to ensure
that as we continue to roll out the programme, we must make sure that it
has the desired impact.

As we listen to the people in Limpopo talking directly to the public
representatives, we could hear them raising a number of issues. They raised
issues that they commonly agreed needed to be attended to. Among these
issues are the provision of water, sanitation and electricity.

Thank you, Mr Minister. I am glad I am talking about news relating to the
Bill you have just introduced and passed. I have listened to you carefully
though I was not in the House, and heard when you said that everybody
needed electricity. These are the things that our people raised again and
this is the action the government and Parliament have taken to speed up the
delivery of electricity to our people down there.

With regard to housing, including the poor quality of the building of
houses, service delivery by municipalities, land reform and land
restitution and educational matters I am very confident that you would
agree with me that although there might be some different dimensions in
respect of these areas of need in a particular community, these are
certainly not new things. This means that we must sharpen our strategies to
respond to these issues. We must also make our people aware and empower
them to use the structures that they have in their communities to provide
solutions to the problems that they have.

I must at the same time congratulate the Limpopo government for
strategically addressing the challenges raised by the people. It showed us
that they were not waiting for the NCOP to arrive before they could act,
that they actually know the challenges that the people face and are doing
their best to utilise the available resources.

We are also aware that the resolution of the challenges facing the people
of Limpopo need a joint and co-ordinated effort by all spheres of
government. This would be carried out fully and be informed by what the
province itself is going to do to follow up on these issues.

At this point I would like to state that over and above the issues raised
by the people, that are contained in the report we are considering today,
my office has received about 150 written submissions from the six districts
in the province. These were canvassed before and during the time of our
visit by the Public Affairs department. At the moment the submissions are
being processed, including translation, so that they can be referred to the
relevant structures for consideration.

Whilst there, I would like to add one point which I think was very
important which the President raised when we were in Limpopo. You would
remember, all of you are witnesses, that the President posed a question to
us. He said to me: Chairperson, can you tell me, when you say you are
dealing with the executive on these issues, which executive are you talking
to? Do you all remember that? And none of you could respond to that
question. Do you remember that? I had to respond from the podium and I said
to the President: The executive that we should be speaking to is yourself
because you are the head of the executive.

All I am saying is that all these reports on Taking Parliament to the
People will now land on the desk of the President as the head of the
executive and the head of the country. This is going to assist at the
executive level because then the President will be able to play an
oversight role on the issues that our people shall have raised so that each
portfolio systematically develops a plan to follow up an action on those
issues that have been raised by our people on the ground. I want to thank
the President for challenging us by saying: Bring that report here; I would
like to see it.

I can assure this House that we will respond to each and every person or
group that have taken the time to write to the NCOP. As the House, we have
looked at some of the mechanisms we have which should assist us to follow
up on issues raised by the people of Limpopo and other provinces, such as
the revision of the guiding document, Programme 209, which is before this
House today. I am sure you will accept that programme.  Once you have
adopted it, it becomes the programme of the House and it belongs to you.
You must act upon it, you must implement it to make sure that all the
things that I am talking about are then implemented on the ground. It is a
programme that we will own and that we will from time to time negotiate
with the provinces and take them on board as we implement it. I think it is
very crucial.

We have deliberated at length on that programme. There are clear objectives
set by government, clear actions that should be taken by the National
Council of Provinces and, Chairperson of Committees, I rely on you to drive
that process with your members and make sure that at the end of the year
you will come and stand up in this House again to report back and tell the
House what you will have done with that programme which you yourself has
adopted. We would like to hear that report from you, not next year, but
before you go on long recess in November 2006. Every chairperson will have
to present a report in this House. We will have to dedicate the whole day
for those reports and discuss them. That is what we should do.

The presidium of the NCOP will also consider a discussion document on the
framework of follow-up to Taking Parliament to the People. I hope that when
we have finalised the document it will assist everybody in responding
appropriately to the issues raised by our people. The input we receive from
the people during our visit to provinces does require us to have a
structured feedback mechanism so that we can be able to measure the impact
of this programme. This is an issue that I keep raising in the NCOP. We go
down to the people and when we get there people are very excited, they say
the NCOP is here, it has put the national leadership together, the
provincial leadership together and the local government leadership
together; but then what next?

We therefore need to come up with a mechanism that will then feed back to
the people, because we do follow up on these visits by Parliament to the
people so that we do not create this anxiety about service delivery, and
then go away. We must be able to say at the end of the year, as I have said
earlier: This is what we have achieved. We must also go back and report to
those people and say: Since we left, this is what we have achieved. We must
go back and report to those people and say: Since we left this is what has
happened, this has not happened but it is in the plan of the departments,
they are working on it. That is how you deal with the public that has
elected you the positions where you are today.

Hon members, allow me to commend the report to the House and invite
everybody to engage seriously with the report and come up with some ideas
if you think we have erred so that we can improve from time to time.

I want to welcome the hon the Deputy Minister of Education who also
supported us in Limpopo for coming here to participate in this debate
today. It is encouraging to the NCOP when we see the executive supporting
us in the work that we are doing.

I want to thank all those who are here today and those who have put up this
report. Thank you very much. I now put the report before you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Chairperson.
Chairperson, I just want to bring to your attention and to that of the
House that for the first time in this House, I think since we arrived in
the NCOP, the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry has broken a record for
just coming in and listening to the debates in this House. [Applause.]

We appreciate your presence, Madam, and of course you have fulfilled your
commitment in that you said you would come and just listen to the debate in
this House. I think the Deputy Minister of Education is also going to
continue to be with us, but he has to beat the record of the Deputy
Minister of Trade and Industry.

I will now call upon the hon L J Lepulane, special delegate from Limpopo.
[Applause.]

Mr L J LEPULANE (Limpopo): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members of the
NCOP and hon members of provincial legislatures, on behalf of the Limpopo
Legislature and the people of Limpopo I wish to express my appreciatione to
the NCOP for their decision to prioritise and visit Limpopo between 31
October to 4 November 2005.

Ka segagešo, le rile ge le se na go goroga, ra re ``Mme o tlile, tlala o. .
. .” [Disego.] [As soon as you arrived here, we thought that our problems
would be sorted out.]

The report before us does indeed indicate the correctness of initiating and
implementing this initiative. The objectives of promoting public
participation in parliamentary affairs and assisting the NCOP in carrying
out its oversight functions are commendable. The NCOP programme was indeed
in line with principles of participatory democracy and popular
participation process as envisaged in the Freedom Charter.

The NCOP had met with a significant number of stakeholders during the
visit. This encounter included meetings with traditional   leaders, the
women’s sector, the youth sector, the business sector, farmers and workers.
This process occurred during an appropriate year – during the anniversary
of the Freedom Charter.

The monitoring and evaluation component of the programme was critical. We
often do not have sufficient opportunity to assess the impact of various
pieces of legislation and policies in terms of eradicating poverty and
underdevelopment.

The visit had also created an opportunity to collectively evaluate
programmes and projects that are implemented. This included various
delegations to health centres, farms and projects.

The report captures a number of observations and recommendations that
should guide all spheres of governance’s efforts to accelerate service
delivery,delivery, eradicate poverty and facilitate a sustainable economic
development. These areas include the following: the mainstreaming of co-
operative governance and popular participation in decision-making;
constraints and challenges related to service delivery and sustainable
development; programme management; implementation of special focus
programmes across the spheres of governance; and the imperatives of
building a developmental local government.

I would like to take this opportunity to share with you some reflections
and proposals on some areas, including the following. With regard to co-
operative governance, as indicated in the report, we concur with the report
that:

   By visiting rural communities, the NCOP gives a voice to those who would
   not necessarily have the opportunity to discuss issues with their
   representatives. Our visit to Tzaneen in the Limpopo Province,Province
   has provided an opportunity to our people to comment and recommend on a
   variety of issues affecting their lives.


This has provided an opportunity for systematic interaction on service
delivery and institutional transformation that affect various spheres of
governance. These lessons should be considered during the implementation of
the Intergovernmental Relations Act.

This view was echoed by the input of the Premier of Limpopo, Comrade hon
Sello Moloto. He said that the sitting of the NCOP in the province provided
a rare opportunity to share the best practices and insights on service
delivery and intergovernmental practices.

With regard to the service delivery issues and municipal transformation, it
is commendable to note that both the national and the provincial spheres of
governance have developed a concerted interest and effort to support the
local spheres of governance. The most visible initiative is Project
Consolidate that intends to build capacity in municipal governments.

It is apparent that we require an effective and efficient local government
as a condition to accelerate provision of basic services, facilitate
economic development and poverty eradication.
The report captures various challenges that need to be attended to. These
include limited revenue base; limited financial management skills;
strengthening of public participation programmes; provision of free basic
services; unfinished or poorly constructed RDP houses; water scarcity and
electricity.

These challenges require a comprehensive intervention from all spheres of
governance. In line with this recognition, it is commendable to indicate
the sState- of- the- Limpopo Province aAddress presented by the hon Premier
Sello Moloto in his dealing with some critical interventions to address
these issues.

On water shortages, the Premier indicated that there are great prospects of
overcoming these constraints because the building of De Hoop Dam has been
approved through the national programme of Asgisa, the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa. He further pronounced that this
intervention willwould go a long way in addressing the water needs for both
domestic household consumption and industrial use in the whole of Greater
Sekhukhune and beyond.

On the development and strengthening of municipal governance, the Premier
noted that the commitment to pursue creative and innovative ways of
improving the financial, administrative and service delivery in our
municipalities has gained the required momentum. He further indicated that
in this financial year 75% of our municipalities were able to prepare and
table their multi-year budgets within the stipulated timeframes, as
compared to only 31% in the previous financial year. Ke a leboga. [Thank
you.] [Nako e fedile.] [Time expired.]]

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, hon Deputy Ministers, hon members, special
delegates here today, as we celebrated the ninth anniversary of this House
on 6 February this year and reflected on its achievements, taking
Parliament to the people should be seen as one of the most successful
programmes of this House since its inception.

The ANC has always combined the wishes of the people with the necessary
strategic direction and policies. This is in line with the historic mission
of the ANC, which centres round our continuing obligation to advance the
national democratic revolution and to achieve our goal of true national
liberation through bettering the lives of all.

In celebrating the Freedom Charter, the emphasis during the fourth quarter
of 2005 was focused on activities that build the people’s power through
izimbizos, the People’s Parliament and other forums where the people are
able to directly interact with their government. Therefore, taking
Parliament to the people of Limpopo is directly in line with the aims of
the Freedom Charter that states that the people shall govern.

I would like to pay special tribute to the positive and constructive role
that members of the Limpopo House of Traditional Leaders played by sharing
with us their invaluable wisdom and local knowledge during our discussions
and site visits in our combined effort to push back the frontiers of
poverty and to deliver on the people’s contract.

Let me comment on statements made by some members of this House who argued
that taking Parliament to the people is nothing other than, and I quote,
“political tourism”, a “political holiday” and a “political road show”.
Comments like these are an insult to the dignity and aspirations of the
people of Limpopo – and of the country – who have the right to a better
life.

How dare they pretend that they have the interests of the people at heart,
when making such statements, which, in essence, are an attempt to deny the
people the opportunity to speak to their elected representatives, an
opportunity they otherwise would not have had.

How dare they pretend that they are the guardians of the people’s rights if
they are not prepared to let the people talk? How dare they pretend that
the ANC is a racist organisation, when they themselves find it difficult to
go to the people of Limpopo? How dare they deny the people of Limpopo the
right to speak?

I am of the opinion that the people of Limpopo could make a strong case of
hate speech against these people and should consider taking this matter to
the Human Rights Commission. Furthermore, it is further interesting to note
that during our discussions on Tuesday, on the follow-up visits to KwaZulu-
Natal and the North West Province, only three members of the party who made
these remarks were in this House, and one of these members also left early.
The same thing happened today: there were only two members here at one
stage.

During our visit we heard stories of hardship caused by the lack of water,
electricity and housing. However, I would like to ensure the people of
Limpopo that they are in the hands of a caring and progressive ANC
government that have taken note of their cry for help.

The Premier of Limpopo, in his address to the NCOP, raised some challenges,
and I quote: “The health of our people is affected by factors such as
proper housing, sanitation and access to safe drinking water”. At the same
time he also announced that 1,3 million people were already provided with
water in the province. He further announced that the provincial government
would allocate R100 million for drought relief and water provision, and
R100 million towards electricity. In the current financial year the Limpopo
Province has already completed 4 244 houses, and is planning to build 12
000 houses during the next financial year.

The exploitation of farmworkers in the province remains a very serious
concern to everybody, and I would like to request all the relevant role-
players in the province to jointly explore ways to curb this inhumane
practice, which is clearly unacceptable 12 years after democracy.

Perhaps the time has come for government to seriously consider putting the
necessary legislation in place that will criminalise illegal farm
evictions, a matter that cannot be tolerated any longer. The perpetrators
should be behind bars.

Ek wil vandag na twee belangrike aangeleenthede verwys, naamlik beplanning
en finansiële bestuur. Gedurende een van ons besoeke aan ’n skool is ons in
kennis gestel van ’n padbouprojek van 22 km waarvoor daar slegs R10 miljoen
beskikbaar gestel is. Ons is verder deur die kontrakteur meegedeel dat as
gevolg van die ontoereikende bedrag geld wat beskikbaar gestel is vir die
projek, die kwaliteit van die pad van so ’n aard is dat die pad ’n verwagte
lewensduurte van slegs vyf jaar het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[Today I would like to refer to two important issues, namely planning and
financial management. During one of our visits to a school we were informed
of a 22 km road construction project for which only R10 million had been
made available. Furthermore, the contractor informed us that because of the
insufficient amount of money that had been made available for this project,
the quality of the road was such that it only had a life expectancy of five
years.]

Clearly this is a classic case of lack of planning by officials of the
department and should not be tolerated.

What is of particular concern is that, up to date, only 27% of the MIG
funds have been spent by the province. I contribute this to the lack of
planning and capacity within the department. One of the direct results of
the low level of spending in the department is the roll-over of funds
and/or fiscal dumping.

Fiscal dumping, again, results in a chain of bad management practices,
which include bad planning and the development of poor quality business
plans that, again, result in bad quality service delivery and, in the final
instance, deprives the community of quality goods and services. This should
not be tolerated any longer since it is only the people who suffer as a
result.

However, the picture in Limpopo Province is not only one of doom and gloom.
There are various areas of pronounced improvements that are visible. [Time
expired.][Applause.]

Mnr L H FIELDING: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb lede van die Huis,
besoekers, dames en here, met wat betrefbetrekking tot die besoek aan die
Limpopo-provinsie in 2005 het dit duidelik geword dat die plaaslike
regering nie die vermoëns het om dienste aan die gemeenskap op grondvlak te
lewer nie. Ek verwys hier na swak gesondheidsdienste, ’n tekort aan skoon
drinkwater op sekere persele, en swak kommunikasie met die gemeenskap. Dan
verwys ek ook na die landbouprojekte waaraan so baie geld bestee is, maar
waarvoor geen marknavorsing gedoen is nie, en waar die vrugte letterlik op
die grond lê en verrot en nie bemark kan word nie.

Dit is baie duidelik dat wanneer ons na dié aspekte kyk dat ons regering op
plaaslike vlak . . . [Tussenwerpsels.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)
[Mr L H FIELDING: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of the House,
visitors, ladies and gentlemen, as far as the visit to the Limpopo province
in 2005 is concerned, it has become clear that local government does not
have the ability to deliver services to people at the grass-roots level.
Here I am referring to poor health services, a lack of clean drinking water
on certain premises, and poor communication with the community. I also wish
to refer to the agricultural projects on which so much money was spent, but
for which no market research was done, and where the fruit is literally
rotting on the ground and cannot be marketed.

When we look at these aspects it is very clear that at local level our
government ... [Interjections.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, there isn’t any interpreting
and I am afraid we will miss the good or the bad things the member is
saying. If there could be some interpreting?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs M N Oliphant): Could the procedural staff please
check on the interpreting? Hon member, could you please wait a minute? We
will give you your time.

Hon member, continue in Afrikaans in order for us to ascertain if there is
interpreting.

Mnr L H FIELDING: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil ook verwys na die skool waar ons
besoek afgelê het, waar daar geen drinkwater of toiletgeriewe vir die
kinders was nie. Ek wil ook verwys na wat die vorige spreker, mnr van
Rooyen, gesê het, dat op dieselfde besoek aan die skool daar ook verwys is
na uitgebreide openbare werkeprojekte-gelde wat bedoel is vir werkskepping
en nie vir dié doel aangewend is nie, maar wel aan ’n kontrakteur gegee is.

Daarbenewens voel ek dat distriksrade nie regtig in lyn werk met die
kriteria wat die regering voorhou nie, dat ’n begroting en besigheidsplan
saamgestel moet word vir die gebruik van dié gelde, sodat dié gelde nie in
die hande van kontrakteurs beland nie.

El wil dit ook baie duidelik stel dat ons deur die jare geleer het dat
kontrakteurs en konsultante die meerderheid of die grootste persentasiedeel
van dié bedrae wat toegeken word aan gemeenskappe gebruik vir hul eie
doeleindes en dat dit nooit regtig by die mense uitkom nie.

Ek wil ook verder sê, Limpopo is een van die provinsies van dié wat ons
besoek het wat die pragtigste is, maar die behandeling teenoor ons mense op
grondvlak is nie so pragtig nie. Vir my, uit die ondervinding van plaaslike
regering oor 20 jaar heen, omskryf ek dit duidelik as baie swak en
beledigend van die regering aan die bewind wanneer mense op grondvlak
veronderstel was om dienste te lewer. Ek het werklik, as oud-leier van 22
jaar, vir die eerste maal trane gestort, in daardie saal, vir daardie
mense. Dit skrei ten hemel om ná 11 jaar van demokrasie te sien dat mense
in sekere dele van ons land nog so swaar moet kry. Dankie, Voorsitter.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr L H FIELDING: Hon Chairperson, I also want to refer to the school that
we visited, where there was no drinking water or toilet facilities for the
children. I also want to refer to what the previous speaker, Mr Van Rooyen,
said, that during the same visit to the school reference was also made to
money for extended public works projects that was not utilised for this
purpose, but was in fact given to a contractor.

In addition, I am of the opinion that district councils are not really
working in line with the criteria set by the government, that a budget and
business plan relating to the expenditure of this money should be drawn up,
so that this money does not end up in the hands of contractors.

I also want to make it very clear that we have learned over the years that
contractors and consultants use the largest percentage of the amounts
allocated to communities for their own purposes and that this money never
really reaches the people.

Furthermore I want to say that Limpopo is one of the provinces, of those
which we visited, that is the most beautiful, but that the way in which our
people at the grass-roots level are treated there is less than beautiful.
Based on my experience of local government over 20 years, I regard the
ruling government’s behaviour as atrocious and insulting, when people at
the grass-roots level are supposed to deliver services. As a former leader
of 22 years’ standing, I truly cried for the first time, in that hall, for
those people. It is a disgrace to see, after 11 years of democracy, that
people in certain parts of our country still have to struggle so much.
Thank you, Chairperson.]
"National Council of Provinces Main",Unrevised Hansard,20 Feb 2006,"Take 18
[National Council of Provinces].doc"

"National Council of Provinces Main",Unrevised Hansard,16 Feb 2006,"[Take-
18] [National Council of Provinces Main][NCOP-Logger][tm].doc"

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister
Elizabeth Thabethe, and hon members of this House, it is always a great
privilege to be here. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you
for the invitation that has been extended to me.
I heard the words of the hon Fielding with dismay, and quite true to the
character and the hypocrisy of the DA, they only complain bitterly about
challenges that we face as a government, but fail to mention the wonderful
achievements.

When the President addressed this nation, he spoke about the confidence
that this country had in the government, and the confidence that the people
had in the future. He spoke at length about the singing through the hills
and the valleys, and the very soon and imminent possibility of the trees
and the forests clapping their hands. He did so affirming and reaffirming
the hope of the people of this country.

He spoke about the thousand of classrooms that were provided and built, and
this was re-emphasised by the hon the Minister of Finance. He spoke about
the thousand of clinics that were established and erected. He spoke about
the neglect of the past, but the commitment to make today better than
yesterday, and tomorrow better than today. Indeed, hon Chairperson, today
is better than yesterday, and tomorrow shall be better than today.
[Applause.]

The hon member failed to advise or inform or convey to this House the gross
neglect of the apartheid regime, in terms of its provision of education;
the poor and desolate and paltry conditions under which our learners had to
go to school; the fact that less than 50% of learners who were eligible to
go to school were in school, and that today we can proudly say that more
than 90% of our learners are in school. Indeed, that is a wonderful
accomplishment. [Applause.]

He failed to talk about the inferiority of the system of education where
the whites were privileged and the blacks were neglected, including
himself. He will fail to realise and remind us about the fact that he could
not go to the university of his choice, and that he was confined to the
University of the Western Cape as a tribal institution for coloured people.

Today we can celebrate and say that we have the right, the liberty and the
access to every institution of learning, and indeed, today is better than
yesterday.

He has failed to tell us that no bursaries or resources were allocated to
the poorest of the poor, to the African, to the Coloured and to the Indian,
by that government, and that the privileges were extended exclusively to
the whites.

Today we can say that R1,2,2 billion has been set aside for bursaries for
historically disadvantaged learners who had previously been excluded from
the institutions of learning. Therefore today has been better than
yesterday, and we can celebrate it.
This hypocrisy reminds me of not only of what Isaiah had said that the
President has quoted, but reminds me of what the Qur’an says about those
who are deaf, dumb and blind, and cannot see and refuse to see.

They will pretend that that there is no change when indeed there is change,
and when you go through the beautiful valleys and the hills of the Limpopo
Province, and as you approach Tzaneen, you see before you the wonderful
serenity, tranquillity and the beauty of this place, and immediately you
say to yourself: Here is opportunity, here is a tomorrow that can be better
than today.

I am glad that the hon Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry is here,
because through the wonderful forestry that you see here, the possibilities
of beneficiation are enormous, and the possibility of small, medium and
micro enterprises is enormous.

The commitment that we have made is not an empty commitment. We can boast,
but we do not do so with any arrogance, that we have provided water to more
than 6 million of our people in a short space of 12 years; that we have
provided electricity to more than 8 million people in a short space of less
than 12 years; that we have improved the system of education, and that we
have created opportunity and access for our people.

That is wonderful, that is different and today has to be better than
yesterday. Indeed, if the DA had any commitment to the institutions of
governance, then certainly their presence would have been more visible and
noticeable in this Chamber.

The mere fact that they disregard the importance of an important debate of
this nature, which speaks to the needs and the cries and the hopes of the
people from a poor rural community, where they themselves had gone,
probably to tour and not to listen, speaks of that kind of hypocrisy that I
spoke about earlier.


The Reconstruction and Development Programme speaks about, and I quote:

  Our people, with their aspirations and collective determination, are our
  most important resources in linking democracy, development, human rights
  and a people-centred approach. We are paving the way for a new democratic
  order, the thoroughgoing democratisation of our society that must
  transform, build the state and civil society. It is therefore an active
  process enabling everybody to contribute.


The initiative by this Chamber, the NCOP, to reach out to the people in the
rural hinterland is indicative of the commitment of this institution and
the ANC-led government to its commitment to a participatory democracy,
which is people-centred.
Yes, indeed, Mr Fielding must pay particular attention to the fact that we
make promises but we also keep them. When we went to Limpopo, I was not the
only Minister who had gone out there. Many of us had gone out there,
because we recognise the importance of our responsibility to interact with
our people.

We have indicated that given the abject poverty of certain communities in
certain areas, it becomes critical and necessary to enhance access, and
that we declare certain schools no-fee schools. That promise was made last
year. Today we can proudly say that the provinces are going to implement
it. [Applause.]

How does it affect a province like Limpopo? In terms of the presentation
made by the MEC for Education to the select committee of this very Chamber,
it is indicated that all schools that fall under quintile one and two, that
is the poorest and the very poor schools, would be exempt.

Effectively, this translates into 1 000 027 learners who would receive the
benefit of attending a no-fee school. [Applause.] The total learner
population is 1 976 570. That means that more than 50% of the learner
population of the Limpopo province will be the beneficiaries of a policy
which will be implemented from 1 April, in terms of which they will be
attending a no-fee school and, therefore, they will have better access and
the opportunity to achieve quality education. [Interjections.]
Moet ek dit vertaal? Ek sal dit . . . [Do I have to translate it? I will .
. . ]

You have heard the pride with which the President spoke about the
confidence of our people and his commitment to a united South Africa. You
have heard him speak with hope and confidence about the future. This
confidence resonated also in the speech of the Minister of Finance.

In a decade of commitment, in a decade of transformation, in a decade of
sincerity, biased towards the poorest of the poor, he has indicated once
again how he intends to make a difference in the quality of the lives of
our people.

The commitment by this government, by an ANC-led government, to eradicate
the bucket system, is indeed a genuine one. It is not something that is
going to occur 10 years from now; it is something that is going to occur
within the next two years. The problem of sanitation in Limpopo, in terms
of its commitment, will be eradicated within the next two years.

The commitment to water is not a commitment that is remote in a distant
future beyond our reach and grasp. It is a commitment that will be realised
by 2010, and when we celebrate the arrival of teams from all over the world
in our country, we will be able to say that each of our households has
clean water.
The Minister of Energy was here earlier and she spoke about the Electricity
Regulation Bill, but she also spoke about the infrastructure that will be
provided to this country, and to this nation, to ensure that we are able to
sustain and maintain the energy resources.

By 2012, this government, this ANC-led government, will ensure that no
household is without electricity. Now that is the commitment that the ANC
has made, is making currently, has made, and has been able to fulfil.

Yes, indeed, there are challenges. We are neither arrogant nor
overconfident. We say that the road ahead is a difficult one, but it is one
about which we are filled with confidence, given the fact that we have
succeeded in changing, in a very significant way, the quality of the lives
of our people.

Let me deal, with your permission, Chairperson, with the issues closer to
my heart, given the fact that I am now the Deputy Minister of Education.
One of the key challenges that we face in our country, given the legacy of
colonialism and apartheid, is the fact that we have to ensure that we
accelerate development amongst our young learners. Therefore we have
initiated and established an Early Childhood Development Programme, led by
the Department of Education, supported by the Departments of Health and
Social Development in terms whereof children from birth to 5 years of age
would have the opportunity of accelerated growth and development. We have
already trained 4 000 educators to ensure that, qualitatively, they will be
able to provide our learners with this opportunity.

Today we can stand here proudly and say more, Mr Fielding, that more than
400 000 children in this country are doing Grade R. The intention is that,
by 2010, a million children will be in Grade R. It is a wonderful
accomplishment. There is hope. There is a future. There is promise, and
there has been delivery.

With regard to literacy, which is central to the performance and the
cognitive development of learners, we believe that, especially visiting
schools such as you have, given the result of decades of neglect, Mr
Fielding, it is important that we provide them with books so that we can
enhance and improve and accelerate literacy.

More than 5 000 schools will be the beneficiaries of at least 100 fiction
books so that we can say that there are resources in those schools, in
addition to other resources to enhance and accelerate development in this
regard.

Now one of the key challenges that we have in this country, given its
enormous opportunity and potential to improve and to sustain development,
is the fact that we require skills desperately. The reality is, and I have
listened very carefully to what the hon member from the SA Local Government
Association spoke about, that the challenge we face is the challenge of
capacity. There I can certainly agree with Mr Fielding that we have to
recognise that we have to promote and improve our capacity, and therefore
we have initiated already, before he had spoken, Project Consolidate. They
tend to listen very attentively to the ANC, and when it is said that these
are the interventions that we are going to make and we indeed make them,
then the DA would say: ``Well, if we were you, we would do exactly what you
are doing right now’’, and pretend that those are their own ideas.

But in any event, in terms of this particular aspect, you will notice and
this is what Mr Fielding forgets to remember, that for the 284
municipalities, every municipality requires a water engineer. How many
water engineers do you think there are in this country who are black? There
are three; two of them have been poached by the private sector. So there is
one African water engineer in this entire country. It means that we have a
critical responsibility and need to ensure that we develop skills as
quickly as possible.

This country needs thousands upon thousands of engineers. It needs project
managers. It needs town planners. It needs actuaries. It needs people
managers in the service sector, and indeed, the intention is that, in order
to achieve accelerated shared growth, we have to ensure that we pay
particular attention to skills development. Therefore government has
allocated resources for this particular purpose.

Further education and training colleges create an important pathway. I want
members to listen very attentively. This country does not only require
professionals, it also requires intermediate skills, skills in the form and
shape of artisans, be they welders, builders, fitters and turners, not by
the hundreds but by the thousands. The FET colleges have been recapitalised
and will be recapitalised to the extent of R1,9 billion to ensure that we
provide quality programmes for development, accelerated development, in the
provinces in order to ensure that we are able to respond through the skills
that are critical to the developmental challenges of our country.

In this regard I can announce that I am going to Limpopo again. I am going
to speak to the youth, speak about the youth in democracy, and speak to
them about the importance of FET colleges, and what an important avenue of
development it provides for our learners. They would not have to travel
thousands upon thousands of kilometres, because they would have
institutions that have been refurbished, that have been recapitalised,
where they would get quality education, and achieve quality skills in those
areas. [Applause.]

It would also mean that we have got to pay particular attention to the
gateway subjects of mathematics and science. I visited the various schools
- and the ANC does that, and the DA does not do it; it does so only at
election times or when someone else pays for the trips – and then we
discovered that very few learners understood that in order to become a
doctor, an engineer, an actuary, or a chartered accountant, you require
mathematics at the higher grade. Therefore, we have started an advocacy
programme, which has had concrete results.

The participation in mathematics last year alone was increased dramatically
by 5 000, in terms of the passes as well. In physical science it was 8 000.
Our intention is that, within the next three years, we would have increased
the cohort of learners who pass mathematics and science by 24 000. We would
double up the number.

Optimistic? Yes. Confident? Yes. But we cannot do it alone. We require the
support of all educators, all members of the community, and public
representatives to ensure that the message is passed that the gateway
subjects are critical and necessary in order to gain entrance to certain
professions and vocations.

To do this we have extended ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I am afraid your time has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, may I just conclude by
saying that I am glad that you have stopped me. We are going to have an
opportunity to address this noble and esteemed House again during our
budget speech. We will then be able, with the Minister, to set out in
comprehensive detail what the future holds for us in education. Thank you
so much for your attention. [Applause.]

Mr M A MZIZI: Sihlalo noNgqongqoshe abakhona kanye nezithunywa eziqhamuka
ezifundazweni, ngithi ukuthula akube nani. [Chairperson, to the Ministers
present and delegates from the provinces, I say: Peace be with you all.]

Discussing this report brings to mind some of the things that one cannot
easily forget. I would suggest to this House that when we revisit the
Limpopo province, we go in winter or autumn. [Laughter.]

Ungangibuzi-ke. Lo mbiko ophambi kwethu uqukethe izinto eziningi. Isaga
siyasho sithi ukuhamba kuzala induna. Ngithi nami angisike elijikayo
ngokuphosa itshe esivivaneni ngoba sebekhulumile abafowethu. Kusukela
ngomhlaka-31 Okthoba kuze kube umhlaka-4 Novemba ngonyaka ophelile,
kwakusobala ukuthi isikhathi sabe sisincane ngoba kwakukuningi okwakudinga
ukuthi sikucoshe kubahlali basendaweni. Ngivumele-ke Sihlalo ngihlabe
amagqqabantshintshi ngendawo nami engafika kuyo ebizwa ngokuthi yi-Berlyn
Farm. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Ask me no questions about that one, please. This report that we are
discussing today is full of many things. As the saying goes, a rolling
stone gathers no moss. I also wish briefly to give some input, as my
colleagues have done. The period 31 October till 4 November last year was
clearly not enough, because there was a lot that we needed to hear from the
local people. Allow me some time, Chairperson, briefly to talk about the
place that I visited, namely Berlyn Farm.]

This farm is situated just outside the Nkowankowa Township in the Letsitele
Valley, which falls under the Greater Tzaneen Municipality. At the moment
the farm is owned by the Limpopo department of agriculture and managed by
its parastatal, that is the Agricultural and Rural Development Corporation,
the ARDC.

The farm is used to produce citrus fruit and litchis. This farm has a long
history of ups and downs. The current situation is that the farm is not
actively managed for production purposes, owing to land claims and the
scaling down of ARDC activities. In short, the Limpopo department of
agriculture and the claimants have already identified a strategic method of
solving the problem. During the process of entering into a new agreement
between the LDA and the claimants, a new claim emerged and challenged the
legitimacy of the first claims.

Okwababuhlungu-ke lapho ukuthi laba asebeqhamuka muva bathi bona le ndawo
eyabo ngoba eyobukhosi babo. Laba ababakhe lapho kusho ukuthi bayizinceku
zabo, ngakho-ke le ndawo kufanele kube ngeyabo bengacabangi ukuthi labo
bantu baxoshwa, basuswa kuleyo ndawo ababakhe kuyona. Abakuthathanga lokho,
bakushaya indiva. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[What was even more painful there, was that these people who came
afterwards and claimed to be the rightful owners of that piece of land,
alleged that the place belonged to their chieftaincy. This being the case
meant that people who already had homes in the area were called their
butlers, and were even told that they should under no circumstances be
under the illusion that that land belonged to them. However, that fell on
deaf ears.]

This issue has caused a huge setback in progress on this farm. Both the
crops and the land are in poor condition, and dying owing to drought. It is
obvious that this matter will end up in court.

Kwababuhlungu impela ngoba kwathi uma sifika laphayana – angithandi ukuthi
uma sikhuluma ngemibiko sibe nehaba, kube sengathi sifuna ukukhomba abanye
ngeminwe – sathi uma sifika laphaya abantu babephelele bonke bathi
iPhalamende selifikile. Namhlanje ikhanda lizokwehlukana nesixhanti ngoba
bazothola indawo yabo futhi balime baqhubeke baye phambili. Badumala-ke uma
bezwa sithi sisazokuzwa umbiko wabo ukuze sikwazi ukubelekelela ukuze
baqhubeke nendawo yabo. Kulukhuni kuyitshe? [Uhleko.] (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[This was extremely painful because when we went there – I do not want us
to exaggerate when we talk about these things, as if we are pointing
fingers at certain people – all the people were saying Parliament had come.
We said today the men will be separated from the boys, because those who
deserve the land will get it and the tilling of the soil will soon begin.
They were initially somewhat concerned when they heard us say to them we
would first hear all the views and thereafter decide on the matter. It was
stone hard. [Laughter.]]

Nonetheless, despite all these hiccups, we were made to believe that the
claim might be finalised during the course of 2006, and that the new
business would take over immediately thereafter.

Sihlalo, ufikile-le u-2006. Ngiyethembeka-ke ukuthi – ngiyabonga ngoba
nomfowethu oqhamuka esifundazweni saseLimpopo ukhona – konke esakhuluma
ngakho esakuthola kubantu kuyothi okunye kwakho bakwenze uma sifulathela
nje indawo, okunye bakwenze kusasa bese kuthi okunye bakwenze ngolunye
usuku. Nginethemba-ke lokuthi mhla siphindela eLimpopo, njengoba sengishilo
ukuthi siyoza ebusika noma-ke ekuphumeni nje kobusika, siyofika sithole
lezo zithelo zisekhona bese siphuza iziphuzo, sithole nemarula. Uyazi
ukuthi bathi yini leso siphuzo kuleya ndawo? Bathi . . . (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Chairperson, the year 2006 has indeed come. I just hope – I am grateful
that a member from the Limpopo Legislature is also here – that all we spoke
about and the people’s concerns were addressed immediately after our
departure from there, and hopefully they are addressing other challenges
and are preparing to address others in the future. I hope that when we go
to Limpopo again, as I have mentioned earlier, we will come in winter or in
autumn, and that we will enjoy the fruits from these farms and be given
some drinks and amarula. Do you know what they call that drink in that
area? They say . . . ]
. . . it’s the South African gardens.

Nebala isomiso sikhulu okwaze kwathi basinika nohlelo olwalungekho kithina
kwathiwa ake sithandaze sicele imvula. Habe! Umfundisi laphayana uMoatshe
wathandaza ngaze ngabheka ngoba ngangicimezile ngathi uthi usakhuluma
nezingilozi noma usathandaza nje. Lana izulu ngakusasa. Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The drought is terrible in that area; so bad that we were even asked to do
something that was not part of our programme. We were asked to pray for
rain! Oh! Pastor Moatshe prayed until I opened my eyes. I initially had my
eyes shut, but when he continued praying non-stop, I asked myself whether
he was still praying or whether he was talking to the angels by then. The
following day the rain fell. [I thank you. [Applause.]]












Nksz N F MAZIBUKO: Sihlalo, ngibingelela oNgqongqoshe abakhona kanye
namalungu omkhandlu. Uhlelo lokusa iPhalamende kubantu lubalulekile
kakhulu. Uhlelo oluhle kakhulu ngoba abantu bayaphiwa ithuba lokutshela
uhulumeni, ikakhulu thina zishayamthetho, ukuthi yini ebahluphayo nokuthi
futhi ngabe bazuza kangakanani esabiwenimali.

Senginonyaka owodwa ngiyilungu loMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe. Kuwo
wonke umsebenzi esiwenzayo, awukho ongijabulisa kakhulu njengokuthi siye
kubantu. Yinye qha into engidumazayo - yilaba bamaqenjana amancane. Ngisho
laba abayikhonkothayo uma ngabe ihamba. [Uhleko.] Mina ngiyojabula mhlazane
bethi abafuni ukuzibandakanya kulolu hlelo ngoba empeleni angiliboni iqhaza
abalibambayo. Okwabo njena ukukhekheleza bagibele yona le nqola yethu
abayikhonkothayo. Ukwesutha kwakhumbuza uNoshinga ukuthi kuyathakathwa.

Intsha yaseLimpopo yazikhulumela ngesikhathi sivakashile ikhala ngokuthi
ayinamakhono, yakhala ngokweswela imisebenzi yabuye yakhala ngolunye ulusha
olusebenzisa izidakamizwa, luphuze notshwala bese luhlukumeza abazali. Kulo
nyaka nje sigubha iminyaka enga-30 kwaba nezibhelu laphayana eSoweto
ngonyaka ka-1976. Uma siphendula thina siwuhulumeni we-ANC sithi sibazwile.
Ngisho nesabiwomali esethulwe uNgqongqoshe u-Trevor Manuel izolo lokhu
sithele isizumbulu sezimali ukuze intsha iqeqeshwe iphinde futhi ibe
namakhono. IsiKhwama seNtsha uMsobomvu naso sithi entsheni uzoyithola
kanjani uhleli ekhoneni.

Simema bonke abasha ukuthi bazibhalise ukuze batomule imali babe
osomabhizinisi abasafufusa bakwazi futhi ukuqasha nabanye ontanga babo.
Nokho, asikhumbule ukuthi akuvelwa kanyekanye kungemadlebe embongolo.
Ezinye iznto zithatha isikhathi ngakho sicela ukuba babekezele.

Omame nabo abazange bazibeke phansi. Basitshela kwezikabhoqo bethi babulawa
yindlala. Abanye bathi abayeni selokhu bahamba bethi bayothenga isinkwa,
nanamuhla abakabuyi. Basitshela nokuthi le mithetho esiyibekile ebhekene
nokubavikela ayibavikeli ngoba abanye besilisa bayabahlukumeza futhi
bayabanukubeza ngokocansi. Kukhona-ke omunye wesilisa obenganawo amahloni
owathi laba besifazane abasabahloniphi abayeni babo.

Sebeyeyisa baqhuba intwala ngewisa ngoba bethembe le mitheshwana yethu
ebizwa ngokuthi o-Domestic Violence Act. Abakwenzayo ukuthi bachukuluze
abayeni babo bese begijimela emaphoyiseni beyobabophisa ukuze balale
esitokisini bese laba besifazane baphume kanje beyobhiyoza, bedansela o-
Sweety My Babe kanye neculo le-Alska elithi Ujayiva sengathi umenyiwe
[Uhleko.] Ngaleso sikhathi izingane zona zisuke zisele zodwa zinganakwe
muntu.

Ububha nabo abuzibekanga phansi. Siyazi ukuthi emaphandleni abantu baphila
ngokutshala imifino kanye nezithelo. Kepha uma imvula ingani, abakwazi
ukulima. Ubaba umfundisi uMoatshe waze wahlanganisa umkhuleka sathandazela
imvula, yingakho izulu lina kulesiya sifundazwe. Nokho okubuhlungu ukuthi
kunezikhukhula.

Amakhono nawo, do! Kungenxa yokuthi abantu bamandulo babengavumi ukuthi
ingane yentombazane iye esikoleni ngoba bethi ukudlala ngemali ngoba
izokwendela komunye umuzi. Yingakho-ke abaningi besifazane bengenawo
amakhono, abaqashwa futhi abaqasheki. Uhulumeni we-ANC uma ephendula uthi
ayikho inkwali ephandela enye.

Sesibeke izinhlelo ezinjengo Asgisa, phecelezi i-Accelerated  Shared  Growth
for South Africa ukuze abesifazane  batomule  kulo  mnotho,  babe  namakhono
futhi bakwazi ukuzimela  geqe  bengalokhu  belinde  o-sweety  my  babe  babo
abahamba beyothenga isinkwa.  NgesiSuthu  sithi  “Mme  o  tshwara  thipa  ka
bohaleng”, phecelezi kusho ukuthi . . . (Translation of  isiZulu  paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms N F MAZIBUKO: Chairperson, I greet all  the  Ministers  and  members  of
Parliament. The programme  of  taking  Parliament  to  the  people  is  very
important. This programme is important because it gives a  voice  to  people
to tell the government, especially the members,  about  their  concerns  and
how they benefit from the budget.

I have been a member of the National Council of Provinces for one year  now.
In all the work that we do, there is nothing  that  makes  me  happier  than
going to the people. There is one thing that disappoints  me  -  members  of
small  parties.  I  am  referring  to  those  who  bark  when  it’s  moving.
[Laughter.] I would be happy the day they say that they  don’t  like  to  be
involved in this programme, because I don’t see them playing any role.

The youth spoke for themselves when we visited Limpopo. Their concerns  were
a lack of skills and a shortage of jobs. They  also  raised  concerns  about
the youth who are addicted to drugs and those who consume alcohol and  abuse
their parents after doing so. This year will mark the  30th  anniversary  of
the Soweto uprising of 1976. In our response as the ANC government,  we  are
saying that we  heard  their  concerns.  The  Minister  of  Finance,  Trevor
Manuel, allocated millions to  job  training  and  skills  development.  The
Umsobomvu Youth Fund is asking: “How are you going to make things happen  in
your life if you are just sitting in the corner, doing nothing?”

We are calling on the youth to register so that they  will  become  emerging
business people and  employ  others.  However,  we  have  to  remember  that
success does not come to everyone at the same time. Some things  take  time.
Therefore, we urge them to be patient.

The women also spoke for themselves. They told us to  our  faces  that  they
were starving. Some said that their husbands  had  gone  to  buy  bread  and
never came back. They also told us  that  the  laws  that  are  supposed  to
protect them do not do so, because  their  husbands  still  abuse  and  rape
them.

A shameless man said that women did not respect  their  husbands.  They  are
disrespectful in terms of the Act entitled the Domestic Violence  Act.  What
they do is to provoke men so that they would be arrested. After  that  women
celebrate and dance to Sweetie my baby and  the  song  by  Malaika,  Ujayiva
engathi emenyiwe. [Laughter.] All this time, children  are  left  alone  and
ignored.

There is also poverty. We all know that people live by  growing  fruits  and
vegetables in rural areas. If it does not rain, they  are  unable  to  farm.
Father Moatshe also prayed for rain. That is  why  it  is  raining  in  that
province. However, it is a pity that there are floods.

They have no skills because previously girls  were  not  allowed  to  go  to
school. It was regarded as a waste of money as  she  will  get  married  and
leave. That is why  the  majority  of  women  don’t  have  skills,  are  not
employed and are unemployable. Our response is: “Every man for himself”.

We  have  programmes  like  Asgisa,  the  Accelerated  and   Shared   Growth
Initiative for South Africa, so that the women can benefit, gain skills  and
be able to be independent. In  Sesotho  we  say  “mme  o  tshwara  thipa  ka
bohaleng”, which means . . . ]

You teach a woman, you teach the nation. You teach a man, you teach an
individual. [Laughter.]

Yingakho-ke sithi abesifazane amakhono abo bayawadinga ukuze ikati
lingalali eziko. Abanye futhi abazikhulumela abantu abakhubazekile. Siyazi-
ke sonke ukuthi mandulo abantu ababekhubazekile babefihlwa emakhaya.
Imindeni yabo yayingavamisile ukubaveza obala. Thina siwuhulumeni we-ANC
sithi uma ngabe umuntu ekhubazekile uhola imali kadekle.

Manje-ke benzani-ke abantu bethu basemkhaya? Ngelanga lawo umholo bayamgeza
nje kahle umuntu, bamgqokise abe muhle bese bemphelezela ukuthi ayohola le
mali yethu kahulumeni. Uma bebuya lapho baphuza utshwala bakhohlwe ngaye.

Abantu futhi abakhubazekile bakhale ngokuthi abanawo amakhono, futhi ezinye
izindlu zikahulumeni abakwazi ukungena kuzo ngenxa yokuthi zinezitebhisi.
Imithetho esesiyishayile abanye bayishaya indiva. Baswele amakhono,
abaqashwa emsebenzini nezitulo abahamba ngazo sezaguga futhi abanazo
nezibonelelo. Siwuhulumeni we-ANC saphendula sathi kuyo yonke imithetho
ebhekene nemisebenzi kahulumeni, amaphesenti athile kufuneka kube ngabantu
abakhubazekile. Akekho-ke uhulumeni oke wakwenza lokhu ngaphandle
kukahulumeni ophethwe yi-ANC.

Sekukonke-ke sizitholile izinkinga  mayelana  nezitifiketi  zokuzalwa  kanye
nomazisi.  Abanye-ke  bakhala  ngokuthi  bashadiswe  bengazi   kepha   thina
singuhulumeni  we-ANC  sabaqinisekisa  ngokuthi  wonke   umuntu   unelungelo
lesitifiketi  sokuzalwa  kanye  nomazisi.  Sabaqinisekisa  futhi   nanokuthi
sizozidabula lezo zincwadi zomshado zabo bonke labo abashadiswe bengazi  uma
nabo beziveza.

Uma sengiphetha, umhlaka-1  Mashi  ususeduze  -  kuyoba  uqhude  manikiniki.
Kuyocaca ukuthi abantu bafuna muphi  uhulumeni  ukuba  abaphathe.  Abanye-ke
bayobeletha  izithende  ngoba  ngeke   bayimele   le   ndlovu   engange-ANC.
Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[It is for that reason that we say women need skills; so that  famine  won’t
become rampant. People with disabilities also registered their concerns.  We
all know that previously people  with  disabilities  were  hidden  at  home.
Their families were not used to coming out with them. The ANC government  is
saying that people with disabilities must get grants.

What do people do then? On payout  day  they  bath  the  person,  dress  him
nicely and accompany him to  get  his  money.  When  they  come  back,  they
consume alcohol and forget about him.

People with disabilities also raised concerns about skills shortages. They
also don’t have access to some government buildings because they have
stairways. Some undermine the laws that we make. They don’t have skills and
they are not employed. The wheelchairs that they are using are old. The
response of the ANC government is that it is entrenched in Acts governing
the Public Service that a certain percentage must be people with
disabilities. There is no government that has done that before apart from
the ANC government.

We also received concerns about birth certificates and identity documents.
Some said that they were married without their knowledge. The ANC
government has assured them that everybody has a right to a birth
certificate and an identity document. We promised them that we were going
to sort out the issue concerning marriage certificates if they came
forward.

In conclusion, 1 March is around the corner. It is election day. It will be
clear which government must govern. Some will run away because they cannot
face this elephant that is huge, the ANC. Thank you. [Applause.]]




END OF TAKE
sd (Zul)/LB (Eng)




"National Council of Provinces Main",Unrevised Hansard,23 Feb 2006,"Take 20
[National Council of Provinces Main].doc"

"National Council of Provinces Main",Unrevised Hansard,16 Feb 2006,"[Take-
20] [National Council of Provinces Main][NCOP-Logger][tm].doc"
Mr N D HENDRICKSE: Chairperson, hon members, before I start, I just want to
say to the member that spoke before me I come from a small party, but we
have a 100 per cent attendance here today. [Laughter.]

The Taking of Parliament to the People of Limpopo indeed has been a
tremendous insight into challenges of service delivery, despite the many
achievements and progress made in certain areas. To me, as the new member
of the NCOP, it was a great learning experience and eye-opener to see how
government’s policy programmes and projects have uplifted the lives of
ordinary citizens. Indeed the trip proved useful from an oversight
perspective.

Having said the above, I would like to focus on some key concerns regarding
the observations made in Limpopo. These are as follows: There seemed to be
a dichotomy between traditionally owned large white farms with all their
infrastructure, such as irrigation schemes, in place, and emergent black-
owned farms which have been heavily impacted upon by the drought. It
appears that emerging black farmers receive very little financial and
technical assistance and one would like to determine what has happened to
agricultural extension officers who in the past have assisted white farmers
with their farming methods. Farming has become very technical and markets
have become very important now that we are part of the global situation.
One makes no excuse for expropriating large farms. The time has come for it
to happen. When that does happen, we need to equip our farmers to be able
to take over these farms in a proper way. The drought had nothing to do
with our farmers there. Other farms were lush, but our farmers had trees
struggling and dying, because they did not have the wherewithal.

One success story has been the construction of roads in Limpopo, using
labour intensive methods, and it was good to see. Some of the roads were
not of the best of quality because they decided to make use of a cheaper
kind of road. Other roads were made very well and without using any
mechanised assistance. [Time expired.]

Mnr C A T SMITH (Noord-Kaap):
Agb Voorsitter, agb Adjunkminister, agb Adjunkvoorsitter van die NRVP, lede
van dié hoogeerwaarde Huis en spesiale afgevaardigdes, dis vir my ’n
besondere eer en ’n groot voorreg om aan hierdie debat te kan deelneem, wat
onder meer handel oor die oorsigbesoek aan die provinsie van Limpopo. Laat
my toe om in hierdie stadium ’n paar knellende probleme waarvan ons tydens
daardie besoek bewus geword het, onder die aandag van hierdie Huis te
bring.

Eerstens is daar die impak van die droogte; tweedens is daar die behoefte
aan water waar mense lang afstande moet aflê om by water uit te kom;
derdens, die swak kwaliteit van die HOP-huise in die groter Tzaneen-
gebied, die infrastruktuur wat tot gevolg het dat daar lang afstande afgelê
moet word na skole en bushaltes, waar mense blootgestel word aan misdaad;
die Letaba Fire Protection Association waar die Mopani-distriksraad maande
lank gewag het die om aan hierdie mense se probleme aandag te gee. Dankie
aan die Minister wat die kwessie van elektrisiteit aangeroer het. Ook die
kwessie van die misbruik van plaaswerkers is van die probleme wat daar was.

Laat my toe om aan die agb Fielding te sê dat dit probleme probleme is dié
veroorsaak is deur apartheid. Laat ek u daaraan herinner dat toe die ANC-
regering hierdie in 1994 oorgeneem het, dit ’n bankrotregering was. Vandag
kan ons inderdaad spog dat hierdie land se ekonomie omgeswaai is deur die
ANC, soos wat u inderdaad gister gehoor het in mnr Manuel se Begroting.
Daar is aanduidings van ’n vyf persent groeikoers, wat moontlik kan styg
tot ’n ses per sent groeikoers. Hierdie is tekens, soos die agb
adjunkminister Surty aangedui het, dat gister sleg was; vandag onder die
ANC-regering beter is en môre nog beter sal wees. Moenie hier kom sit en
maak asof die DA niks te make met die toestande in Limpopo nie.

Ek wil nie verder ingaan op die DA nie. Laat my egter toe om te sê dat die
opposisiepartye op ’n opportunistiese wyse besig is om ons, die ANC, te wil
laat afdwaal van die rigting wat ons ingeslaan het. Laat my hulle tog
daaraan herinner dat ons nie net hier is om politieke punte aan te teken
nie, maar dat ons inderdaad hier is vir die herskepping van ’n nuwe
samelewing, weg van apartheid en rassisme, na demokrasie en ware vrede.

Ek wil graag stilstaan by die walglike wyse waarop die ACDP deesdae van die
kruis van Christus misbruik maak as ’n verkiesingsfoefie om mense op ’n
absolute goedkoop wyse te om te koop met geloof en met die kruis. In
hierdie stadium moet ons sê dat dit walglik is en dat ons dit glad nie
goedkeur nie. Die mense daarbuite is mense met integriteit en hulle sal nie
laat mislei met sulke foefies soos wat die ACDP inderdaad gebruik nie.

Wanneer ons die 50-jarige bestaan van die vrouens se optog na die Uniegebou
in Pretoria vier, moet ons daaroor praat binne die konteks van
geslagsgelykheid, en ons moet daarteen waak dat wanneer ons oor die regte
van mans en vrouens praat, moet ons nie binne die konteks van
meerderwaardigheid en minderwaardigheid nie.

Agb lede van hierdie Huis, seuns moet nie identiteitsloos grootword in Suid-
Afrika nie, maar met ’n identiteit sodat hulle kan trots wees daarop dat
hulle mans is wat nie hul vrouens en kinders misbruik nie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr C A T SMITH (Northern Cape): Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon
Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, members of this august House and special
delegates, it is a special honour and a great privilege for me to
participate in this debate dealing with the oversight visit to the Limpopo
province, amongst other thing. At this point, allow me to draw the
attention of this House to a few pressing problems that we picked up during
that visit.

Firstly, there is the impact of the drought; secondly, there is the need
for water considering the fact that people have to walk long distances to
fetch water; thirdly, there is the issue of the poor quality of RDP houses
in the greater Tzaneen area, and the infrastructure that results in the
fact that people have to travel long distances to schools and the bus stop,
exposing them to crime; and the issue of the Letaba Fire Protection
Association, that had to wait for months on the Mopani District Council to
pay attention to these people’ s problems. Thanks to the Minister for
mentioning the electricity issue. There was also the issue of the abuse of
farm workers, which is one of the problems.

Allow me to explain to the hon Fielding that these problems were caused by
apartheid. Let me remind you that when the ANC government took over in
1994, the government was bankrupt. Today we can indeed blow our own trumpet
due to the fact that the ANC has turned the tide for the economy of this
country, as we heard in Mr Manuel’s Budget yesterday in fact. There are
indications of 5% growth, which can probably increase to 6%. These are
signs, as indicated by hon Deputy Minister Surty – yesterday was bad, today
is better under the ANC-led government and tomorrow will be even better.
Don’t come and sit here and pretend that the DA has nothing to do with
conditions in Limpopo.

I do not want to elaborate more on the issue of the DA. However, allow me
to point out that the opposition parties are engaging in an opportunistic
way to try to get us, the ANC, to deviate from the course that we have
embarked upon. Let me remind them all the same that we are not here solely
to score political points, but that we are here in fact to build a new
society, moving away from apartheid and racism towards democracy and real
peace.

I would like to focus on the revolting manner in which the ACDP is abusing
the cross of Christ as an election ploy nowadays, bribing people with
religion and the cross in an absolutely crude way. At this stage we must
point out that it is sickening and that we by no means approve of it. The
people who are out there are people with integrity, and they will not allow
themselves to be deceived by ploys like those the ACDP in fact engage in.

When we celebrate the 50th commemoration of the Women’s March to the Union
Buildings in Pretoria, we should deal with it within the context of gender
equality and guard against addressing the rights of men and women within
the context of superiority and inferiority.

Hon members of this House, boys should not grow up in South Africa without
an identity, but in fact with an identity that will make them proud to be
men who are not abusing their women and children.]

We need to use our economic market to benefit the entire people of the
Limpopo province, particularly the poor. In order to sharpen our economic
strategy, we must focus on the development of the second economy of poor
people to the same level as the first economy. We need to put more emphasis
on the local economic development  initiativesdevelopment initiatives and
to provide sustainable, natural environments in which people can flourish
spiritually, physically and economically.

Vir die probleme wat ons tans in Limpopo ervaar, het die Minister gister
aangekondig – en ons wil hom gelukwens – dat daar meer as R20 miljard vir
belastingverligting is. Dit sal inderdaad ’n groot bydrae lewer tot die
dienslewering in hierdie provinsie en in die land. Dit is ook ‘n
merkwaardige bydrae dat welsynstoelaes bo die inflasievlakke verhoog is.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[With regard to the problems we are currently experiencing in Limpopo, the
Minister announced yesterday that – and we want to congratulate him – there
is more than R20 billion for tax relief. This will indeed contribute
greatly to service delivery in this province and in this country. It is
also a remarkable contribution that welfare grants have been raised above
inflation levels.]

Hon members, the Freedom Charter says that there will be houses for all and
we need a housing programme that will integrate and deracialise cities and
towns, house the poor close to their place of work and address the issues
regarding the related infrastructure, such as sport and recreation
facilities. Farmers must refrain from threatening workers with
retrenchments in the wake of severe droughts that has negatively affected
the farming sector in this part of the province. All employers are bound by
section 189 of the Labour Relations Act that clearly states that every
employer should first go through the consultation process before
retrenching the workers.

Local government needs to reorientate itself in order to deliver better
services to the community in order to implement faster and better service
delivery. The municipalities need to change the mindset and approach of
people at management and operational levels. There must not be a lack of
motivation, lack of organisation and lack of sufficient development of
technical knowledge to deal with these problems. All municipal officials
must take action, meet deadlines and take the best decisions in the
shortest time that is available. Local government must provide an essential
minimum package of services to all indigent households in a sustainable
manner. It is the responsibility of municipalities to determine their own
mechanisms for the passing of this subsidy to the poor and to establish
appropriate targeting mechanisms thereof.

I am certain that we shall overcome as we have advanced towards a gender
responsive developmental local government. On 1 March we shall hold local
government elections and, as members of this House, we need to assess
ourselves as to whether our being here has made any difference in the
upliftment of the country or not. As a nation we have travelled the road
very few have dared to travel and we have embarked on a course of building
a truly united, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous society. The next
decade’s challenges arise from the lessons learned from the first decade
and new opportunities created by the first phases of transformation. We
look at the road ahead with enthusiasm and passion. Our revolutionary
challenges as the ANC-led government and the people of South Africa are
still enormous and daunting. There is no way that we can let our people
down. Let us roll up our sleeves and be a nation at work for a better life
for all.
Agb lede en agb Voorsitter, die Noord-Kaap sien uit na u besoek eerskomende
maand en baie sterkte met u werksaamhede. Ek dank u. [Applous.] [Hon
members and hon Chairperson, the Northern Cape is looking forward to visit
next month and wishes you everything of the best with your activities. I
thank you. [Applause.]]


Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chairperson, I am joining this debate with a smile,
after what happened yesterday. After enjoying the dynamic speech by the
Minister of Finance, something happened last night, that is, Kaizer Chiefs
– one, Sundowns – zero. [Laughter.]

To some people it might sound like over-kill, but I also want to crush and
flush the myth by the DA, that the programme of Ttaking Parliament to the
Ppeople is a waste of time or, as they say, is a political road show. This
chorus, I think, is now now becoming boring, because they are very economic
with the truth. I don’t want to say they are lying; they are very economic
with the truth.

If misleading the public is a disease, we need to get a doctor for these
people, because I think they need help, they are sick. They know that what
they are saying is not true, and it cannot be right. One irrelevant
argument was that investors might not be willing to go and invest in an
area that is underdeveloped. Contrary to what they are saying, investors
are not interested in investing in an area that is already developed. For
heaven’s sake, go and get your facts right, please. Maybe today one might
just say: “Mene mene tekel, upharsin.”

Some of the stakeholders that made use of this opportunity to talk to us
when we were at Nkowankowa are emerging farmers. They appreciated the fact
that we have saved them the task of flying all the way from wherever they
are to Cape Town to come and talk to Parliament.

One of their concerns, for example, was how to access funds. This problem
was raised in the presence of the national Minister and the MEC. Their
concern was positively responded to by both the Minister and the MEC. There
was this undertaking by our government, that their concerns will be
positively addressed. You can’t tell me that this was a political road
show. It can’t be right.

It was pleasing to hear commercial farmers appreciating the role played by
the NCOP and the ANC-led government. They even raised their concerns that
were well received by the Ministers and MECs and those who were there.
Therefore, you listen to some people and say that people are not satisfied.
People were even ululating in appreciation of what the government is doing.

The report I got from the regional Land Claims Commissioner, Mr Mashile
Mokono, is that there is good co-operation between the department and those
farmers, except for the few who still need babysitting. You can’t tell me
that this was a political road show.
Land restitution is going so well in our province. Our people are extremely
happy to get their land back. This was confirmed by people who addressed us
in that hall. We agreed, as Parliament, that yes, there are still some
challenges that need to be addressed. I’ve got statistics to prove what I
am saying.

During our sitting it emerged again that some projects in and around Mopane
were in a dire need for assistance, in terms of seed capital and
infrastructure to make them more viable and relevant in addressing the
socio-economic needs and realities of Mopane, realities like the growing
economy that addresses food security, geographical gross products and job
creation.

Twelve projects in greater Tzaneen, Polokwane, Mogalakwena and Belabela
municipalities will benefit from these developments. This will create a
turnaround for this project’s direct beneficiaries and their localities, in
that a monthly gross margin of R40 000 will be generated once the projects
are operational. Of the 44 disadvantaged farmers, 35% are women, and 34%
are youths, and they will be owners and operators of these projects.

During the same period when we were there in Nkowankowa, members will
recall that the Seleisi family had a plight that was brought to the
attention of the Minister, hon Thoko Didiza. They were being denied burial
rights for the deceased family member on the property, the property that
they have known for donkey’s years. The rest of the family members had
lived and were buried on the same farm, which had changed hands through
market forces, until it landed with the farmer who felt it was wrong for
the black person to be buried in that farm.

We, as the government, have managed to secure for this family the highest
order of rights beyond what they have asked for. The farm has been bought
for them, and the Seleisi family will soon be titleholders to the 255
hectares property, and a highly productive agricultural enterprise.
[Applause.]

They will receive support through CASP in the new financial year to acquire
the relevant skills, and beef up the infrastructure capacity to make the
farm more productive. Two members of the family are currently, as I am
speaking, enrolled at Buhle academy of agriculture in Delmas, on a six-
month practical or technical agricultural training course. Well done, to
our government.

Modulasetulo, go nyakega gore re lebeleleng gabotse tlhahlo yeo e fiwago
batho ba rena ge ba se na go fiwa naga . . . [Nako e fedile.] [Hon
Chairperson, we need to look into the training that is offered to our
people after land has been allocated to them . . . [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon House
Chairperson, let me thank the Deputy Minister of Education and all the hon
members for their positive reflection on the recent visit by the National
Council of Provinces to Limpopo. The reflection has clearly showed us that
the visit was not just a success but also a wonderful experience, in terms
of engaging with our people in dialogue.

I think, as the Chairperson indicated earlier, that it is important for us
to follow up on the report. When we do so, we should keep in mind that the
issues raised in this report, which the participants in this debate
reflected on, need their joint effort as national, provincial and local
government.

It is impressive to see that government makes use of the reports that we
make available after we have visited provinces. I have noted that some
government departments do request the reports before visiting those areas
we have visited as part of Taking Parliament to the People, as was the case
with North West, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. This is important because
when we talk to the people they see one government. Therefore it is
important that we share information so that people see that it is really
one government, which speaks with one voice.
Yes, as presiding officers we are going to consider a working document on
the follow-up mechanism, which we must adopt so that we know at what stage
we need to expect feedback from our committees or from government. This, we
hope, will assist especially the government departments to provide us with
information on time before we embark on any form of follow-up visit.

We can see that, with regard to the programme of Taking Parliament to the
People, all the spheres of government in practice work together. This is
very important in the context of the need for us to promote co-operative
governance.

As the NCOP, we must make use of the position that we occupy in the system
of co-operative government. In this regard, we must make sure that local
government, in particular, does benefit from taking part through occupying
the benches of this House. We must make sure that this sphere of government
is supported by national and provincial government in order to carry out
its functions. Section 154(1) of the Constitution enjoins national and
provincial governments to take certain measures to support and strengthen
the capacity of municipalities to manage their own affairs, exercise their
powers and to perform their functions.

Here I want to knock the DA again over their little fingers and tell them
that they have put posters up concerning delivery. We deliver. Yes, I want
to congratulate them for delivering the whole city of Cape Town, Western
Cape, back into the hands of the ANC. As the NCOP, this is the reason we
have now decided to pay particular attention to local government, as I will
indicate later on when we talk about Programme 2009. It is important that
we do so because we are all agreed that this is mainly where service
delivery needs to be sharpened.

I thank hon members for the contributions to this debate. I hope that,
collectively, we will not allow the issues we have raised and those
contained in the report to be forgotten. They must remain on your radar
screens. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. That
concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that
the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65
of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads
are present in the Chamber. Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of votes, if they so wish. Is there any province
that wishes to make a declaration of vote? None. We shall now proceed to
voting on the question, which will proceed in alphabetical order. Eastern
Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: Siyavuma. [We support.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J Van ROOYEN. Free State supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N F MAZIBUKO: We support.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu! [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mrs H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re a e amogela. [Limpopo supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Mrs M P THEMBA: Mpumalanga supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Noord Kaap steun. [Northern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Noordwes steun. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Die Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All provinces voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

                         ORDER NO 3 NOT DISPOSED OF

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move:

   That Order No 3 not be disposed of today.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I am informed that the
Chief Whip has raised a motion with respect to Order number three. That
Order will no longer be debated this afternoon. I therefore call on the
Secretary to read the fourth Order of the Day.

 CONSIDERATION REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
                             STUDY TOUR TO INDIA

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I now call the hon P Moatshe, the
chairperson of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson and hon members, we visited India and the
objectives of the visit were to meet the various stakeholders and to
explore talks on the following issues: to look at agriculture and
aquaculture initiatives including policies in that country, sustainable
tourism development, government’s institutional and policy measures in
support of job creation and poverty alleviation, the selection of projects,
programme design, management and evaluation mechanisms, and community
participation and involvement in multisectoral approaches to the
programmes.

As we all know, India is the second most populous country on the planet,
and given its own history of colonialism and underdevelopment, it is faced
with enormous challenges on all fronts, of which poverty is perhaps
paramount.

A glance at the statistics relating to its economic indicators provides us
with the kind of insight that confirms this country’s stature as a growing
giant. For example, the performance of the Indian economy was good during
2003-04 as its GDP grew at 8% while inflation remained below 7% during this
period.

On the international front, India’s total global trade reaches
US$12 billion, while its exchange reserves increased to $114 billion as at
May 2005. The fundamentals of the Indian economy are sound as its current
account deficit is less than 1%.

The planning commission for the government of India has estimated a GDP
growth rate of 8%, a savings rate of 26%, and an investment rate of 28%
during the period between 2004 and 2008. What is particularly important to
us is the fact that, given the trend and government policy, it is estimated
that the economy will grow at 6%, benefiting South African companies in the
execution of performance in infrastructure sectors, including electricity,
water and road construction. [Interjections.] I’m in trouble here, really!
[Laughter.] I’m in trouble here, yes. This guy keeps on beeping.

The overall performance of the Indian economy will also create demand for
South African products such as its fruit, wine and other alcoholic
beverages. The growth in agriculture and favourable . . . [Inaudible.] . .
. will lead to an increase in fertiliser imports from South Africa.

Ever since diplomatic relations were established between India and our
country in 1993, trade between us and India has grown rapidly. India’s
imports are mainly in the form capital equipment. At the same time, exports
from South Africa are increasing in view of that country’s commitment to
lowering import duties, which was further reflected in the budget presented
in the Indian parliament and the trade policy declared on 8 April 2005.

Yes, as a committee we were more than impressed with the lead and advances
that India has made in the area of aquaculture, which is the domestic
harvesting of fish.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I’m afraid your time has
expired.

Rev P MOATSHE: So short. I can’t believe that. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms T S Setona): Order! Hon members, I want to remind
hon members to do themselves and the presiding officers a favour in that as
they speak they also look there, because people forget and that is why
there is the whole evocation of suspicion from time to time that presiding
officers are robbing people of time. There is a machine there - as they are
reading people must look at it. I think it assists.

I shall now put the question. The question is that the report be adopted.
As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present. They are.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that wants
to make a declaration? None. We shall now proceed to voting on the
question. I shall do this in alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T Manyosi: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J Van Rooyen: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N F Mazibuko: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C Ntuli: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mrs H F Matlanyane: Re a e amogela. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P Themba: Steun. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A Sulliman: Ke ya rona. [Supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S Kolweni: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J Mack: Supports.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES ON PROGRAMME 2009

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon House
Chairperson, hon members, on 30 June 2004 the National Council of Provinces
launched its programme of action for 2009, then termed Vision 2009.

However, the title of this important document had to be changed to avoid
confusion with the new vision of Parliament that was launched last year,
hence the name “Programme 2009”. We have decided to review the document
each year so that it takes into consideration new challenges and to ensure
that it always relevant.

Programme 2009 seeks to direct the work of the NCOP to the things that we
must do. Members must see it as a guide to the work of the National Council
of Provinces and develop their programmes alongside it.

There are things that will not necessarily be in the document and which we
will expect our committees not to lose sight of. There are also things that
will not necessarily be in the document as it is an NCOP-specific document,
and which we will do jointly with the National Assembly as Parliament.

The original document did not have clear targets that the National Council
of Provinces must achieve by 2009. This time we agreed that specific
targets were essential for us to measure our performance.

They are the following: increased oversight work that is guided by input
from the provinces and local government regarding their needs and
interests; the promotion of public participation with clear impact on
service delivery and the work of Parliament; improved support to local
government through closely monitoring government programmes at municipal
level; improved intergovernmental relations as a result of the National
Council of Provinces’ sustained contribution to building the system of co-
operative government.

Importantly, the document emphasises the need for us to ensure that local
government is supported to deliver in an effective and efficient manner.
The document has been enriched by input from hon members as we had two
rounds of consultations on the document - first with chairpersons of select
committees and the Whippery, and, second, with all National Council of
Provinces members.

I commend Programme 2009 to the House in the belief that we will commit to
it and continue to enrich it as a working document for taking the National
Council of Provinces through to the end of this parliamentary term. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question. The
question is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in
terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether
all delegation heads are present in the Chamber. Yes.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make the declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration? None.

We shall now proceed to voting in alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T Manyosi: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J Van Rooyen: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Ms N F Mazibuko: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C Ntuli: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mrs H F Matlanyane: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms M P Themba: iMpumalanga iyasekela. [Mpumalanga supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A Sulliman: Northern Cape supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S Kolweni: North West ke ya rona. [North West supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J Mack: Wes-Kaap steun. [Western Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces have voted in
favour. I therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of
the Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                          PROGRAMME IN PIGEONHOLES

                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, just one announcement:
I’m informed that members must go to their pigeonholes and collect the
programme that has just been presented by the Deputy Chairperson of the
Council. Thank you.

The Council adjourned at 16:39.
                                 __________




                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                         WEDNESDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Finance
         (i)     Appropriation Bill [B 2 - 2006] (National Assembly - sec
              77)

          ii) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 - 2006] (National Assembly -
              sec 76)


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report and to the
         Joint Budget Committee to consider in terms of its mandate, as
         well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 15 February 2006.


        iii) Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
             Year) [B 4 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77)

         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Finance of
         the National Assembly for consideration and report, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 15 February 2006.
         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bills may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Fast-tracking of Bills


     RESOLUTION OF THE JOINT PROGRAMME SUBCOMMITTEE


     The Subcommittee convened on 15 February 2006, at 15:30, and adopted
    the following decision:


         That, in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2), the Division of Revenue
         Bill be fast-tracked, where necessary dispensing with any relevant
         House Rule or Joint Rule and shortening any period within which
         any step in the legislative process relating to the Bill has to be
         completed, including the submission of the translated version of
         the Bill as introduced before the debate in the National Assembly
         takes place. This process must be completed in order for the Bill
         to be enacted by 31 March 2006.

    In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in both
         Houses for ratification.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     (1)    The Budget Speech of the Minister of Finance - 15 February 2006
         [RP 10-2006].
     (2)    Estimate of National Revenue for 2006 [RP 11-2006].

     (3)    Taxation Proposals in respect of Income Tax.

     (4)    Budget Review 2006 [RP 9-2006], including:


         (a)     Taxation proposals in respect of customs and excise duties
              [tabled at 15:12]; and

         (b)     "Annexure E: Memorandum to accompany the Division of
              Revenue Bill", tabled in terms of section 10(5) of the
              Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97 of
              1997).


    (5)    Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2006].


    (6)    Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2006], tabled in terms of
         section 10(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997
         (Act No 97 of 1997).


    (7)    Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
         Year) [B 4 – 2006].


     (8)    Estimates of National Expenditure 2006 [RP 8 - 2006], which
         includes:


         1. Memorandum on Vote No 1 - "The Presidency", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         2. Memorandum on Vote No 2 - "Parliament", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         3. Memorandum on Vote No 3 - "Foreign Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         4. Memorandum on Vote No 4 - "Home Affairs", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         5. Memorandum on Vote No 5 - "Provincial and Local Government",
              Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         6. Memorandum on Vote No 6 - "Public Works", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;
         7. Memorandum on Vote No 7 - "Government Communications and
              Information System", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         8. Memorandum on Vote No 8 - "National Treasury", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         9. Memorandum on Vote No 9 - "Public Enterprises", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         10.     Memorandum on Vote No 10 - "Public Service and
              Administration", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         11.     Memorandum on Vote No 11 - "Public Service Commission",
              Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         12.     Memorandum on Vote No 12 - "South African Management
              Development Institute", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         13.     Memorandum on Vote No 13 - "Statistics South Africa", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         14.     Memorandum on Vote No 14 - "Arts and Culture", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         15.     Memorandum on Vote No 15 - "Education", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         16.     Memorandum on Vote No 16 - "Health", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         17.     Memorandum on Vote No 17 - "Labour", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         18.     Memorandum on Vote No 18 - "Social Development", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         19.     Memorandum on Vote No 19 - "Sport and Recreation South
              Africa", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         20.     Memorandum on Vote No 20 - "Correctional Services", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         21.     Memorandum on Vote No 21 - "Defence", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         22.     Memorandum on Vote No 22 - "Independent Complaints
              Directorate", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         23.     Memorandum on Vote No 23 - "Justice and Constitutional
              Development", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;

         24.     Memorandum on Vote No 24 - "Safety and Security", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         25.     Memorandum on Vote No 25 - "Agriculture", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         26.     Memorandum on Vote No 26 - "Communications", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         27.     Memorandum on Vote No 27 - "Environmental Affairs and
              Tourism", Main Estimates, 2006-2007;
         28.     Memorandum on Vote No 28 - "Housing", Main Estimates, 2006-
              2007;

         29.     Memorandum on Vote No 29 - "Land Affairs", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;

         30.     Memorandum on Vote No 30 - "Minerals and Energy", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         31.     Memorandum on Vote No 31 - "Science and Technology", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         32.     Memorandum on Vote No 32 - "Trade and Industry", Main
              Estimates, 2006-2007;

         33.     Memorandum on Vote No 33 - "Transport", Main Estimates,
              2006-2007;.

         34.     Memorandum on Vote No 34 - "Water Affairs and Forestry",
              Main Estimates, 2006-2007.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Finance for consideration
         and report.

    2.     The Minister of Transport


          a) The Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for
             International Carriage by Air, tabled in terms of section
             231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the ratification and/or accession to
             the Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for
             International Carriage by Air.


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson


                               PROGRAMME 2009


                               3RD PARLIAMENT

    1. Introduction


    The National Council of Provinces represents the  provinces  to  ensure
    that provincial interests are taken into account in the national sphere
    of government. It does this mainly by  participating  in  the  national
    legislative process and  by  providing  a  national  forum  for  public
    consideration of issues affecting provinces.


     - (Section 42 (4) of the Constitution)


    This means that, when carrying out its work, the  National  Council  of
    Provinces (NCOP) must always be guided by this mandate.  This  includes
    identifying key and relevant areas of focus, which must assist the NCOP
    to deliver on its stated mandate.


    2. BACKGROUND


    On 30 June 2004 the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) presented  its
    blueprint programme of action for the 3rd  Parliament  entitled  Vision
    2009, but which was later to be known as Programme 2009. The aim was to
    deepen and further consolidate the gains it had made as a  House  which
    provides a forum for provinces and local government at national level.


    In the document, the NCOP identified the need to broaden the  scope  of
    participation by  provincial  and  local  governments  in  shaping  the
    national agenda,  thereby  deepening  participatory  democracy  in  our
    institutions of governance. It also identified the need  to  raise  and
    improve the profile of intergovernmental relations and to  continuously
    seek ways of refining and strengthening the system of  these  relations
    in all spheres of government. In addition,  and  most  importantly,  it
    committed itself to actively contribute to the process of  delivery  to
    better the lives of the people by strengthening  and  focusing  on  its
    oversight function.


    Programme 2009 is therefore both a strategy and a programme  of  action
    for the NCOP in the 3rd Parliament.


    At the beginning of 2006 the NCOP saw the need to revisit the programme
    after examining the impact of its oversight  and  public  participation
    programmes and developments in service delivery. The document will from
    henceforth be reviewed annually to ensure that it is relevant and  that
    it provides a proper response to national priorities.


    3. FOCUS OF WORK OF THE NCOP


    The main focus of the work of the NCOP in  the  3rd  Parliament  is  on
    oversight. This means that the NCOP must direct more time and resources
    toward the performance of oversight work as a mechanism  for  following
    up on the implementation of the laws it  has  and  continues  to  pass,
    including government  policies  and  programmes.  The  focal  point  is
    oversight which must go  hand-in-hand  with  the  promotion  of  public
    participation as central  to  achieving  the  vision  of  a  ``people’s
    Parliament’’.


    Further, there should be  a  deliberate  bias  in  the  oversight  work
    towards assisting delivery at local government. This is  in  line  with
    the provision of the Constitution, in section 154(1), which states:


    The national government and provincial governments, by legislative  and
    other  measures,  must  support  and   strengthen   the   capacity   of
    municipalities to manage their own affairs, to  exercise  their  powers
    and to perform their functions.


    The NCOP serves as a  national  legislative  forum  for  provinces  and
    representatives of organised local government.


    The NCOP’s oversight work must deliberately respond to some of the  key
    areas contained in the President’s first State-of-the-Nation Address to
    the 3rd Parliament. These were mainly areas of joint  competence  which
    impact more on the poor and in which the NCOP could have an  influence.
    They, in no particular order, are the following:


  • Local government (Part B of Schedules 4 and 5 of the Constitution)
  • Agriculture (including land affairs)
  • Education
  • Expanded Public Works Programme (including urban and rural  development
    programmes)
  • Health
  • Housing
  • SMME development
  • Social security (including home affairs services)
  • Safety and Security (including the justice system)


    In this regard, the NCOP must closely monitor the programmes  announced
    by the President in his first State of the Nation Address  to  the  3rd
    Parliament with respect to the above, and in each annual address up  to
    the end of the term, in order to be able to meaningfully assist in  the
    process of accelerating service delivery. Toward this,  our  committees
    will identify the specific issues the  President  raised,  discuss  and
    dissect them, and draw up detailed plans and  specific  programmes  for
    oversight work  so  that  we  can  monitor  their  implementation.  The
    document will on an annual basis provide guidelines  to  the  areas  of
    priority, as is the case below under 13.


    In illustrating the above point the example is: In respect of learning,
    the President in his first State of  the  Nation  Address  to  the  3rd
    Parliament, stated that by the end of the  financial  year,  government
    would ensure that “there is no learner  or  student  learning  under  a
    tree, in a mud-school or any other dangerous conditions”.


    To respond to this, the relevant committee would identify  the  schools
    and communities facing these conditions. They would draw up a programme
    to examine the nature of  intervention  and  to  monitor  delivery  and
    progress to ensure that problems, if any, are detected so that improved
    strategies are employed. The advantage of the NCOP in  this  regard  is
    that it is potentially a receptacle for best practices from  provinces.
    These best practices can then be shared  with  other  provinces  in  an
    effort to find workable solutions, thereby  putting  the  principle  of
    intergovernmental  relations  into  practice.   The   Intergovernmental
    Relations Framework Act provides some clear guidelines with  regard  to
    the promotion of intergovernmental relations.


    4. TARGETS FOR 2009


    Through Programme 2009, the  NCOP  must  have  achieved  the  following
    targets by the end of the 3rd Parliament.


  • Increased oversight work that is guided by input from the provinces and
    local government regarding their needs and interests
  • Promotion of public participation with clear impact on service delivery
    and the work of Parliament
  •  Improved  support  to  local  government  through  closely  monitoring
    government programmes at municipal level
  •  Improved  intergovernmental  relations  as  a  result  of  the  NCOP’s
    sustained  contribution  to  building  the   system   of   co-operative
    government


    This the NCOP must do by leading processes, mainly oversight and public
    participation  exercises,  which  must  enable  provinces   and   local
    government to impact positively on service delivery.


    5. PROMOTING COHERENCE OF GOVERNMENT PROGRAMMES


    In order to promote better coherence between  the  work  programmes  of
    government in the different spheres, we need to ensure that all spheres
    of government are on the same footing, especially  in  respect  of  the
    priorities the government has set itself. One of the ways  of  ensuring
    this is to follow up on strategies employed by the different spheres of
    government to respond to the government programmes as set  out  in  the
    State-of-the-Nation Address and  other  guiding  documents.  The  NCOP,
    through its committees, must vigorously scrutinise plans by  government
    and especially local government for implementing programmes set out  in
    the State of the Nation Address and other guiding  documents,  so  that
    Members could be alerted to possible difficulties early in the process.




    6. IMPROVING LIAISON WITH PROVINCES


    One of the important issues that remain critical in  the  life  of  the
    NCOP is good liaison with the provinces and local  government.  Without
    the input from the provinces and local government, the work of the NCOP
    would be difficult if not impossible to carry out. There is thus a need
    to constantly improve the way the NCOP relates with these  institutions
    and  structures   for   better   co-ordination   of   programmes.   The
    administration  has  a  big  role  to  play  in  ensuring  that  proper
    communication systems are in place to assist with liaison work.


    On the other hand, interaction among the leadership  of  the  NCOP  and
    Provincial Legislatures would continue.


    The office of the second Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP  (a  provincial
    Premier elected to office for a term of one year) will  be  crucial  in
    ensuring that political and policy issues emanating from the  NCOP  are
    shared with the leaders of provinces, including matters that need their
    urgent attention. Further, steps should also be taken to clearly define
    the role and work of this office.


    7. POLICY ISSUES
    The National Council of Provinces  is  a  political  institution  whose
    mandate is to represent the interests of provinces so as to ensure that
    their interests are taken  into  account  in  the  national  sphere  of
    government. It is therefore important that the  NCOP  articulates  this
    mandate in a manner that contributes to the betterment of the lives  of
    the people, especially the poor.


    In this regard, the NCOP must promote discussion of policy issues  with
    a view to improve understanding and to provide a  platform  for  public
    debate of issues critical for service  delivery  and  development.  The
    NCOP, through provincial delegations and Salga, must sponsor debates on
    national policy  issues  that  are  informed  by  provinces  and  local
    government service delivery challenges.


    8. PROMOTION OF CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNMENT


    The NCOP occupies a unique position within the country’s constitutional
    system of governance. It brings  together  all  the  three  spheres  of
    government under one roof, thereby occupying a strategic centre for the
    promotion of intergovernmental relations. It does this by working  with
    all the spheres of government (in such a manner as stated under point 5
    above)  and  by   providing   a   platform   for   public   debate   of
    intergovernmental matters.


    The NCOP must ensure that it promotes co-operative governance by  using
    its position as the unique legislative body where all the three spheres
    of government are represented.


    9. INVOLVEMENT OF SOUTH AFRICAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION


    The participation of the South  African  Local  Government  Association
    (Salga) in the NCOP is critical in order for the NCOP  to  be  au  fait
    (fully informed) with the service delivery and policy challenges facing
    local government. A closer interaction with Salga, in  the  context  of
    the stated focus of the NCOP in the remainder of the term, is even more
    crucial. It will put the NCOP in a  better  position  to  champion  the
    necessary  interventions  to  assist  local   government   to   deliver
    effectively and efficiently.


    In the past the  NCOP  has  played  an  active  role  in  instances  of
    interventions  and   investigations   of   allegations   of   financial
    maladministration,  fraud   and   other   irregularities   at   certain
    municipalities. While these should always remain on the  radar  screens
    of the NCOP, equally are the backlogs to delivery of  services  to  the
    people whether they are as a result of the above or lack of capacity at
    local government. In this context, the NCOP needs to constantly  engage
    with Salga on the continuum of service  delivery  challenges  so  that,
    where possible, any  weaknesses  or  backlogs  are  prevented  or  that
    mechanisms could be found to address them.


    It is therefore imperative that the leadership of the  NCOP  and  Salga
    should engage each other with a view to define clearly  the  role  that
    Salga must play in the NCOP, and the role that the NCOP  must  play  to
    assist local government.


    10. SECTION 76 BILLS


    The area of Section 76 Bills is an area where the NCOP has considerable
    impact. The main reason is that this is the area  of  joint  competence
    between provincial and national government. The NCOP has observed  that
    where it occurs, the introduction of section 76 Bills in the NCOP is of
    benefit to the institution and provinces, as it gives adequate time  to
    consider the Bill. The importance provinces attach to canvassing public
    views on national legislation cannot be overemphasised as  it  provides
    the citizenry an opportunity to submit input on legislation. Section 76
    Bills are key in driving the country’s socio-economic programme and the
    NCOP must adhere to at least the minimum 4-week or maximum 6-week cycle
    when considering this legislation.


    11. TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE


    Taking Parliament to the  People  is  a  programme  that  the  National
    Council of Provinces initiated to provide people with an opportunity to
    have a say in the affairs of  Parliament.  It  provides  them  with  an
    opportunity to have a say in the way they  are  governed.  People  must
    constantly engage with Parliament, wherever they are in the country.


    The programme entails visits to provinces (at least two provinces in  a
    financial year) by the  NCOP  to  conduct  public  hearings  and  other
    oversight exercises. The  huge  success  of  the  programme,  from  its
    inception in the Eastern Cape in 2002, is an indication that people  do
    want to take part in Parliament. Thus, in order to  support  and  build
    the programme, the NCOP must ensure that:


  • Proper follow-up mechanisms are established
  • Government response to the issues raised by the people is monitored
  • The programme does not create false expectations among the people
  • The programme is educational and promotes the appreciation of democracy
    by the people
  • There are clear timeframes for report-back sessions


    The Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and the House Chairpersons must draw
    up an annual indicator or checklist which will serve as a  report  back
    by the House on the impact of its  work  through  this  programme.  The
    indicator can also be used to evaluate the impact of the programme  for
    future planning purposes. The  indicator  or  checklist  must  identify
    issues raised during the visit, outline follow-up mechanisms  used  and
    report on progress.


    12. COMMITTEES


    Committees must work on accelerating their oversight work alongside the
    programme Taking Parliament  to  the  People.  Part  of  this  includes
    isolating issues related to their clusters from the visits to provinces
    for follow-up purposes. They will be expected  to  focus  primarily  on
    areas of priority as outlined under 13 below, as part of  their  annual
    programmes. Local development will be key.


    Importantly, committees will also need to put in place a mechanism  for
    monitoring the implementation  of  projects  and  programmes  contained
    under the Accelerated and Shared Growth  Initiative  for  South  Africa
    (Asgi-SA), where the NCOP could have an impact.


    13. SPECIFIC AREAS OF PRIORITY FOR 2006


    13.1 Parliament’s Theme for 2006 - ALL SHALL HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS


    When doing our work this year we will be guided by this theme. As a
    national House that represents the interests of provinces, the focus on
    this theme must give us an opportunity to see to what extent have
    ordinary citizens benefited from equality law and what are the
    scenarios that result from this in each province. In this regard we
    should take part in a national Review Campaign in an attempt to answer
    the above question. We should pursue this by working with provincial
    legislatures, other government departments and civil society.
    13.2 Summit on intergovernmental relations


    It  is  recommended  that  as  part  of   efforts   to   promote   good
    intergovernmental  relations,  the  NCOP  must  consider  organising  a
    national  summit  of  legislative   and   non-legislative   bodies   on
    intergovernmental relations. The aim of the summit is to reflect on how
    the country has  moved,  and  continues  to  move,  in  satisfying  the
    constitutional  and  statutory  provisions   for   the   promotion   of
    intergovernmental relations.


    13.3 Specific areas of focus


    Contained below is a list of issues drawn from the President’s State of
    the Nation Address of 3 February 2006 which have  been  identified  for
    special attention by the NCOP.  The  tasks  represent  undertakings  by
    government. The NCOP sets out what it wants  to  do  in  responding  to
    these tasks. It is  important  to  note  that  this  section  does  not
    encompass all the work to be covered by NCOP committees but serves as a
    guide to specific areas targeted this year and on which committees must
    report back by the end of the year.


    a. Local government


    Tasks by government


  • Give particular attention to strengthening local government
    • Each municipality must have a realistic IDP, a credible LED  Programme
      and the material and  human  resources,  as  well  as  management  and
      operational systems to implement IDPs and LEDs
    • Integration of  planning  and  implementation  across  all  government
      spheres is one of the prime areas of focus for the next term of  local
      government
    • Local government to discharge its  development  and  service  delivery
      obligations, drawing on the lessons provided by Project Consolidate
  • Deployment of 3000 Community Development Workers by March this year


    What the NCOP will do


    • Assess the capacity to deliver of municipalities focusing especially
      on those municipalities under Project Consolidate
  • Promote the importance of people involvement in driving development in
    their communities
    • Assess the provision of basic services like water and electricity by
      local government and assisting municipalities to find solutions to
      challenges
    • Assess contribution of Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) to the
      alleviation of poverty by opening up employment and local economic
      development opportunities
    • Identify acceptable benchmarks for service delivery by municipalities
      for use by Members when conducting oversight exercises (using as basis
      the ones identified in the State of the Nation Address with regard to
      IDPs, LEDs, human resources, management and operational systems)
    • Monitor the deployment of Community Development Workers and how they
      assist local communities
    •  Monitor  the  implementation  and  adherence  to   local   government
      legislation passed by Parliament


    b. Agriculture (including land affairs)


    Tasks by government


  • State to play a central role in land  reform  and  ensuring  that  land
    restitution is accelerated
    • Minister of Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  to  review  willing-buyer
      willing-seller policy; review land  acquisition  models  and  possible
      manipulation of land  prices;  and  regulate  conditions  under  which
      foreigners buy land
    • Land redistribution programme is aligned to the Provincial Growth  and
      Development   Strategies   and   Integrated   Development   Plans   of
      municipalities


    What the NCOP will do


    • Monitor the  process  of  policy  review  and  how  it  addresses  the
      different  challenges  raised  by  provinces  with  regard   to   land
      redistribution
    • Interrogate Provincial Growth and Development Strategies and  IDPs  to
      see if they are aligned to the land redistribution programme
    • Continue to monitor government support to small and  emerging  farmers
      to establish  whether  resources  made  available  by  government  are
      properly utilised


    c. Education


    Tasks by government


  • Eliminate fees for the poorest quintile (section)  of  primary  schools
    targeting 529 schools
    • Double the Maths and Science graduate output to 50 000 by 2008 and re-
      equipping and financing the Further Education and Training Colleges


    What the NCOP will do


    • Monitor the process  of  eliminating  fees  in  targeted  schools  and
      assisting government by promoting public awareness in this regard
  • Monitor government plans with regard to the availability  of  educators
    in Maths and Science
    • Monitor government progress in eliminating the backlog in delivery  of
      classrooms in the different provinces
    •  Monitor  government  progress  in  eliminating  the  backlog  in  the
      provision of access to clean water and sanitation to  schools  in  all
      the provinces
  • Monitor government support to FETs, more especially the  issue  of  the
    skills gap
    • The Select Committee  on  Education  and  Recreation  to  monitor  the
      provision of  sport  and  other  facilities  for  children  and  youth
      development, more especially at schools and in local communities
  • Assist government to ensure a safe learning environment at schools


    d. Expanded public works programme


    Tasks by government


    • To accelerate infrastructure investment in  the  underdeveloped  urban
      and rural areas through the Municipal Infrastructure  Grant,  Expanded
      Public Works Programme and other infrastructure funds
    What the NCOP will do


    •   Consider   government   plans   and   resources   for   accelerating
      infrastructure investment in underdeveloped areas, particularly  those
      under the urban renewal and rural development programmes
    • Assess the impact of EPWPs on the creation of jobs as well as the  use
      of other infrastructure funds
    • Monitor the use of Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  by  municipalities
      and plans by municipalities for maintenance of infrastructure


    e. Health


    Tasks by government


  • To proceed with the programme of revitalising hospitals
    • Further expansion  of  health  infrastructure,  the  refurbishment  of
      existing clinics and hospitals and re-opening of Nursing Colleges


    What the NCOP will do


    • Monitor government plans  for  upgrading  hospitals  and  refurbishing
      clinics,  including  transformation  and  restructuring  of   hospital
      management
    • Monitor  government  spending  through  the  upgrading  programme  and
      challenges being faced in this area
    • Monitor government’s Operational Plan  for  Comprehensive  Prevention,
      Treatment and Care of HIV and Aids


    f. Housing


    Tasks by government


  • To accelerate the expansion of housing stock to address  the  needs  of
    the homeless
    • Ensure that housing development contributes to eliminating the duality
      of living spaces inherited from apartheid
  • Municipalities to allocate land close to economic centers  for  housing
    development
    • To assist the poor with access to finance by transforming the National
      Housing Finance Corporation  into  a  Housing  Corporation  that  will
      provide finance to the poor and middle-income groups


    What the NCOP will do


  • Monitor government programmes for accelerating the expansion of housing
    for the people
  • Monitor delivery by local government of land for housing development
    • Conduct review on delivery  of  houses  (focus  on  sustainability  of
      housing projects, the quality of housing units and delivery rate)
  • Monitor expenditure of allocated financial resources


    g. SMME development


    Tasks by government


    • To expand our small, medium and micro enterprise sector through  Asgi-
      SA,  paying  particular  attention  to  Broad-based   Black   Economic
      Empowerment and the development of women and youth
    • To take  necessary  measures  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  such
      exisiting  programmes  such  as  SEDA  (Small  Enterprise  Development
      Agency), IDC Small Business Initiative, the Apex  (Micro-credit)  Fund
      etc
    • To review the procurement programme for accessing  government’s  goods
      and services from small and medium businesses



    What the NCOP will do



  • Organise a workshop for briefing of NCOP Members on Asgi-SA
    • Draw up a programme  for  monitoring  the  implementation  of  Asgi-SA
      focusing especially on areas where the NCOP can have an impact through
      its oversight programme
    • Assess measures to ensure  effectiveness  of  funding  programmes  for
      small and medium businesses and how they benefit in  particular  women
      and the youth
    • Monitor government’s review of procurement programme to  assist  small
      and medium businesses
    • Assess government’s programme to assist small and  medium  businesses,
      including assistance with training, access to capital,  marketing  and
      development of co-operatives


    h. Social security (including home affairs services)


    Tasks by government


  • To continue to implement the comprehensive anti-fraud strategy
  • To launch the National Social Security Agency
    • To set up 100 new Youth Advisory Centres, enrol at least 10 000  young
      people in the National Youth Programme and enrol 5 000  volunteers  to
      help vulnerable children


    What the Council will do


    • To continue to assist government  using  public  platforms  and  other
      means to create awareness about government’s anti-fraud strategy
  • To monitor the success of government’s anti-fraud strategy
  • To monitor the implementation of the National Social Security Agency
  • Monitor government programme on youth  development  and  protection  of
    vulnerable children
    • Monitor accessibility of government services to  especially  the  poor
      (often  inhibited  by  lack  of  awareness,  appropriate  IDs,   birth
      certificates etc)
  • Monitor government’s programme with regard to immigration


    i. Safety and Security (including the justice system)


    Tasks by government


  • To further improve our criminal justice system
  • To focus on integrated law enforcement operations in priority areas
  • Reducing drug trafficking  and  implementing  social  crime  prevention
    measures
    • Improve case-load management in  our  courts,  build  four  additional
      correctional facilities, reduce the number of children in custody
  • Fight corruption in the public sector


    What the NCOP will do


  • Monitor government’s programme of improving the criminal justice system
  • Monitor government plans for integrated law enforcement operations
  • Monitor  implementation  of  government’s  measures  for  social  crime
    prevention
  • Assess impact of government programmes in fighting  corruption  in  the
    public sector


    14. Conclusion


    To achieve the above, the NCOP  will  employ  a  number  of  strategies
    initiated mainly at committee  level.  Research  will  be  an  integral
    element of the process of the implementation of the  programme  as  set
    out above. The information will be used to equip Members and to  direct
    their work. This underscores the need for increased research  capacity.
    Dedicated research will assist Members  with  collecting,  synthesising
    and producing relevant information for oversight  work  so  that  their
    interventions become targeted and more effective.


    Dated 16 February 2006


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Economic and  Foreign  Affairs  on  the
   Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29B - 2005] (National Assembly – sec  75),
   dated 15 February 2006:
      The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs, having
    considered the subject of the Electricity Regulation Bill  [B 29B –
    2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
    the JTM as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with proposed
    amendments, as follows:

                                  CLAUSE 6

   1. On page 5, in line 40, to omit the heading and to substitute
      “Customer and end user forums”

                                  CLAUSE 19


   1. On page 9, in line 52, to omit”(2)” and to substitute “(4)”

                                  CLAUSE 49

   1. On page 15, in line 25, to omit “2005” and to substitute “2006”

                                  SCHEDULE

   1. On page 16, in the third column of the item amending the National
      Energy Regulator Act, 2004,  -


   a) In the last line of paragraph 1, to omit “2005” and to substitute
      ”2006”’


   b) In paragraph 3, in the 4th line of the new paragraph (d) to omit
      [electiricity Act] and to substitute “[Electricity Act]” and in the
      next line, to omit “2005” and to substitute “2006”.

                         THURSDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism


   (1)      The Joint Tagging Mechanism on 16 February 2006 in terms of
        Joint Rule 160(6)(d) classified the following Bill as a section 76
        Bill:


            i) Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 – 2006] (National Assembly –
               sec 76).


