---
title: 'National Assembly - 31 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-31
---

WEDNESDAY, 31 MAY 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The House Chairperson Mr K O Bapela took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          UNPARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE

                                  (Rulings)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Before we call for the first order,
I just want to make some rulings relating to matters that were raised last
Thursday, 25 May 2006.

During the debate on the Budget Vote of the Department of Minerals and
Energy several points of order were raised during the speech by hon B G
Mosala. Those points of order were raised by inter alia hon M J Ellis and
hon S K Louw. I indicated at the time that I would take the matter under
review and report to the House in due course.

Having now had the opportunity to study the Hansard, I wish to rule as
follows. Regarding Mr Ellis’s initial point of order, he, as a senior Whip,
knows very well that a point of order should not be used in an attempt to
correct statements being made by a member speaking. Furthermore, it is not
for the Chair to determine the veracity or otherwise of such statements.
His point of order was therefore not a point of order. Consequently, I
instructed Mr Mosala to proceed with his speech.

However, in raising his point of order, Mr Ellis contended that Mr Mosala
was deliberately misleading the House. To accuse another member of
deliberately misleading the House is unparliamentary as it infers bad faith
on the part of the other member. I must therefore ask Mr Ellis to withdraw
his statement that Mr Mosala was deliberately misleading the House.

Mr M J ELLIS: Can I address you on that point of order, Mr Chair?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): No. I just want a withdrawal, hon
Ellis.

Mr M J ELLIS: I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): In the second point of order, Mr
Ellis objected to the following statement by Mr Mosala, “You know that you
are a compromised leader of the DA.” This remark was clearly directed at an
individual member, the hon W J Seremane, and amounts to an attack on that
member’s integrity. “Compromised” in this context would mean that the hon
member in question had exposed his good name and reputation to injury and
disrepute. I therefore request hon Mosala to withdraw the remark that the
hon member is compromised.

Mr B G MOSALA: I withdraw, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Mosala. Finally, hon
Mr Louw raised a point of order in which he maintained that a member of the
DA had said that Mr Mosala was corrupt. However, he was unable to identify
the specific member. No one admitted to making the remark and it was not
recorded in Hansard either.

In a case where an unparliamentary remark cannot be ascribed to any member,
the Chair is unable to rule on the matter. I, however, would like to take
this opportunity, once again, to urge hon members to desist from resorting
to unparliamentary language as it is in breach of the Rules and does not
contribute to the good order in the House. With those remarks I hope we
will then proceed.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 19 - Sport and Recreation South Africa:

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, good afternoon Deputy
President, today I want, first of all, to acknowledge the presence in the
gallery of a whole array of people from the sports fraternity, both from
South Africa and indeed from other parts of the world.

Notable amongst them is Mr Fred Nassiri and a delegation of nine people
from the USA who are here on a very important mission – a mission which
coincides with our vision. [Applause.] They are on a mission to promote his
song, Love Sees No Colour. And you will understand that it is a theological
position as well as a constitutional imperative.

One of our rallying calls during the struggle for the liberation of our
people and our country was that the struggle for a nonracial sports
environment was an essential part of the struggle for freedom. We argued
that sport in every part of the world reflects the society it is practised
in: a racially divided society or a society which gives preference to a
particular gender or class. All these things tend to be reflected in the
way sport is practised in a particular country, either subtly or very
sharply.

Sportspeople can be exposed to antisocial traits like violence, corruption,
hooliganism, excessive nationalism and cheating. Sportspeople can be
exposed to the dangers of child labour, doping, early specialisation, and
exploitative commercialisation and overexertion. These ills of society
invariably affect the health of citizens. They create a premature
separation of juveniles from their families and a loss of cultural and
communal ties. So, yes, sport is a reflection of society - its miseries and
woes, the socioeconomic challenges as well as society’s values.

A positive and developmental approach to sport has potentially positive
benefits. In a transforming society like ours, sport and recreation must
necessarily contribute to the country’s transformation agenda - an agenda
that seeks to create a nonracial, nonsexist, prosperous and peaceful South
Africa. Sport must contribute to the redressing of the disparities of the
past: equal opportunities, access to infrastructure, access to equipment
and kit; yes, equal access to skills and skilled coaches,referees and
efficient managers.

Our President in South Africa has persistently highlighted the potential
that sport has to build social cohesion and national unity. Who can
understand that more than us who experienced how South Africa was bound
together in joy when we won the Rugby World Cup in 1995 and when we won the
right to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup in 2004. Of course, we were also in a
national solidarity of misery, woe and anger as we lamented being knocked
out of the list of nations to participate in the football World Cup in
Germany.

I am reminding most of you about what you already understand. But success
for a sport activist does not rely on a periodic remembrance of these
facts. It does not rely on merely talking about them or occasionally
donning a cricket hat. What is important for us is the passion in
implementing these ideas. That is the brief and the mandate given to our
Ministry when the President entrusted me with sport and recreation for our
country.

The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa affirms the democratic
values of human dignity, equality and freedom. Participation in sport and
recreation is recognised by the United Nations and progressive countries as
a fundamental human right, which all governments must give their citizens
access to. As such, access to sport and recreation is a non-derogable right
which is entrenched in our own Constitution.

In line with these constitutional imperatives, our President assigned us
powers and functions to develop and implement national policies and
guidelines for our people and our country. This way, we contribute to
transforming South Africa into a country that belongs to all who live in
it, united in our diversity. This way, we contribute to the healing of pain
caused by an unfortunate dispensation in our country.

Our President reminds us all the time that our ideals and objectives for
the South Africa of our dreams cannot be achieved through spontaneity or
mere aspirations. The transformation agenda cannot be left to the whims of
the market either. For, as the President correctly pointed out, and I
quote, “market forces are not sympathetic to the poor”. So we have a
responsibility to make sport and recreation unlock its potential in
transforming and developing the underdeveloped parts and people of our
country. We have to intervene in this respect.

Both Mr Kofi Annan, speaking for the nations of the world, and our
President, speaking as the president of the African nations at the time,
declared that well-designed sports-based initiatives are practical and cost-
effective tools that could help the nations to achieve the development
goals identified in 2000 by the UN - the well-known Millennium Development
Goals.

I think we should investigate the extent to which, in real terms, the
continued marginalisation of sport and physical education in a number of
countries undermines the success in delivering the Millennium Development
Goals. The underperformance of sports persons from such countries tends to
attest to the attitude of seeing sport as a mere luxury, as we saw just
recently in Melbourne how the Australians had invested so much resources in
their athletes to the extent that they had a whitewash of all other nations
during March 2006.

Our mass participation programme positions our sector well to make a
contribution, not only to mass participation by the populace of our country
but also to make a contribution to human resource development and poverty
alleviation. We have trained 352 unemployed young people to run this
programme. The little stipend we pay them contributes in feeding an average
family of five people per trainee. We have trained young volunteers in the
administration of sport and recreation; 1 293 entry-level coaches have been
trained; 655 referees and more than 450 young people have also been
trained. This might sound like a pittance to those who have come to accept
this as a given but to those who had been denied these benefits for more
than 300 years, this makes a difference.

Some sports federations and other institutions have supported us very
admirably in these initiatives because they understand the meaning of these
things. Only two weeks ago, together with the SA Football Association,
Supersport and the University of Johannesburg, we launched a senior
management training course. The Deputy President was there to give full
stature and support that the programme deserves. Such acquired skills will
benefit a number of federations in lifting up their management capacity. So
our mass participation programme does not only dwell on swelling the ranks
of our sports programme, it also creates jobs and skills.

We consciously support these initiatives because we have prioritised the
good governance of our federations as a priority. It is true that
facilities, physical conditioning, sponsorship etc are important tools in
the making of world beaters. But if the management of these tools and of
this environment is not up to scratch, it is highly unlikely to see success
on the sports field. Unhappy athletes do not perform as well as they could.

Good governance could also improve the quality of our sport, in the same
way as it improves the political administration of our countries. We are,
as such, making a humble but important contribution both to Asgisa and
Jipsa, and the programmes of Nepad.

Our vision is to see the participation in our programmes lead to community
clubs. These will in turn be the basic sites of sports development and the
building blocks of social cohesion. Together with school sport, community
clubs are also where the catchment of players for skills development and
transformation will come from.

This is the rationale for us placing such a premium on the proper
organisation and management of our federation and on the development of
skills in areas where they had never been developed before. Better mores, a
new positive value system that will contribute to a moral regeneration,
will be born in these close-knit clubs and schools and must contribute to
the building of a better nation.

We are not merely putting together human beings who must just get fit and
entertain us. We hope to transform selfish and money-driven players and
managers into people of great integrity, patriots who want to serve our
country more than they want to be millionaires. A classic example of this
is Roland Schoeman and his mother, who defied the gold of Qatar and
preferred to serve and swim for South Africa. [Applause.]

The first Minister of Sport and Recreation in our democratic country, the
late Comrade Steve Tshwete, always emphasised this, and I quote him:

   Children do not learn to swim in their cots. They need a swimming pool.

We fully agree with that great patriot.

The providing of facilities and amenities to all South Africans is a
sacrosanct imperative for us. As such, we regard the accessing of sports
infrastructure to rural areas and townships as part and parcel of the
transformation agenda and indeed as part of the transformation of our
society. This is why the preparations for the Fifa 2010 World Cup are more
than just preparing for a megasport event.

Our preparations for 2010 have to be in synchrony with government plans for
the betterment of the lives of our people. This is why, for instance, we
opted for 10 stadiums instead of just eight. That is why we will also build
and refurbish practise stadiums in smaller areas like Kimberley. The road
infrastructure, technology and business opportunities must have an impact
on the lives of our people and on the economy of our country.

The mindset of our country must also change. This is why we are building
football stadiums where they had never been built before, because we want
to instil the understanding in South Africans that South Africa is not just
a rugby and cricket country.

Swimming pools and tennis courts are also needed in the rural areas. They
are not just for the city. All this needs money, hon members. We do our bit
with what you allocate to us to assist needy communities, to assist with
equipment and kit, to assist parents and their children who get selected to
top clubs in their communities and their provinces, but this is not enough.

We hope that our municipalities will also continue to co-operate with us in
these plans to make accessible what is available by way of infrastructure
to our people. We hope that they will stop the bad habit of selling public
facilities or leasing them to monopolies that exclude our people through
exorbitant registration or participation fees.

Sport must belong to all. It must be accessible to all. We hope the
Municipal Infrastructure Grant will perform much better this year in
delivering the much-needed infrastructure than it has done. We also believe
that, in co-operation with the Department of Trade and Industry, the
National Lottery Fund designated for sport and recreation will be focusing
on the needs where they are needed, not just where people know about them.

Hon members of this House could also play a role as catalysts in the
dissemination of the information on how to access the MIG as well as in
assisting in the filling in of those forms so that the people who elected
us can benefit from the fiscus, which has made resources available for
these things.

We also firmly believe in collaboration with other departments as we
deliver on our mandate. The Departments of Housing, Education, and
Provincial and Local Government agree that we should be part of their
planning of human settlements and building of schools, and the Departments
of Safety and Security, Social Development, Health and Correctional
Services also agree that we have a role to play with them in dealing with
the health and anti-social behavioural patterns of some of our people.

Both the Department of Foreign Affairs as well as the United Nations agree
that sport can contribute in changing the war psychosis of the children of
war. When the guns go silent in Africa, peace must take root for
development to occur.

Our transformation agenda cannot be complete without attending to gender
imperatives. I believe that the performance of our Paralympians speaks for
itself. Some of these great athletes draw tears from the hardest of hearts
because of their sheer perseverance. The national question as well as
gender equity is improving. Both swimming and tennis have responded
positively to our calls for integration. Cycling is also coming up very
nicely.

We saw in Melbourne the first African woman in the history of our country
to do weightlifting and she won a gold medal. [Applause.] This is progress,
but more women must participate in sport. They must also take charge of
their destinies in the federations. To this end, we are hosting a national
conference in August on the role of women in sport. I hope some of the hon
members here will participate in that conference. This event will also be
the culmination of our programme for this year to commemorate the great
women of our country and their role in our struggle.

On the negative side, we have seen an upsurge in doping cases. We have also
seen an upsurge in cases of HIV/Aids but we are encouraged and inspired by
the nongovernmental organisations and former players’ associations who
continue to associate themselves with our efforts to deal with these
things.

Success in sport cannot be realised without resources. We appreciate the
partnerships that these organisations weave with us. We also appreciate the
seriousness with which sponsors and federations treat take us. This is real
unity in action and it must win. The support of a number of countries
overseas and in our neighbouring areas continues to enhance our successes
in making sport a real and accessible benefit for our communities.

Last, but not least, the team, led by the Deputy Minister and the director-
general, must be acknowledged; they’re a group of enthusiasts who continue
to translate our political ideals into operational successes. Please
support this budget proposal so that we can help South Africa remain at the
top. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Is it parliamentary for members of the House who
have never played cricket or rugby to pretend to be Springboks, wearing
Springbok colours? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That is not a point of order, hon
Minister.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Chair, hon Deputy President, comrades and visitors who
have come here to listen to the budget tabled in this House by the hon
Minister of Sport and Recreation, I want, firstly, to say that, as the ANC,
we want to express great appreciation for the multiparty committee that has
taken us this far.
At times, we used to have a very turbulent situation, but I can tell you
that we are now on the same wavelength. At times there were issues that, as
the ANC, we felt we could not get round, but I think things have been going
very well lately. I want to express my appreciation for that first.

Minister, we want to say, as a committee, that it has been a very exciting
time but also a difficult one. It has been exciting because we were doing
all the things that Parliament requires of us. However, the difficulty was
that the man who had been tasked with steering this ship, umqhubi [the
driver], would also be requested to ask on behalf of the committee:
“Minister, why, when you are such a library of information and an asset did
you stop giving figures in your budget speech and instead told the people
of South Africa about where they come from and where they are going with
sport?”

This has been a challenge because, with regard to some of the things we
were doing, we were not sure whether we were doing those things in the
right way or not, and only you could tell us because you understood them
better. The difficulty was that we were not sure what you were going to say
when we did things in a different way.

Our Department of Sport and Recreation is a component of the government of
the Republic of South Africa. The department works under the guidance of
the Constitution and the existing laws of the country. Consequently, we
reaffirm our declaration that South Africa belongs to all who live in it,
united in diversity.

One of the central messages and tasks is to use sport to heal the divisions
of the past, to unite our people and to establish a society based on
democratic values, social justice and fundamental rights. That is what
sport can do. All of us are witnesses to that.

When we visited Egypt for the African Cup of Nations, Côte d’Ivoire, which
was in the same group as Bafana Bafana, proceeded to the finals. They said
that if Côte d’Ivoire could win the African Cup of Nations that would unite
the people of that country who have been involved in civil strife for many
years. I think sport is central to uniting people. [Applause.]

We are also faced with the task of improving the quality of life of
citizens and freeing the potential of each person. Our people hope that, as
stated in the Constitution, human dignity and nonracialism will be
achieved. These aspirations are in line with the declarations of the UN and
the AU, both of which believe that sport and recreation can make a big
difference and contribute to sustainable development and peace. These
bodies believe that sport and recreation can and do play a significant role
in the attainment of the millennium goals facing us. Our programmes are
designed to deliver on the above-mentioned goals.

Our people are responding very well to the mass participation drive. This
positive response is a challenge to government and the private sector to
put resources into sport and recreation. Government alone will not be able
to realise the levels of excitement that we are achieving through mass
participation. Therefore business is challenged to say, “Let us travel
together on this road.”

It’s a difficult road, but together we would be able to make a difference
in the lives of our people. The success of other countries, such as
Australia, China, Nigeria, Cuba, to name a few, did not happen by chance,
but as a result of government allocating proportional resources to sport.

However, the committee, and we in the ANC, have a different view. Time and
again people come and tell us about the small budget for sport in
Australia, Britain and all the other countries. Deputy President, we
acknowledge that our budget is not enough, but which country in Africa has
a bigger budget than ours? That is where the biggest problem lies. Compared
with Australia, yes, we are likely to come second. But compared with our
counterparts in Africa we are, even in the face of the little resources
that are allocated to sport, a step ahead.

The other challenge is that our sport has not been doing well when it comes
to issues of governance, which is something that is very close to the heart
of the committee. Governance in the federations is key. An institution with
shaky governance will not be able to produce the desired results. Therefore
we are requesting that federations must begin to create stability so that
we are able to assist them and walk with them on this long road.

The President of the country said that freedom has been good to business.
But the challenge is: Has business been good to this freedom and the people
that need help most? That is the challenge.

Minister, we appreciate the partnership of Supersport and Wits University
regarding life skills development and the acquisition of skills that the
Deputy President is leading in this country. That partnership is very
important. It is a demonstration of the private sector coming into the
picture and we appreciate it and say to Supersport, “Nangamso ningadinwa”
[Keep it up].

We are looking at other people that are doing something on their own, for
example Shosholoza Meyl which is close to hon Mlangeni’s heart. It has been
doing very well. It is a private entity that is owned by people but
represents South Africa and hoists her flag. It is feared in the world, hon
Mlangeni; and there is also the Grand Prix. All those brought together in
this country contribute to the economy.

Therefore, Deputy President, it cannot be true that sport does not play a
role in the GDP of a country. I want to say to people today that about 33%
of that GDP comes from sports tourism. When you see us going to Absa
Stadium in Durban and filling it up, we go there as tourists to watch a
game and lift up the economy of that place. But, sadly, that is not
recognised as the role that sport is playing in contributing to the GDP of
this country. [Applause.]

Minister, our role in the economy of this country is huge. It will be
demonstrated and will leave a legacy in this country after the 2010 World
Cup. All of us, as members of that committee, will walk tall, Minister
because even if we die we shall have left that legacy in this country.
[Applause.]

For the past two years, the Department of Sport and Recreation has been a
department that has not really done well around the issues of
transformation, gender and disability. This is the second time we are
presenting this matter to you. But there is leverage for us that we can use
to address that aspect.

The restructuring of the department, specifically regarding the dissolution
of the SA Sports Commission, has created an opportunity for women to be
recognised, and lead that department at management level. That is a matter
that we are closely looking at, because we want to see that department
being transformed and representing the people of this country, women and
disabled people in particular.

Madam Chair, I would also like to congratulate ...
[Laughter.][Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I am still the Chair.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: I apologise for that, Chair. I also want to extend a word
of congratulations to people who represent organisations such as the Hall
of Fame, Grand Prix, and Athletics SA. The president of Athletics SA
invited us, Minister, to a function to honour the athletes who participated
in Australia. They said I must give you this message. Regarding those
athletes who went to Melbourne and arrived back in this country with no
expectation of remuneration, with the little resources that Athletics SA
had, they had about R320 000 to give to those athletes.

However, one thing that has stuck in our minds is what we observed when a
mother from a certain farm arrived in that place, and the President of
Athletics SA gave her son R20 000. She asked: “Siza kuyenza ntoni imali
engaka?” [What are we going to do with such a lot of money?] It was such a
big thing.

I am saying people such as representatives of Athletics SA and others have
set a challenge. Those are people who could not put that money aside for
themselves but were able to say: “With the little resources that we have,
we will go and inspire the young people.” [Applause.]

I have seen a pattern emerging now because others are also doing what
Athletics SA has done. I am proud of them and we are proud of them. I think
they must keep that up. [Applause.]

Concerning the disasters at our stadiums, the ANC raised the matter with
you a month or two ago, Minister. They said they are concerned that time
and again incidents such as the Ellis Park disaster are happening, and that
we don’t seem to be worried about such things. On 13 January 1991 40 people
died in two minutes at a stadium in Orkney, Klerksdorp, in North West. What
can be done for those people who lost their loved ones, Minister?

An 11-year-old boy who played in a curtain-raiser match there and who had
woken up very early in the morning on that day to go and watch his heroes,
Orlando Pirates, play against Kaizer Chiefs, lost his life. There is no
plaque there; there is nothing. We have raised that matter and we realise
that Safa is also beginning to do the same. But it was a matter of concern
to the ANC that we didn’t do something for those people. And now that
something is happening in that regard, we are happy about it, Minister.

The issues that we want to raise around transformation are very pertinent.
We understand that the new leadership of cycling is doing very well. They
came before the portfolio committee to explain their transformation agenda.
They were upbeat, and said that they hadn’t known about those things that
you were talking about but that they were going to correct them. It will be
difficult, because we are venturing into a terrain where people have a
different mindset. But I think they need to change.

The people from those new and untransformed federations are serving on very
important structures in this country, such as the SA Sports Confederation
and the Olympic Committee. Our question is: How do you put other people’s
houses in order when your own house is not in order? And that is a vexing
question.

On the basis of democratic practices, these little federations take over
the leadership of sporting institutions, and they don’t consider some of
the very little things. I do not think that is right. We need to be
sensitive in how we build sport in this country. We need to be sensitive to
hostile takeovers in the name of democracy. I do not think that the ANC is
of the view that we must hold the democratic process to ransom. No! It
can’t be.

As the ANC, we appreciate the memorandum of understanding signed between
the Department of Education and the Department of Sport and Recreation,
where the former will focus on curricula aspects of the schools, including
physical education and human movement. Minister, the entity that has been
created, that is the National Co-ordinating Committee, Nacoc, operates in a
manner similar to what you opposed regarding the United School Sports
Association of South Africa, Ussasa, when you said managers of the
department cannot serve in the structures of the United School Sports
Association. However, high-powered deputy directors-general of the
department are serving in Nacoc, which defeats the objective of leaving
school sport to teachers.

Teachers are still serving in Nacoc, and this can’t be correct. We might as
well continue with Ussasa, without Nacoc. We will be interacting with Nacoc
to find out exact details regarding its existence, its shape, its direction
and how it intends to address these matters.

Concerning LoveLife, we as the committee and the ANC are of the view that
we have one of the best comprehensive HIV and Aids strategies from the
Department and Ministry of Health. The role of LoveLife in those areas is
not very clear. Therefore we must begin discussions so that people will
start asking in unison: “Is it correct for LoveLife to be placed in sport
or should it be part of the Minister’s good process concerning a world-
renowned comprehensive HIV and Aids strategy?” That is what we want.

Boxing SA came up with a disclaimer on the Auditor-General’s view. But, we
are interacting with Boxing SA and we have taken a decision as a committee
that we are going to interact with both the department and Boxing SA on a
quarterly basis so that we can assist Boxing SA to get out of the quagmire
of the disclaimer regarding the Auditor-General.

We have seen that whilst we were beginning to address that issue, Boxing SA
suspended its manager. We have come to the conclusion that it’s common
practice in the country that if you are a chief executive officer and
black, you will be sacrificed. We are very serious and worried about this,
because the question of restructuring an entity and starting with the CEO
doesn’t make sense to us. The CEO is there to assist you to restructure
your entity, therefore you cannot start with him. That is the kind of
situation that you find in Boxing SA, and it is not very good.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you very much, Chair and hon members. [Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: Chairperson, hon members, it is as appropriate for me to wear
this shirt as it is for a person to be the Minister of Defence whilst never
having served in the army. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

I stand before you today in a South African sports shirt ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, on a point of order: If
the reference is to the hon Minister, he was a leading member of uMkhonto
weSizwe. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That’s not a point of order.
Continue, hon Lee.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, on a point of order: I have never
been a member of uMkhonto weSizwe, if I may just ... [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): There is no point of order. Let’s
continue. Let hon Lee continue with his speech.

Mr T D LEE: I stand before you today in a South African national sports
shirt. It is a shirt I wear with great pride, as do all sportsmen and women
who represent our country. It is a shirt in which ordinary South Africans
invest a great deal of emotion.

As a country that has always had a deep and passionate love for sport, we
have shown that there is no field in which we cannot excel.

Sedert 1994 het ons in gholf, sokker, rugby, atletiek, swem en nog vele
ander sportsoorte groot hoogtes bereik. Alle professionele sportlui sal
egter bevestig dat ’n mens net so goed is soos jou jongste deelname.
Terugskouend weet ons almal wat hierdie trui verteenwoordig. Ons staan
vandag egter voor die vraag wat dit in die toekoms vir ons moet
verteenwoordig en beteken. Suid-Afrika se grootste prestasies lê in die
verlede; hulle is agter die rug. Ons staan nou voor uitdagings: kan ons
daardie prestasies in die toekoms herhaal, of selfs beter vaar? Ek glo ons
kan. Maar dan sal dinge moet verander. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)
[Since  1994  we  have  reached  great  heights  in  golf,  soccer,   rugby,
athletics,  swimming  and  many   other   sporting   codes.   However,   all
professional sportspeople will admit that you are only as good as your  last
match. Looking back, we all know what this jersey represents. Today we  are,
however, facing the question as to what it must mean and represent to us  in
the future. South Africa’s greatest achievements lie in the past;  they  are
history. We are now facing challenges: Can we emulate those achievements  in
future, or do even better? I  believe  we  can,  but  things  will  have  to
change.]

I want to come now to South African football. Today I want to focus on just
one of the ways in which we need to deal with football, concerning the 2010
World Cup which is to be hosted by our country. I do so not because
football is more important than other sporting codes but because it goes to
the heart of the question I posed. It is an administrative task of epic
proportions – viz the hosting of the World Cup. Our ability to comply with
every logistical requirement will be a reflection on our competence.
Judging by the way in which this sport is being administered at the moment,
we are a very long way from achieving that goal.

If you stop any sports fan on the street and ask them what they think of
South African football, their answer will be that it is in a crisis and
that it is in a mess. I know this because I have done so and I would really
ask the Minister to do the same.

They may tell you that something as simple as buying a ticket has become an
administrative nightmare. They may tell you that our stadiums are unsafe
and badly maintained. They may tell you that we have problems with our
referees; that the attendance at games is falling; that fixtures are often
cancelled because of administrative problems or that, quite simply, we are
no longer producing the sort of talent we once did.

They may tell you any of these things; they may tell you all of these
things. They are all true. They are the result of a poorly run sport, and
an administration that treats both players and fans with contempt. If we
are to host the World Cup, these things will have to change.

Die DA het dit nog altyd bepleit dat die regering geen plek in sport het
nie, maar die Sokkerwêreldbeker is iets anders, want die toernooi word deur
die Suid-Afrikaanse regering aangebied. Wat die administrasie en uitvoering
daarvan betref, is dit deur en deur die regering se saak, en dit is hoog
tyd dat die regering optree asof hy in beheer is.

Maandag het Mnr Danny Jordaan – en ek is bly hy sit hierbo - die
uitvoerende hoof van die plaaslike organiseringskomitee vir die
Sokkerwêreldbeker, gesê die 2010-toernooi is reeds ’n finansiële sukses, en
dat die befondsingsdoelwit van R2 miljard reeds bereik is. “Dit hang nou
van ons af om te sorg dat die organisasie en administrasie slaag,” het hy
gesê.

Ongelukkig versuim ons in dié opsig om aan die vereistes te voldoen. Die
ontwikkeling van ons stadions is in verskeie gevalle agter; daar is talle
onbeantwoorde vrae oor vervoer en verblyf; en derdens wil dit voorkom of
niemand in beheer is en daar geen duidelike gesags- of
verantwoordelikheidslyne is nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[The DA has always argued that government has no place in sport, but the
Soccer World Cup is something different, because the tournament is being
hosted by the South African government. The administration and the
execution thereof is solely the responsibility of the government, and it is
high time that government acts as if it is in control.
On Monday Mr Danny Jordaan - I am glad he is sitting up there – the
executive head of the local organising committee for the Soccer World Cup,
said that the 2010 Soccer World Cup tournament was already a financial
success, and that the funding goal of R2 billion had already been reached.
”It now depends on us to make sure that the organising and administration
succeed,” he said.

Unfortunately in this regard we are failing to meet these requirements. The
development of our stadiums is behind in schedule many cases; there are
many unanswered questions regarding transport and accommodation; and,
thirdly, it would appear that nobody is in control and that there are no
clear lines of authority and responsibility.]

By the way, other countries have hosted the World Cup successfully they
have appointed a Minister in charge – a single dedicated person to oversee
the process and with whom the final responsibility lies. South Africa,
however, has not done this. Instead we have appointed a committee
comprising of people with many other responsibilities.

In response to a question that I put to you yesterday, Mr Minister, in this
House, you intimated that the Deputy President will be in charge. But the
Deputy President is in charge of so many things already, not least of all
Asgisa and government business in its entirety. With respect, Mr Minister,
it is simply not feasible to suggest that the Deputy President can make a
sustained and focused contribution to the World Cup as well. It is asking
too much of her.

South Africa should learn from the precedent set by other countries in this
regard. We should appoint a Minister responsible for the World Cup; a
Minister whose sole focus will be the successful running and administration
of the 2010 World Cup.

Ten slotte wil ek die volgende sê: die 2010-wêreldbeker lê net vier jaar
die toekoms in. Ons het 1 460 dae oor om seker te maak dat alles reg gedoen
word. In plaas van om ’n gevoel van vertroue te hê, voel gewone Suid-
Afrikaners egter onseker.

Hulle is nie seker of ons alles onder beheer het nie, want wat hulle elke
dag sien, is ’n sportsoort wat klaarblyklik buite beheer is. As die
regering dié waarneming wil verander, het hy sterk leierskap en ’n helder
gefokusde en spertydgedrewe visie vir die 2010-wêreldbeker nodig. Oor vyf
jaar wil Suid-Afrikaners met trots terugkyk, nie net op ons prestasie in
die toernooi nie, maar ook op ons rol as gasheer en organiseerder.
Tans is daar ten opsigte van albei dié sake onsekerheid. Hierdie regering
moet dit dringend verander. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In conclusion, I want to say the following: The 2010 Soccer World Cup will
take place four years from now. We have 1 460 days left to make sure that
everything is done correctly. Instead of having a feeling of confidence,
ordinary South Africans are feeling unsure.

They are not sure if we have everything under control, because what they
see every day is a sporting code that appears to be out of control. If the
government wants to change this perception, it needs strong leadership and
a clearly focused and deadline-driven vision for the 2010 Soccer World Cup.
In five years’ time South Africans want to look back with pride, not only
with regard to our performance in the tournament, but also with regard to
our role as host and organiser.

At the moment there is uncertainty with regard to both these aspects. This
government must change it as a matter of urgency.]

Finally, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee, the hon Mr
Komphela, for the very inclusive way in which he deals with issues
affecting the committee and for his collegiality. His conduct shows that he
understands multipartyism. He agrees that we have the right to disagree
agreeably. [Applause.]

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson, Ministers present here and colleagues, the
main aim of Sport and Recreation South Africa is to improve the quality of
life of all South Africans by promoting participation in sports and
recreational activities. On paper, this main objective sounds so simple and
no one can argue against it. Of course, we all want our people to be
healthy and improve their lives by participating in some or other form of
sport.

However, the reality suggests that the task of the department is much more
complicated and more difficult to achieve. For instance, the demands and
attractions of the modern way of life mean that fewer people have the time
or want to make time for exercise and other health-related activities. The
result is a whole range of health problems that detract from our national
state of wellbeing.

Turning to the budget, Sport and Recreation South Africa receives R352
million for the current financial year. Actually, this is substantially
less than last year’s allocation but we note that the budget then was
higher because of the once-off allocation for the 2010 World Cup planning.

While the IFP supports the budget, I would like to raise a number of
concerns and challenges relating to the sports arena. The first one is
transformation. Almost every day we hear about the commitment of
federations, administrators and coaches to transforming various sports. We
also have a transformation charter in place which is supposed to guide all
macro bodies, national and provincial organisations and clubs regarding the
need to transform sport.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Dhlamini, just a moment please.
Hon members, your noise levels are very high. Please reduce that noise.
Thank you. Hon Dhlamini, continue.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Thank you, Chair. But commitment is one thing,
implementation and visible results are quite another. The fact is that this
so-called “commitment” does not translate into fully representative sports
but just lip service and time-buying tactics. Hon Minister, we must
acknowledge this harsh reality - that transformation on the basis of
volunteerism does not work. Surely, the time has come to legislate on the
matter.

The IFP welcomes the introduction of the sports amendment Bill. The fact is
that if more previously disadvantaged players are not given a chance to
participate in domestic games or at provincial level, we stand little
chance of preparing these players for the national or international stage.
If this situation continues, South Africa’s teams will not be fully
representative of South Africa.

Previously disadvantaged players must be given opportunities to gain
experience and to perform to the best of their abilities, otherwise the
chances of them being picked for national teams are, to say the least,
remote. Here is a startling question: How many black players do hon members
think will be in the starting 15 of the Rugby World Cup next year in
France? Is it one and a half or nothing? This stark reality must be
confronted head-on.

The second concern is that government funding on sport is inadequate, to
say the least. We acknowledge that there are many competing demands on the
national fiscus but we have to ask why millions and millions of rands lie
undistributed in the National Lottery Fund. This money could easily be used
for sports development, new facilities, training programmes, academies,
other projects for sports and development, and access regarding the
previously disadvantaged areas, more especially townships and rural areas.

We therefore call on the government to allow more of the Lotto proceeds to
be channelled to Sport and Recreation. No doubt this will help the
department to achieve its objective of promoting participation in sport and
recreation. Why not even shift the National Lottery Fund from the
Department of Trade and Industry to Sport and Recreation like other
countries are doing?

The 2006 Soccer World Cup kicks off in Germany next week. After the Olympic
Games, this is the biggest sporting event on the global agenda. In 2010 it
will be our chance to host the World Cup. But, hon members, we should be
concerned. We should be concerned about the state of our preparedness for
2010.

Thus far we have heard a lot about planning, getting structures into place
and so on. The local organising committee has told us they have been
prevented from releasing more concrete details because of the imminent
start of the German tournament. We certainly hope that by the end of the
German World Cup we will hear more about new public transport systems, new
stadiums and other infrastructure requirements for hosting the tournament,
as the Minister has said.

There are only four years left before 2010. That may sound like a lot of
time but it is not, because we should be vigilant that time does not run
out before we are fully prepared, thus leaving us embarrassed and
ridiculed. This tournament means so much to our country and indeed to
Africa that we cannot afford to fail.

In conclusion, hon Minister, the municipal infrastructure grant route, in
providing basic facilities, is a dismal failure. The President, early this
year when he responded to my questions, made a commitment that they would
relook at the issue because, through the building for sport programme, we
were able to build 300 facilities in two years but with the MIG route we
have only, as reported, built four facilities that we still need to see. I
therefore call on the Cabinet to relook at the issue of removing building
for sport from MIG. It does not deliver. I thank you, Chair.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, hon Dhlamini, if
you listen to the speech and the contribution we make, you will hopefully
get the answers to the questions you posed in your speech.

May I just say, in reaction to a remark by the hon chairperson of the
portfolio committee pertaining to the implementation, as constituted in
line with the agreement signed between the Minister of Sport and Recreation
and the Department of Education, that the reference to Nacoc, the co-
ordinating body, just points out that in terms of the agreement, physical
education – and we’ll touch on that in our contribution this afternoon – is
the responsibility of the Department of Education.

However, we have, as the Department of Sport and Recreation, a direct
interest in school sport and school sporting activities, and the organising
thereof. This is why we are present in that structure to make sure that
that would be funded, and that as Parliament and as government we have
insight in that funding. But, hopefully, we will have time to look at that
matter later on.

As far as Boxing SA is concerned, we know that they last had a CEO in 2003
but they are in the process of appointing a new CEO.

The 2010 Soccer World Cup raises a lot of issues and remarks. The hon Lee
questioned the ability of our hon Deputy President and the interministerial
committee to deal sufficiently with the LOC in delivering a very successful
2010 Soccer World Cup. May I advise the hon Lee in his mother tongue?

As jy niks het om te sê nie, boet, moet dit nie hier kom sê nie, asseblief.
[Gelag.] [ If you have nothing to say, brother, please do not say it here!
[Laughter.]]

We don’t want a new Minister of sport and recreation for 2010; we have a
very competent Minister of Sport and Recreation, a very sophisticated
Deputy President and highly multi-skilled people. We will deliver the best
Soccer World Cup ever. However, may I just say one thing. I find it tragic
that people are pushing us, uMfundisi [the Reverend] and myself, to talk
about the tournament in 2010 when the kick-off of the 2006 Soccer World Cup
in Berlin has not even taken place. I think we should respect the protocols
and react accordingly.

The White Paper on Sport and Recreation, which is the department’s primary
policy document, identifies the shortcomings in our sport and recreation
system. It also proposes the strategies to address these shortcomings. The
challenges identified in the White Paper range from a lack of appreciation
for the role that sport can play in our society to the lack of
participation by the majority of our country’s people in physical activity.
It also identifies the lack of resources needed for ensuring involvement in
physical activity.

The White Paper, may I say, is as relevant today as it was when it was
first launched in 1997. Despite some progress, we still have a long road to
travel in the sector to achieve the objectives of the White Paper. Sport is
still being trivialised in our country. It is sometimes regarded as
frivolous and unimportant even though it is a multibillion rand industry
and it does contribute more than 2% of the gross domestic product in our
country. In fact, daily, sport occupies the time of the majority of our
people and it forms part of the psyche of the majority of the country’s
people.

How much time do we, as citizens of the country, not spend, on a daily
basis, in watching or reading about sport? Many of us start reading the
newspaper from the back page and may I say, when I listen to some of the
political utterances, it seems to me that this is the only part of the
paper that some of our colleagues read. Well, government is committed to
sport and recreation. We are certainly not on a par with the developed
world with whom we compete.
The developed world with whom we compete has identified and committed
itself to exploiting the potential of sport and recreation for achieving
significant socioeconomic and other outcomes. Even the United Nations gave
credence to the role of sport by declaring 2005 the International Year of
Physical Education and Sport. The United Nations used the prominence of the
sector to promote development and to foster peace, especially in post-
conflict situations around the globe. Today, the United Nations speaks of
sport for development and peace.

We informed Parliament about the United Nations International Year of
Physical Education and Sport during the Budget Vote last year. Several
initiatives have emanated from the focus by the United Nations in our
sector. I personally attended four workshops on this topic over the past
year. I have come away though convinced that, as South Africans, we are
disadvantaging ourselves by continuing to peripheralise the sector as an
unimportant pastime – a luxury as it were.

We are witnessing first hand the impact that the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup
is having on our country. Having provided impetus for heightened levels of
activity in virtually every sector, we predict that the level of activity
will increase progressively as we approach 2010 when it will reach, I
think, fever pitch. This demonstrates the power of sport. Within the
context of Accelerated Shared Growth for South Africa, Asgisa, the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup and sport in general can contribute towards achieving
the target of a 6% growth rate by 2014.

In particular, we must look at the tourism potential of sport and
recreation. In 2003, tourism was recognised as a major growth sector
internationally. It is, in fact, still the case. In our own country the
Standard Bank survey found that tourism had outstripped gold mining as a
revenue generator. Tourism had grossed R53 billion in 2003 while in the
same year gold mining in this country grossed R35 billion.

It is recognised internationally that sports tourism comprises 30% of world
tourism. If that same model were applied to South Africa, sports tourism
would have netted R15,9 billion in 2003. Unfortunately, we know that the
sports tourism industry in South Africa does not match the international
norm of 30% of all tourism.

Sports tourism in South Africa is in fact underdeveloped. There is
substantial room for growth in the sector. To address this, the Department
of Sport and Recreation has developed a sports tourism promotional product
in close co-operation with the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism. We unveiled this product for the first time at the Tourism Indaba
in the Durban area this month.

In fact, the product itself is a CD. It combines the VeZA route finder,
which was developed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research,
CSIR - and thank you to my colleague and friend, Deputy Minister Hanekom,
and the Minister, who are here from the Department of Science and
Technology.

They used the sports information on that VeZA route finder. So, if you are
a visitor, you can utilise this instrument not only to plan your attendance
of sports events but you can map your route to the venue, you can book your
accommodation and you can select your restaurants and other tourist
attractions at, in or around the stadium in any part of our wonderful
country, South Africa.

Tourism is but one aspect of the sport and recreation sector that can
contribute to Asgisa and Jipsa. There are several others. We are excited
about Asgisa and Jipsa, especially as Jipsa, especially as Jipsa will serve
as a catalyst to integrate disparate education and training projects in the
sector that will result in mutual benefit for our department and,
obviously, for Jipsa.

While Sport and Recreation South Africa is already involved in programmes
to support Asgisa and Jipsa, it has always been our contention that
government alone cannot cover all the bases in terms of the delivery of
sport and recreation to the country. The backlog is just simply too huge.

The origins of the backlog need not be elaborated on here. In fact, it was
the Reconstruction and Development Programme that described the sports
sector as being one of the worst legacies of apartheid. That is why we need
the involvement of the private and the NGO sectors.

In this regard, mention must be made of the chairperson of the portfolio
committee. I would also like to single out the contribution of Supersport,
in conjunction with the Wits Business School, which has taken the
initiative to put resources into the education and training of our top-
flight sports administrators and managers.

The performances of our representative teams internationally have indicated
that there is a void that needs to be filled. Enrolment in the above-
mentioned programme will assist in doing so. Shortcomings in management and
administration are bound to be reflected on the field of play as well. We
are witnessing this currently.

We are of the opinion that the challenges that we currently see at the top
end of our sport, the failure of Bafana Bafana to qualify for the 2006 Fifa
Soccer World Cup in Germany, the lack of achievement in the African Cup of
Nations as well as the performances of our rugby, cricket and netball
teams, amongst other sports, are directly attributable to this vacuum.

Supersport have started to put their money where their mouth is and have
invested a small amount of R6 million towards upskilling 75 managers and
administrators over the next three years. To start with, they have thrown
down the gauntlet and I trust others in the private sector will follow
suit. In fact, I appeal to them to do so because this is an investment in
our national pride.

The Supersport initiative is aligned to the second priority in our White
Paper. Even though their efforts are aimed primarily at the top end of the
continuum, where they themselves have specific interests, it will serve an
important purpose. Beyond that, our human resource needs are enormous.

At the entry level of community mass-based sport and recreation, we are in
need of suitably trained and skilled people. Eliminating the shortage of
qualified people at this level is important, because the foundation is
vital to ensure quality at the top end.

We also need quality physical education teachers in all our schools, not
only in the more privileged ones that can afford to have them. We need good
community sport and recreation workers to ensure that the youth from the
large majority of our communities can participate and can compete on a more
level playing field. In short, we have to promote lifelong participation in
physical activity.

To start with, we must restore school sport to the status it enjoyed in the
past; a status that saw the sports fields of our country flooded with
learners, especially on Wednesday afternoons during interhouse and
interschool matches. The school-going youth enjoyed at least two periods of
physical education per week. They don’t have that any more.

The rise in antisocial behaviour amongst our youth, unfortunately,
parallels the demise in school sport and physical education. We have to
look no further than prioritising the reintroduction of these activities in
our schools. The memorandum of agreement between the Departments of Sport
and Recreation and Education facilitates precisely this. We are now
implementing the provisions of the agreement.

Sport and Recreation South Africa has introduced programmes that now see
our youth competing on a more footing. Our teams competing internationally
are now a lot more representative as a result of this. Their success at the
Zone Six schools athletics championships last month, where they made – and
let me say this proudly, sir – a virtual clean sweep of the medals on
offer, bodes well for the future.

During the course of this year we will see 798 schools participating in 56
clusters comprising schools in close proximity to one another, and that
will facilitate regular interaction between them. It will involve more than
200 000 learners, and that’s only to start off with.

The strategy is aimed at obviating crippling transport costs that tend to
inhibit interaction between schools. The availability of financial
resources currently constitutes the only impediment to a more expensive
programme. Our aim is in fact to see all 27 000 schools in our country
involved in this project. It has to be fully funded so that no learner is
prevented from participating because of personal financial constraints.

This programme will require the involvement of large numbers of teachers,
volunteers and even learners. But more important is the need to reintroduce
physical education or human movement into our schools. This will truly
massify participation in physical activity in our society and will address
the low levels of participation. Currently that level of participation is
estimated to be restricted to only 25% of our population.

In order to achieve increased levels of participation, we need qualified
teachers who will ensure that our young people are introduced to sport and
recreation properly. We trust that this will enhance lifelong
participation.

If we employ only two qualified physical education teachers in each of our
27 000 schools in South Africa, one for boys and one for girls, we would
have provided more than 54 000 job opportunities. We obviously need
physical education teachers in every school, but then we need to understand
the difference between physical education and school sport.

Of course, these best-laid plans of “mice and men” will come to nought if
the infrastructure for launching them is not available. Regarding this,
appropriate facilities at schools are absolutely essential if the
memorandum of agreement between the two departments is going to mean
anything.

We receive hundreds, if not thousands, of requests annually from schools,
clubs and communities for sport and recreation facilities and other
infrastructure. As we all know, the sports facilities project has been
transferred to the Department of Provincial and Local Government’s
municipal infrastructure grant. Let me say we are not quite happy with the
consequences of that.

Apart from the fact that we are not delivering the same number of
facilities that we used to under the Building for Sport and Recreation
programme – and members alluded to this - we see that the sport and
recreation departments in the provinces no longer feel that they own the
project. The fact that local authorities are no longer prioritising sport
and recreation facilities compounds the problem.

We are in discussion with the Department of Provincial and Local Government
about getting the facility development programme back on track. Without
facilities, it is totally impossible to realise our higher-level objectives
of representivity in our sports teams at all levels, not to mention social
cohesion.

Local authorities must be encouraged to include sport and recreation
facilities in their integrated development programmes. I appeal to you hon
members of this House: When you go out to work in your constituencies,
please persuade your local authorities to include sport and recreation
facilities in their integrated development programmes. This may change the
current impasse.

In short, the potential of the infrastructure development programme in our
sector to contribute to Asgisa and representivity in our teams is
significant. Our challenge is to ensure that there is congruency between
Sport and Recreation South Africa, our schools and local authorities with
regard to sport and the provision of recreational facilities.

We have been in touch with the Department of Housing with regard to
ensuring adequate open spaces and sport and recreation facilities in their
sustainable human settlement policy. It has always been our contention that
human settlements could never be complete without adequate provision for
amenities in which people, especially our youth, could adequately exercise
their right to play. We are happy to see and to say that the Department of
Housing has heeded our call in this regard by rectifying that shortcoming.

I want to single out a further initiative that emanates from the United
Nations sport for development and peace programme that we are pursuing.
Innumerable references were and are made to the role of sport and
recreation in peace initiatives in post-conflict situations around the
globe. South Africa is proud to be involved in several post-conflict peace
initiatives on the African continent, but nowhere have we engaged sport to
assist in any of these projects. Doing so, I’m convinced, will improve our
success rate considerably.

Evidence from many other conflict situations, often much worse than the
ones that we are dealing with, attests to this potential. We are speaking,
and we have spoken, to the Minister of Defence and the department about the
role that sport can possibly play in peacekeeping and peace-building. We
had a positive response, and we are following up on it. Our next step is to
engage Foreign Affairs on the merits of sport as a diplomatic tool in
peacekeeping and peace-building.

To realise the benefits that can possibly accrue from our sector we need
three things, and all three are related to resources. Firstly, we need
infrastructure. Under infrastructure we are not only talking about
facilities but also about organisations, programmes, equipment and kit.
Secondly, we are talking about sufficient human resources of good quality
and with an appropriate disposition. And, lastly, finance, which underpins
both infrastructure and human resources.

We’ve addressed elements of the first two, but I would like to conclude by
referring to the third. As a department, we have the smallest budget of all
national government departments. We are committing some R10 per person per
year to the participation of our people in sport and recreation activities.

Now, R10 can never make a substantial contribution to participation rates
in sport and recreation, but participation can have, and has, an impact on
the budgets of many other sectors in government. Participation can
substantially reduce the health budget. In fact, the Department of Health
has recognised the contribution that physical activity can make. They’ve
introduced the “Vuka South Africa, Move for your Health” programme. This is
to highlight the contribution that being physically active can make to
one’s health.

The savings that we can make on the justice budget, as with many other
budgets, can be as, if not more, significant. We’ve always said that a
child in sport is a child out of court. We saw the start of Child
Protection Week on Monday. I want to contend that sport, if properly
organised, supervised and run, constitutes one of the best ways to ensure
that our children are protected. If our children are constructively engaged
in activities outside of schools, there is no reason why they will or can
become caught up in the influences of antisocial tendencies.

If we say all these things and agree with them, we have to be bold and we
have to say that we must increase the budget for sport and recreation to
ensure that more young people become more involved in the mass
participation programme, our school sport programme and our club
development programme.

Further, we believe that the funding that is available from the lottery can
be utilised much better, and we have approached our colleagues in the
Department of Trade and Industry to facilitate this. There is,
unfortunately, a perception out there that sport and recreation is awash
with resources. Let me say that this is a totally false perception; a few
sports federations and a few players are benefiting from the spoils that
are on offer. The majority of our organisations are in fact suffering.

We have a pool of available resources from the lottery distribution agency
for sport and recreation that, in our opinion, are not being utilised
optimally at this point in time. I’m led to believe that funds are being
distributed to sports structures unbeknown to some of our national
federations. That, surely, cannot continue.

Sport and recreation must be able to play a role with regard to the
distribution of these resources, even if it means that the laws that
regulate the disbursement of these funds have to be amended. We are
presently speaking with the Department of Trade and Industry about this,
and I trust that we will be able to resolve the matter soon. It is
imperative that the resources available for sport and recreation are
utilised optimally.

In conclusion, Chairperson, the legislative programme of our department
will enjoy the attention of both Houses very soon. Prominent amongst these
are the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill that seeks
to amend all non-money matters that may impede the implementation of the
government guarantees that we provided in the bidding phase to host the
2010 World Cup.

The second piece of legislation is the Safety at Sport and Recreation
Events Bill, which will be put to Cabinet for consideration shortly. This
significant and substantial piece of legislation is a sequel to the 2001
Ellis Park tragedy. It is intended to minimise the risk of such a disaster
occurring again in future. But it also constitutes an important tool in the
security arrangements for the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

We also have two amending Bills: the Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill
and the South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill. Both
these Bills have been passed by Cabinet and will serve in this House very
shortly. The former, the Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill, is aimed at
improving the governance of our sports federations and the latter, the
South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill, is aimed at
aligning sport with international best practice.

We trust, Chair, that we will be able to rely on the support of this hon
House and the NCOP for our legislative programme. Chair, afford me the
opportunity to, lastly, say to the Minister of Sport and Recreation,
uMfundisi: Thank you so much for your leadership. It’s wonderful to be your
Deputy Minister; it’s great to work with you. And thank you so much for the
many quotes from the Bible and for other wisdom that you bestow on me.
[Applause.] You’re a true uMfundisi [Reverend] and I thank you for that.

To the department, the director-general, all the federations, the
volunteers, our portfolio committee and the chairperson, I want to say
thank you so much. It’s wonderful to serve in this capacity. I thank you,
Chair. [Applause.]

Mrs D M MOROBI: Chairperson, hon Minister, Rev Stofile, hon Deputy
Minister, Mr Gert Oosthuizen, hon Members of Parliament, ladies and
gentlemen, sport has been a great unifying factor in our country’s
transition. I’m proud to say that South Africans are enjoying the gains of
their revolution. We are commemorating important events that mark the road
to freedom. I would like to just mention a few: the 50th anniversary of the
women’s march to the Union Buildings, the 30th anniversary of the 1976
student uprising and the 10th anniversary of our Constitution.

The Freedom Charter states, “The doors of learning and culture shall be
opened.” This simply means that the colour bar in cultural life, sport and
education shall be abolished. We cannot separate education from sport.

For over 120 years, many South African men and women have excelled in
international world sport and have won trophies and accolades both at home
and abroad. Indeed, our country has entered the age of hope. Our
government, which is ANC-led, has created conditions to achieve progress.
We are a winning nation.

The people’s contract on service delivery and Sport and Recreation South
Africa are delivering to communities at grass-roots level. This is evident
in the mass participation programmes. The objective of the programme is to
facilitate participation in sport and recreation activities for
historically disadvantaged communities, and to focus on rural areas to
promote participation of women, youth, disabled persons and the elderly. A
total of 255 facilities, which are spread over the nine provinces, have
been built in a period of three years while 109 facilities are targeted for
completion by 2006.

Mass participation programmes have been successfully launched in all the
provinces. There are about 96 hubs in which mass participation-based
activities take place. Statistics clearly show that targets were exceeded
during the first year of the programme, despite the fact that it was
launched in August 2004. This indicates that there’s a need for such
programmes in all communities. To date, 677 784 participants have been
enrolled in the programmes as against the targeted figure of 500 000.

Historically, the first South African championships in tennis for both men
and women were held in 1891, making the royal ancient game of tennis the
first sport to include women on a competitive basis in South Africa. And in
1894, cricket was one of the few sports to promote a recreational outlet
for women. In 1897, women’s golf was played in South Africa.

Presently, women are gradually moving into the traditional male sports.
Women are making waves in what has always been male-dominated sports. We
have women who have ventured into male sports, but I just have a few names
that I have managed to extract. We have Charmaine Kene, who at the age of
18 years is the captain of the Gugulethu under-19 women’s cricket team.
There is also Kenosi Mlaba from Tukkies, who is making strides in boxing.
She believes women must start expanding their spheres of influence in
boxing.
There are six women’s rugby teams in Gauteng. Tabia Nkuna, a black woman,
plays in one of these teams - a white team. Phindile Sibiya from Mpumalanga
is the first South African black horsewoman. She can command a horse to
trot in circles, change direction and even jump fences. That’s what she
commands a horse to do. [Applause.] We also have women golfers. I just want
to mention Nokuthula Ngulube who has just been a champion, and many other
women who are doing the same thing.

Hon Minister, there’s also a negative impact which emanates from the lack
of facilities and resources in rural areas. Underdevelopment of women in
key positions is contributing to gender stereotyping. Female participants
are far less as compared to their male counterparts. Women are relatively
underresourced in all aspects – I mean all aspects.

Hon members, I know you’ve got the speakers’ list on your desks. Just go
through that list and you will see how many women are in the programme. I
think there’s only one woman there and the whole list is male dominated.
Women are in dire need of an inclusive functional agent to provide guidance
and leadership, and to visibly lobby for gender equality in all aspects
under the auspices of the government body that leads by example.
There’s a negative impact experienced by historically disadvantaged
communities regarding sport. Poor communities have no access to proper
services, that is public transport, communications and others. All this
makes it highly unlikely that they will be in a position to participate in
sport. It may be noted that the department’s budget is not keeping pace
with its responsibilities and has in fact declined by 6%.

On a positive note, the construction of new facilities has contributed to
short-term employment. Some of the unemployed youth are trained as co-
ordinators. Opportunities that have been opened for talented individuals
who are recruited into the National Sports Academy system by the Department
of Sport and Recreation and the upgrading and provision of facilities in
rural areas and historically disadvantaged communities have contributed to
the improvement of quality of life, equity and social transformation.

The government made strides in activities that are relevant to the sport
and recreation sector, such as job creation, promotion of nonracism,
nonsexism, together with planned increases in resources through Asgisa. The
NGOs and civil society actively take part in and support development to
provide advocacy services. They also provide information on valuable
lessons learned, expertise based on field experience and deepen the work of
the national sports strategy because they enjoy close ties with local
communities.

The NGOs such as Sports Coaches’ Outreach – Score - Sports Without
Boundaries and others are committed to improving the quality of
participation in sport by hosting field visits and trips to promote their
work. The intended results of economic distribution in the sport and
recreation sector are the achievement of a better life for all;
preparedness in all sectors for a successful tour for the 2010 World Cup;
utilising the World Cup as a positive contribution to the struggle to
achieve Africa’s Renaissance; acceleration of development of sports
facilities; and inclusion of women and people with disabilities at decision-
making levels in the Public Service.

Although there are some challenges such as lack of grass-roots development
in sport, lack of good coaches, lack of conducive environments and
facilities in previously disadvantaged communities and the prevalence of
racism, South Africans are truly enjoying the opportunities that prevail
within the sport and recreation department. These opportunities enable them
to use the existing infrastructure and they have knowledge to progress
rapidly. Opportunities also relate to the improvement of publicity and
media relations, taking advantage of the government’s initiatives in sport,
and the increasing promotion of gender equality and disabled participants.

In closing, the truth of the matter is that today is better than yesterday
and tomorrow will be better than today.

Motswana wa bogologolo are: “Sejo sennye ga se fete molomo.” Ha Mosotho ena
are: “Re tla arolelana hloho ya tsie.” Jwalo ka ha Freedom Charter e itse:
[The old Motswana say: “Half a loaf is better than no bread”. And the
Mosotho says, “ We will share whatever little we have”. The Freedom Charter
stipulates:]

... “People shall share”. This budget will be shared accordingly, even if
it is 6% less, and it will be able to reach all aspects of sport and
recreation.

The ANC fully supports this budget.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson, hon members and honoured guests ...

... siyaluxhasa olu hlahlo lwabiwo-mali, nangona besirhalela ukuba unikwe
imali eninzana. Kufuneka ndikunike iingcebiso malunga nokuba ungambhukuqa
njani na urhulumente ukuze ufumane imali eninzi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... we
support the Budget Vote, even though we would have liked additional funds.
I should advise you on how to organise a coup in order to gain access to
lots of money.] [Applause.]]

With the limited time at my disposal, I would like to focus on the
preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. A word of advice to the
Department of Sport and Recreation: Seeing that billions in taxpayers’
money are going to be spent on this event, make sure that large amounts
aren’t simply doled out left, right and centre. And it should not be a
question of only Cabinet Ministers serving on the World Cup management
committees. We are talking about administrators and tender board
specialists from government who must participate in the entire planning
process of the event. Rather have specialists involved from the beginning
and ensure that all the rules are followed instead of in due course
investigating tenders that were awarded.

Take, for example, the upgrading of stadiums. If the stadium is privately
owned, why should the owners not pay for the benefits and investments
government is making? Stadiums like Ellis Park and Newlands cannot simply
receive large-scale investments as a gift from the taxpayers. To avoid a
repetition of the arms deal fiasco, there must be one department that co-
ordinates all the other state departments involved in these preparations.

Your department, sir, has been mandated by this Parliament to run and co-
ordinate sports activities in this country, and any attempt to undermine
our sport department’s brief must be resisted at all costs.

Another issue I wish to raise concerns the quality of players we are
producing. It is not going to help us to target the national coaches only
whenever we perform badly in international tournaments. A good example of
this is football where we failed to reach the Soccer World Cup in Germany -
so, the coach was fired. Then we were elbowed out of the African Cup of
Nations once again the coach was fired. We played in the Cosafa Cup and we
lost under the stewardship of a caretaker coach.

All of these losses are always blamed, as I’ve said, on the coaches. But
when we look at the performances of the professional club teams in this
country, we notice that the shining stars in those teams are from the rest
of the continent. Amongst those foreign players are feared strikers and
midfielders such as Lelo Mbele of Orlando Pirates. But when the same player
was recently called to play for his country in the recent African Cup of
Nations, he was not even in the starting line-up. Yet, here in South
Africa, he’s one of the most feared strikers. It just shows how far behind
we are in producing players of both national and international quality.

I think the advice that we in this House should give the football
administrators and club owners is possibly for our national football
institutions to make it compulsory for each professional side to have
reserve sides with development players such as the under-19 and under-15
teams. If need be, the question of incentives must also be addressed ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member ...

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mnu Komphela, baqalile ke aba bantu bakho ukundiqhawula
ndisathetha. Thetha, Sisi. [Hon Komphela, your people have started
interrupting me again while I’m talking. Speak, my sister.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Your time has expired.
Mr B H HOLOMISA: You should have said so. [Laughter.]

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
members of Parliament and distinguished guests, in today’s Cape Times there
was a short letter by Mr Stuart Shepherd of Edgemead, saying that I must
keep my nose out of rugby and that I must deal with soccer because Bafana
Bafana is a disaster. [Laughter.]

Edgemead is the area, if hon members can remember, where this African girl
was beaten up by a white girl, her boyfriend and her mother. They did not
only beat her up, bamchamela [they urinated on her.] I am therefore not
astonished by this letter of Mr Shepherd.

During the liberation struggle sport played a significant role and we could
never be ignorant of that. Now the time has come for us to harness sport
again in this new phase of our struggle aimed at building the ideal society
we all envisage.

As we transform this country, I would like to present sport bodies with the
challenge of ensuring that the demographic profile of their federations
reflects the country’s population in the shortest time possible. However,
this seems to be a challenge for other federations, especially South
African rugby. Black players seem to disappear after they have represented
the country in the under-19, under-21 and under-23 teams of South Africa.
They disappear into thin air.

The Craven Week sides represent the demographics. However, the world-level
representative teams which come out of the Craven Week seem to disappear
without Saru caring or concerning themselves about the disappearance and
retention of these teams.

In a meeting that we had with Stuart Baxter, the former coach of Bafana
Bafana, he indicated to us that they don’t have any data of the under-19 or
under-16 players. I don’t know how one can prepare if one doesn’t have that
data. Strangely, other countries have the database of their players, even
the data about the injured players. We insist that the people within these
structures, who don’t care, must seriously be removed. It’s a pity I can’t
mention names, but they know themselves. They are fat cats who have lost
the plot of why they were there from the onset.

Enye ingxaki yile nto yokungakhululwa kwabadlali ngamaqela abo ukuba
badlalele ilizwe labo. Yingxubakaxa ke le. Indenza ndibe namanyumnyezi le
nto. Buphi ubuzwe kula maqela kunye nabadlali? Le ngxaki ifuna ingqwalasela
yaye mhlawumbi ithetha ukuba kufuneka sibe nomgaqo-nkqubo kuba sifuna
ukulungiselela iqela eliza kugqwesa ngo-2010. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Another problem is the one experienced by players who are not released by
their clubs in order that they can report for national duty in their
respective countries. This is a serious problem. It makes me shiver.
Whatever happened to patriotism? This may require us to draft a policy that
will address these shortcomings, because we want a team that is going to
succeed in 2010.]

We must go beyond the first round during the 2010 World Cup, and the
spadework must start now. Safa is pathetic and unprofessional.

Abathembekanga. Bathetha iilwimi ngeelwimi ngathi ngabafundi bakaYesu
ngokuya wayenyuka. [Uwelewele.] [You can never trust them. They speak in
different tongues, like Jesus’ disciples on the day of the Ascension.
[Interjections.]]

We must support the Safa leadership that is trustworthy, its coaching staff
and players, as we try to put together a winning team for the World Cup
that’s coming to our shores. We, as the ANC, will close ranks and intensify
the manner and approach in which we deal with the challenges in responding
to the federations, which continue to vilify our government, and the
successes of our democratic state are used as a pawn by the minority groups
to disqualify what’s just and fair.

Federations need to transform. Thus, every conscious effort of our
sportsmen and women to excel in various sporting codes, and in helping
others grow, contributes in countless ways to the building of our nation
and the nurturing of a caring and people-centred society. It is in this
context of transformation and the attainment of our freedom that we must
understand the role of sport in the development of our nation.

In devising our tactics we shall have to display flexibility without
succumbing to opportunism. But it can be done, because we have the
organisation, the leadership and the cadres capable of seeing the web of
ramifications and relationships that make our struggle so complex and
capable of executing the revolution by drawing on the extensive armoury of
methods and forms of struggle.

There is an abundance of talent throughout the length and breadth of this
country, in our villages and in our cities, and it needs to be unearthed
and developed. I often think about how much more successful we could be as
a nation in the international sporting arena if we were able to draw our
athletes from 100% of our population, rather than 20% or 30%.

A bigger resource pool must surely mean a more united South African front,
keener competition and, therefore, higher levels of performance. I am sure
that several national federations have signed a performance agreement with
the Ministry of Sport and Recreation regarding representivity in their
teams.

Recently, Saru endorsed a transformation charter. I am keen to find out
whether they have lived up to those contracts, whether the new charter
adopted will indeed be a guideline in addressing the challenge of
transformation and, indeed, what new targets they have set for themselves
in the year ahead. Clearly the road ahead towards a normal society remains
the key challenge and the sports barometer against which we measure our
progress.

Strangely, sponsors are withdrawing moneys when codes are being run by
black people. For example, if one looks at boxing, netball and athletics,
the moment the African is there, they say “we can’t support”. They find all
kinds of excuses to withdraw their support.

In France, we learned that in each federation there is a government
official within each structure to ensure that policies are implemented to
the letter of the word and are monitored continuously. Perhaps, hon
Komphela, we must implement the same model, in order to ensure that these
federations do comply.

The people we deployed to these structures ended up being imidlwembe
[unruly individuals], so we can’t rely on them. Instead, we need government
officials that are not paid by the federations but are paid by government,
so that they can continuously do the monitoring and evaluation of the
implementation of the policy and legislation that we pass in this
Parliament. I think the hon Lee will agree with me, as he was part of that
delegation to France. This is not something new. [Laughter.]

The Minister needs to be praised for the bold steps which he has taken in
terms of the insurance legislation, which has been introduced as a cover
for boxers against injuries and death; and for the assistance that he has
given to the women’s national rugby team, which will be playing in the
World Cup in Canada this year.
Nantsi ke ngoku into eza kundibethisa. [For what I am going to say now, I
know that I am going to receive a tongue-lashing.]

The overlooking of players who perform well during the Super 14 is
unacceptable. Instead, Jake White chooses to call up players who are
supposed to retire. I, however, understand that the selection of players
also has to do with money, because if the African kids are selected, they
are taking away the money of the white kids.

Yinto ebenza bavale iminyango ke leyo. Siza kuwavula noba iqanyangelwe
ngooqomoyi bamaqhaga, siza kuwavula. Avulekile amasango. Bafuna ukutya
bodwa oontamolukhuni. [Kwahlekwa.] [That then causes them to shut the doors
ever so tight. We are going to ensure that all doors are open, no matter
what. The doors are open. These arrogant people want to benefit alone.
[Laughter.]]

There is a perception here that rugby is a white sport. This is wrong. That
is why this gentleman wrote me a letter saying that I must deal with
soccer. I am dealing with all sporting codes, and I was also a rugby player
for that matter. [Applause.] He must therefore understand that it is not a
white sport. [Time expired.]

Mr E (Cassim) SALOOJEE: Chairperson, those of us who fought the good fight
for representative national sports teams have taken pride in the meteoric
rise of Bryan Habana, in rugby, and Makhaya Ntini’s sustained performance
at the forefront of the Proteas. With performances like these, it is
tempting to believe that transformation in sport has come full circle. If
we give in to that temptation we will be betraying our dream of building a
sporting nation that will provide the opportunity for participation of all,
across the wide spectrum of sporting codes.

While we have made good progress in relation to transforming our most
popular sporting codes, we must realise that the challenges are a whole lot
bigger and more complex than this. Many of the smaller sporting codes are
stagnating in a mindset of exclusiveness and social isolation. The
development challenges are profound, as they still lack any meaningful base
among the historically disadvantaged from whom these codes need to draw
elite sportsmen and women.

In some of these sports, the economic barriers to entry, even at the
recreational level, are quite high. Where sporting codes are highly
commercialised and require substantial investment in equipment, or where
they demand very special training facilities, they have tended to remain
the preserve of the wealthy.

Socioeconomic exclusion is so profound that it seriously challenges the
possibility of selecting truly national teams. I would like to illustrate
what I mean through referring to one sport first, that is cycling. In South
Africa cycling is fast gaining ground in terms of participants, sponsors
and supporters. The big cycle tours have become major events in the South
African sporting calendar. We have international competitors participating
in increasing numbers. Even people who have never felt a saddle under their
rear feel obliged to pretend that they have an interest in the Argus/Pick
‘n Pay tour.

The growth in cycling has only emphasised its status as an exclusive sport.
Cycling at almost any level requires the kind of investment that poor
people cannot dream of making. At competitive level, the bikes and other
essential items such as kits are prohibitively expensive. Added to this
fact is that the training facilities are often inaccessible, and that
competing requires transport for bike and rider. You can begin to
understand why there are so few working class heroes on wheels.

Given that cycling has exceptionally tough barriers to entry, one would
have expected the relevant national sporting body to take on transformation
in a robust way. However, this has not been the case. The fact that Cycling
SA was only formed in 2004 has, no doubt, hampered progress. But the
problems don’t stem purely from structural weaknesses.

The portfolio committee’s interaction with Cycling SA suggests that we are
dealing with an organisational culture that is out of step with the times
and is generally unreceptive to change. There is, however, some sense that
the requirement of transformation is beginning to dawn upon Cycling SA. We
are told that the transformation programme is under review and, certainly,
some immediate steps have been taken to expand the training capacity. For
example, four black coaches have recently completed the first level of an
Australian accredited coaching course. A Khayelitsha-based rider, Luthando
Kaku, will be undertaking a three-month training course in Switzerland.

The portfolio committee will hold Cycling SA to its responsibility to
develop a transformation programme that will have an impact at every level.
From the individual clubs, through to local and provincial structures, and
right up to national and international competition, we will be watching to
see that this programme addresses the development of sustainable training
and coaching programmes to promote cycling among historically disadvantaged
communities, and the mobilisation of additional resources to underpin the
expansion of the sport.

However, the responsibility does not end there. Cycling SA’s exclusion in
sports will not be ended by narrow interventions. It is necessary to move
along a number of fronts simultaneously if you want to make progress.

Major sports sponsors have both the power and the resources to make a
positive impact when it comes to tackling the economic barriers to
participation. Pick ‘n Pay’s name is synonymous with South African cycling.
This is a company associated with humanitarian projects, and with good
conditions of employment. It would be a shame if Pick ’n Pay failed to
bring a progressive influence to bear in the realm of cycling.

The challenge must be made even more broadly. To produce top-flight
sportsmen or sportswomen in any particular code, that sport needs to be
embedded in a nation’s culture. It must be practised at school, at
recreational level or woven into the everyday lives of people. In these
circumstances, talented children from modest homes can be spotted, and
their talents developed. In some countries, particularly in Europe, cycling
has this tradition.

Unfortunately, among disadvantaged communities in South Africa, this has
not been the case. Furthermore, when someone like Sifiso Nhlapo, world
junior BMX champion actually beats the odds and makes it to the top, he
doesn’t get the kind of hero status he deserves on home turf. This is
simply because cycling fans are few where people don’t actually do cycling.
We must therefore find ways to expand cycling opportunities within the
daily lives of disadvantaged communities as a cost-effective form of
transport and as a form of recreation.

Health departments and nongovernmental organisations are exploring ways of
providing cycles free of charge or at low cost to our people in rural and
urban areas, mainly as an affordable form of transport. These initiatives
include projects such as Afribike and the Bicycle Empowerment Network, as
well as the Department of Transport’s Shova Lula campaign. We should be
doing more than just applauding these efforts. We should be shouting for
more and facilitating their expansion.

To make cycling affordable for the majority of South Africans, we must be
able to bypass the exorbitant commercial market for cycles and cycling
paraphernalia, which is driven ever upwards by the bottomless pockets of
the elite.

I would like to pursue the topic of unchecked commercialism in sport, and
the adverse effect that this may have on the broader community. A case in
point is golf, and more particularly the proliferation of golfing estates.
Golf quite obviously suffers from many of the same barriers that plague
cycling. It is no accident that South African stars of the sport have
surnames like Els, Goosen, Immelman, Clarke, Sabbatini. This country has
not produced a major black golfing champion since Papwa lifted the South
African title in Durban decades ago, and was awarded his trophy by Gary
Player outside the clubhouse in the pouring rain.

The commercialisation of golf is an obvious barrier to its internal
transformation. But it also poses a much wider threat: the mania to
establish super-luxury golf estates on every spare inch of the Cape coast
is a madness that must not go unchecked. The Cape coast is a glorious
national treasure that we should preserve intact for generations to come.
Instead, we are allowing it to be excavated and re-engineered to the
unnatural contours needed for golf. We are privatising access to beaches of
incredible beauty, and we are closing off breathtaking views to all eyes
except those of super-rich golfers.

In principle, there is nothing wrong with golf estates. On the contrary,
they have the potential to create employment and to contribute to local
economic development while the fortunate users enjoy their sport. The
problem stems from the sheer number of these estates that are in
development. It also stems from the siting of these estates in places of
natural beauty, where public access should be guaranteed in perpetuity.

The fact is that the natural environment is being irreversibly changed with
little appreciation of the consequences, and the reality is that the rights
of the public are being infringed for the sporting pleasure of a privileged
few. All of this suggests that we have to look long and hard at the
regulatory processes to understand why they are failing to offer adequate
protection.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr E (Cassim) SALOOJEE: I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr M T LIKOTSI: Deputy Chairperson, this Budget Vote is dedicated to
Patrick Pule Ace “Mabhekaphansi” Ntsoelengoe, one of the finest footballers
this country ever produced. He passed away on 8 May 2006. Our country has
not been doing very well in sport of late, let alone recreation. There can
be no enjoyable leisure when your national teams are losers, instead stress
and high blood pressure will prevail.

The PAC of Azania observes, with dismay, how our sport is being run and
developed nationally. There are not enough breeding grounds for sportsmen
and women in the form of sports academies to nurture the youth at their
early stages of life. This trend must stop somewhere, and a new way of
sports development must be put in place now or later.

We underachieve in cricket, rugby and football. We failed to qualify for
the 2006 Soccer World Cup in Germany. We were unceremoniously bundled out
of the African Cup of Nations in Egypt; kicked out of the quarter finals of
the Cosafa Cup in Botswana by the lowly Zebras of Botswana - ranked 50
places below South Africa. We have to pride ourselves on a handful of our
athletes and sportsmen and women who excelled in their sporting codes. To
them we say: “Keep up the good work.”
What our country needs is sport academies and places of high performance at
all levels, that is schools, universities, provinces and at national level.
Sport has made what Brazil, Nigeria, Cameroon and Kenya are to the world
today. We have the ability to produce athletes and sportsmen and women of
quality, the likes of Eto’o of Cameroon; Ronaldinho of Brazil; Tiger Woods
of USA; Martina Hingis - the 25-year old of Switzerland; Venus and Serena
Williams of USA; Paul Tergat of Kenya; Marion Jones of USA; and Mayoyo
Aloryi of Ghana.

The government must intervene and invest billions of rands in sports
development. Facilities must be created and highly skilled sportspersons,
administrators and technical persons must take the lead.

In netball, we congratulate Western Cape Tornadoes on winning the National
Netball League this year. In soccer we congratulate Mamelodi Sundowns “The
Sky is the Limit” for winning the league. [Applause.]  We further
congratulate Kaizer Chiefs “Amakhosi Amahle” for winning the ABSA Cup - the
cup of dreams.

The PAC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, Minister, in view of the department’s
performance, the MF refers the House to the objection we lodged last year
to the department transferring funds to municipalities via the municipal
infrastructure grant to provide sports facilities, amongst its six
priorities.

As predicted, this was a major disaster. Out of R1,3 billion allocated to
MIG in KwaZulu-Natal, only R1,3 million was used for sports infrastructure
... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order, hon members!

Mr R B BHOOLA: As noted, the department is facing a major backlog in
infrastructural development throughout the country. In view of this, we
hope the Minister’s undertaking at the sports investment conference held in
London recently to make infrastructure more accessible will be fulfilled.
We assume the department has realised its error in this regard and will
revert to funding the provinces. This should prove far more productive as
regards delivery.

The MF, however, expresses its confidence in the department’s objectives.
We are pleased with initiatives regarding youth development projects, as
introduced at schools. We believe that it’s during these early stages of
their lives that our youth are easily influenced and sports are a great
means to deter them from a life of crime and violence. It is also at this
young age that our sporting heroes may be discovered.

In the light of this, the MF is concerned as to whether schools have the
necessary funding and resources to implement a sustainable school sports
programme. The benefits of the department’s mass participation initiatives
are recognised. We, however, would like to ask: How is the department
progressing in establishing 210 hubs, and ensuring one hub in each
municipal ward?

Another major aspect on the department’s agenda is the 2010 Soccer World
Cup. It is noted that while all the necessary objectives exist in this
regard, a major backlog exists in delivering on those objectives before
2010. In the light of this, the MF would like to ask this question: How
effective is the co-ordination, organisation and monitoring of the
preparations for 2010 between the department, the Department of
Environmental Affairs and management?

Further, we are pleased at the department’s continued efforts to balance
the sports arena through addressing gender shortfalls and ensuring the
representation of disabled persons in various sports.

The MF supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Mr L R R REID: Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister, invited guests,
hon members, amidst all the doom and gloom expressed here today about the
poor performance of Bafana Bafana, allow me, first of all, to congratulate
two South African sports teams that have performed exceptionally well this
past weekend: the KwaZulu-Natal under-15 soccer team that won an
international soccer tournament in Germany beating Poland in the finals,
and the South African national sevens team that won the International Rugby
Board’s sevens tournament in France by beating, amongst others, New Zealand
and Samoa. [Applause.]

Today I want to focus on school sports. On 17 March 2005 a memorandum of
understanding was signed by the Minister of Sport and Recreation and the
Minister of Education. In terms of that particular memorandum of
understanding, all selected competitive and representative school sports at
provincial, national and international level have become the responsibility
of the Department of Education. This has far-reaching implications.

Previously, under the Department of Education, when a learner from a
disadvantaged background was elected to play a national tour or go
overseas, they had to withdraw from that team because of a lack of money.
Members of the committee would know how they would phone around asking
members for donations. Now, for the first time in this country, the
Department of Sport will pay for both the travelling expenses and the
accommodation of such learners. [Applause.]

What is also alarming, in terms of transformation of school sport, is an
attempt by certain white schools to have competitions during school
holidays involving white teams only. Here we refer to the “jong” or “klein
Bokkies” [junior Springboks] who held a tournament outside Upington at some
stage.

If we thought that this practice was stillborn, it is, however, still
happening in the Southern Cape. It takes place in my hometown, Riversdale,
on the fields of the agriculture school there. That is why it is important
that we should soon be passing an amendment to the sport and recreation
Act. We have to use that particular Act to put an end to this particular
practice. [Applause.]

You know why I am raising this issue. The school level is the first entry
point where transformation should take place. Those kids need to learn how
to live and play together and later represent South Africa. [Applause.]

While school sport was still under the Department of Education it was
administered by Ussasa. I think we must also thank Ussasa for the role they
have played in advancing school sports since unification. They were just
teachers at the time and some of them did not even know how to coach but
all the same they did a good job.

When school sport left the Department of Education and was transferred to
the Department of Sport and Recreation, Ussasa was dissolved and that has
left a vacuum in terms of the administration of school sport. Fortunately,
during our public hearings on the budget we heard several entities that
made presentations. First of all, we heard Sports without Boundaries – a
section 21 entity that was founded by a group of sportspersons, education
leaders, community sports activists and sports volunteers. They made a very
good impression on the committee. As a committee, we recommended a meeting
between themselves and the department because I think they are well
equipped to fill that particular vacuum.

We talked here today in terms of the skills levels. Another entity that met
with us was the one which specialises in rugby, led by the former
KwaZakhele Rugby Union and Saru player, Themba Ledwaba. If you have watched
the Super 14 rugby this year, you would have seen that our national players
in these Super 14 teams passed the ball as if they had never played rugby
before. A player who will be captaining South Africa, Jean de Villiers,
passed the ball behind his wing most of the time.

So it’s about time we charge these former players, like Themba Ledwaba,
with the task of teaching our kids the necessary skills. If we don’t teach
them at that particular level they will never learn those skills.
[Applause.]

Some of the national sports federations also run competitions for learners.
Athletics SA has a cross-country programme for learners and Saru has some
junior rugby competitions. Regarding cycling, individual members of cycling
coach some of our kids. But, I must say that these happen on an ad hoc
basis. As regards Cycling SA, what we must know about them is that their
management committee is still lily-white. They have no idea about
transformation.

I think the biggest challenge for the department will be the provision of
sports facilities. There are many schools in the previously disadvantaged
areas that have no sports facilities at all. While others do have some
facilities, those are not suitable for sport. This is the apartheid legacy
of the provision of skewed facilities along racial lines.

Another challenge is the provision of sports facilities to farm schools.
Here the problem is the ownership of these schools and the scarcity of
land, because all the land belongs to the farmer. I propose that the
department should interact with the MECs of education to hold discussions
with farmers to provide land for basic sports facilities, because we cannot
leave those farm children on their own. They, too, need to enjoy a better
life.

The state of the nation address raised the issue of acceleration regarding
the provision of sports facilities. This is no longer the responsibility of
the Department of Sport but the department is nonetheless expected to play
a leading role in the co-ordination and planning of new facilities through
the municipal infrastructure grant and the Expanded Public Works Programme.

However, once again, I want to echo what the Deputy Minister said, namely
that right throughout the country we met with many councils and to them
sport is not a priority. So, we need to revert to the building for sport
and recreation programme.

Another issue raised in the state of the nation address was around poverty
and unemployment. [Interjections.] Will you please keep quiet while I am
talking? [Laughter.] Through the upgrading and provision of sports
facilities, short-term employment will be created and that will contribute
to the improvement of quality of life.

Boxing SA was established in terms of the South African Boxing Act of 2001.
They have started their baby champions league, that is tournaments for
boxers in the lower weight divisions. These tournaments have become so
popular that they are attracting large numbers of spectators.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON: (Ms C-S Botha) Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr L R R REID: I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, I rise in support of the Budget Vote.

Kwotas moet versigtig hanteer word ten einde werklike gelyke geleenthede in
sport te bewerkstellig. So moet die integriteit en gehalte van die
onderskeie sportkodes ook gehandhaaf word. [Quotas have to be handled with
care to ensure that real equal opportunities in sport are achieved. That is
how the integrity and quality of the various sporting codes should also be
maintained.]

The UPSA does not believe that transformation in sport is merely a matter
of numbers but rather the creation of circumstances and opportunities that
will allow every participant to play his or her particular sport at the
highest level that their talents allow them.

This is an objective that cannot be expected to be achieved
instantaneously, for it is not only about the improvement of sports
facilities, but the improvement of the level of our sports management too.
We must improve the quality of our coaching abilities and depth. We must
improve the quality and numbers of our sport scientists, and we must
improve the quality and numbers of our sport physicians and
physiotherapists, amongst others. The Australians have proved that this
approach is working well.
The UPSA believes that transformation goals and objectives will be achieved
if we follow a bottom-up approach instead of what currently seems to be a
top-down approach. This, in practice, would mean that schools would be the
first point of departure in achieving transformation, not only in terms of
numbers but rather in terms of the coaching and exposure to facilities that
our youngsters need to reach their true potential.

We therefore believe that, in conjunction with the national and provincial
education departments, the Department of Sport and Recreation should
intensify its efforts to address the still lacking presence of quality
sports professionals at schools.

The UPSA supports the programmes that the Deputy Minister ... [Time
expired.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister, and fellow
members, the ultimate goal of the Department of Sport and Recreation should
be to create the opportunity for every child to choose in which sporting
code he or she wants to participate. Failure to properly administer sport,
to provide adequate facilities or to focus on talent rather than race has
meant that a lot of South Africans are simply unable to make that choice.
UMnyango wezeMidlalo nokuzithabisa uqalene neselela yokwakha iindawo
zemidlalo, lapho zifuneka khona khulu. Lokhu kungenzeka ngokobana
uRhulumende akhe iindawo ezaneleko zemidlalo emadorobheni nemalokitjhini
wesitjhaba sethu. [The Department of Sport and Recreation is faced with the
challenge of developing much needed sports facilities. This will only
happen if the government develops adequate sports facilities in the towns
and locations of our nation.]

The enormously high rate of unemployment in South Africa is well
documented. Because of this, many young men and women dream of escaping
from this poverty and unemployment through sport. But how can they realise
their dreams if there are no sports facilities in their areas?

Ngqongqotjhe, abantu abatlhaga khulu abanganamali yokuya endaweni lapho
bangadlala khona imidlalo abakghoni ukuya ngombana abanamali. Kodwana wena
njengoNgqongqotjhe, unemali yokwakha iinsetjenziswa lapho kuhlala khona
abantu. Ngakho-ke Ngqongqotjhe nawungabakheliko eendaweni zabo kufana
nokuthi uyababandlulula. (Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[Minister, extremely poor people are unable to go to places where they can
play sports, because they don’t have money. You, as the Minister, have the
money to build the infrastructure where people live. Therefore, Minister,
if you don’t develop sports facilities for them in their own places, it is
like you are discriminating against them.]

One should also congratulate those sporting codes which, with limited
resources, try their best to assist in building sports facilities. Sadly,
there are municipalities that have sports facilities within their borders
but do not have funds to properly maintain those facilities.

Many councils also do not consider sport to be a priority. This, Mr
Minister, is where your responsibility comes in again. You should educate
municipalities on the importance of spending money on sports facilities. I
am not saying they should cut spending on service delivery to communities.
What I am saying is that we need municipalities to spend money on sport and
less on lavish inauguration parties and buffets. [Interjections.]

Mr Minister, since the municipal infrastructure grant was introduced the
rate at which sports facilities have been built has dropped drastically.
The Minister must seriously consider the ring-fencing of the money
allocated for sport in order to ensure that the funds intended for sports
facilities are actually spent on sports facilities. We will keep saying
this until you have done that.

In sport, if you want to see a representative South Africa, we need to
start developing at junior level while children are at school.  This is not
happening in our townships and rural areas because of lack of available
facilities. Potential Bafana Bafana players are forced to play sports in
which they have no interest or skill. What happened to the children’s
freedom to choose? At the end of the day, South Africa loses out.

The memorandum of understanding signed between the Minister of Sport and
Recreation and the Minister of Education is not worth the paper it’s
written on. Very little, if anything, is being done by the Department of
Sport to ensure that development takes places from the school level, and
not only at senior level.

Another alarming issue concerns Boxing SA, Mr Minister. Boxing SA is a
state institute funded by the taxpayer but it is still flouting laws and
regulations. Every year Boxing SA makes excuses and promises to get its
house in order but nothing has come of these promises.

Last year the Minister explained that non-compliance with financial
regulations was due to different accounts held by provinces. These accounts
no longer exist yet compliance has become an even worse problem. The
Minister cannot escape the blame. He failed for two years to appoint a CEO
for Boxing SA. [Interjections.] That is something which also contributed to
non-compliance. [Interjections.]

Lastly, there are two issues where the department must seriously ask itself
if it is fulfilling the department’s vision. The first one is the mass
participation programme. What is the use of the department parachuting into
a community with a huge fanfare without ensuring the sustainability of the
programme in that particular area? If there is no way to measure it’s
success, then it is only a once-off photo opportunity and a waste of one’s
time and money.

The second issue is the provincial sports academies. Not all these
academies serve any clear purpose. Some, in fact, are just buildings
standing empty. Some at least have an administration clerk twiddling his
thumbs. But how does that develop sport? The simple answer is that it does
not. The purpose behind these academies is not to have a clerk doing
administration work only; they should be used to promote sport in those
provinces.

We can only change in this country if we build enough facilities all over
the country; if we develop sport from primary school level; and if we make
sure that the talented children and those who show potential are mentored
all the way up to the provincial level.

Ngiyabonga, Sihlalo. [Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson and hon members, the annual Budget Vote of
Sport and Recreation grants us the opportunity to assess the impact of the
programmes of the department and these of national federations to improve
the quality of life of all South Africans.

The leadership role in the department and in this committee is taken up by
the ANC, and it is underpinned by the resolutions of the 51st conference of
the ANC, which state that:


  The ANC must give the lead in sport and recreation transformation to
  promote community development.

Another key resolution of this conference urges government to play a
central and, where necessary, interventionist role in the transformation of
sport and recreation in South Africa.

We are thus eagerly awaiting the tabling in Parliament of the Bill that
will deal with transformation in sport. We could have heard today from the
contributions of various speakers that some of our federations simply have
not bought into the idea of transformation. For some time now, the
portfolio committee has called for a blueprint for sport to guide these
federations to achieve our national objectives.

Once again, during the debate, speakers have highlighted the chaotic state
of affairs in certain federations and the lack of co-ordination of
programmes. This has led to a situation where the centrality of
transformation ended up as a side issue on the agenda of sports bodies and
is often used as an excuse to justify the poor performance of national
teams. It is thus expected that this legislation will not find favour with
those political parties who believe that the development and wellbeing of
our people should be left to market forces.

The tabling of this Bill will also coincide with a significant epoch in our
history. Twenty-five years ago, when the anti-apartheid sports movement
took the fight against racial discrimination onto the international stage
by effectively disrupting the 1981 Springbok Tour to New Zealand, the
Minister of Sport, Comrade Stofile, played an instrumental role in forging
international resistance against the participation of the Springboks and
South African teams in other countries while apartheid was still in place.

It is thus also significant that the adoption of the transformation charter
by the SA Rugby Union last Friday coincides with this epoch. Whilst we do
agree that transformation is a process, and we commend Saru on the adoption
of this transformation charter, we need to remind rugby administrators that
the unity process in rugby started way back in 1990.

As a result, we are growing radically impatient with the slow and
lacklustre approach of certain provincial entities towards transformation.
The charter should harness and accelerate the pace of transformation in
rugby, instead of starting from the beginning again. The question is: How
different will this charter be from previous transformation initiatives?
Hopefully, it will not be a case of old wine in new bottles.

The ANC thus rejects comments attributed to certain rugby bosses who
stated, after this transformation charter was accepted, that in future it
might be acceptable – if there are good enough reasons – for a white-only
Springbok team to be fielded. We cannot accept that. While it is not our
job to select the national teams, we need to keep federations accountable
to ensure that their selection policies are aligned to the transformation
commitments they make and the developmental agenda of government.

Allow me, Chairperson, for a few moments, to turn my attention to the
issues affecting sport in the Eastern Cape. The refusal of Saru to allow
the Spears to participate in the Super 14 franchise competition is an
illustration of the serious challenges faced by rugby in the Eastern and
Southern Cape. The inability of parties to agree and commit themselves to a
shared vision in preparing the team for Super 14 competitions ultimately
betrayed the hopes and ambitions of supporters in the region.

We therefore need to reiterate our position that, in principle, we support
a franchise in the South Eastern Cape and maintain that no political
argument can be made for the region not to be part of a Super 14
competition in future. We call on Saru to accept full responsibility for
the future of the Spears and to put a competent board of directors in place
to manage and prepare the team for participation within the next two to
three years.

However, this will necessitate a change in the way rugby players are
contracted in the country. At the moment, provincial unions are primarily
responsible for contracting these players and thus it gives them absolute
control over the players. The result is that the provincial interests of
the wealthy unions prevail at the expense of the national interest.

The prevailing norm of leading rugby nations such as New Zealand is to
accept full responsibility for the contracting of its top players by the
mother body itself. The board of Saru must seriously consider assuming this
responsibility and not relegate it any longer to the unions. Such a system
will fundamentally change rugby and ensure a more equitable distribution of
financial and human resources amongst the rich union and the poor unions.

At the same time, Saru will play a more meaningful role in managing the
players to prevent player fatigue and the alarming incidence of injuries to
their top players. National teams are national assets and must be managed
as such.

The trouble in which rugby in the South Eastern Cape finds itself is not a
situation peculiar to rugby only. We are aware and we engage federations in
that part of the country on sporadic incidents of conflict amongst
administrators, whether it be soccer – cricket is a little bit quiet now
and we welcome that – or athletics, and it is an indication for us of the
turmoil in which sport very often finds itself.

The inability of administrators in the region to get their house in order
impacts negatively on potential sponsorships, without which sports bodies
cannot survive. Failure to comply with the principles of good corporate
governance and transparency effectively nullifies any prospects for the
region, which historically is the home of black sportsmen and women.

The question thus arises: What is at the root of the problem? If we want to
be cynical, we can say that there are racial dimensions involved. That is
not the case. The funny thing is that on both sides, in all groups, you
find a very representative group of South Africans – from all races.

The problem is that once these federations go for their annual general
meetings, they don’t accept the outcome and the result of those AGMs. They
thus forever stay in election mode. They start preparing for the next
election to take place and those who lost out in being elected into
positions either marginalise the other group, or they form a pressure group
which refuses to co-operate. As a result, there is no unity and agreement
on how to advance the game.

Elected officials execute their duties alongside parallel structures and
splinter groups to pursue their own interests. Divisions ultimately become
institutionalised where you have two sports councils operating in one area,
and they are also operating along the lines of the divide. Generally, there
is a lack of commitment of leaders in these sports councils to unite and
form one unitary body.

Notwithstanding this state of affairs - it is strange and it can be
explained because the people of that part of the country love sport –
school and club sport remain vibrant. Recently we experienced a sharp
increase in participation levels in various communities. The problem is the
leadership of the sports bodies.

To address this matter, members of the portfolio committee met on three
occasions with opposing groups. At the last meeting, in April, the parties
agreed to work towards unity and have one sports council in place by the
beginning of August 2006. To our disappointment, however, we learned that
one of the groups, after agreeing to this process, on their own took a
flight to Pretoria where they met with certain government officials and
gave a completely different picture of what is happening there. We are
continuing to engage with them.

Very often, a lot of attention is paid to the bigger federations such as
rugby, cricket, soccer and athletics. The reality is that there are
numerous other federations where transformation challenges exist. Comrade
Saloojee referred to cycling and there are a lot of smaller ones that we do
not pay the necessary attention to.

Despite these problems and challenges that they have, we are aware, Deputy
Minister, that Cycling SA approached the Department of Trade and Industry,
and they successfully applied to have the 2006 Argus Cycle Tour declared a
protected event. When we engaged with the officials from the Department of
Sport we found out that they were not aware of this development, and one
would like that in future there should be closer co-operation between DTI
on the one hand and the Department of Sport and Recreation on the other
hand to ensure that the benefits of protected events will also go to
disadvantaged people.

In the coming financial year, we will also look at closer co-operation with
the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee. We have only met them
once since their inception and we are aware that there are various
challenges. We cannot allow a situation to develop where there is an
increasing divide between the portfolio committee on the one hand and
Sascoc on the other. One instance is where the CEO was fired. We heard
about the sacking of the CEO in the media. That is not acceptable. We
cannot continue like that. We are looking for closer co-operation.

In the limited time at my disposal, I want to deal with some of the
comments made, the last one being by the hon Masango on Boxing SA. Yes,
Boxing SA does have its challenges. We have met with them. Whilst all the
problems have not been resolved, it must be stated that the current
administrators have made bold plans and taken steps to rectify the
shortcomings. One is the firing or suspension of the managing director. An
audit committee has been put in place and the supporting documents have
been given to the Office of the Auditor-General to deal with the qualified
opinion. We hope that matters will come to a conclusion very soon.

We also heard certain comments being made about the school sports
programme. I don’t know to which school sports programme the hon Masango
was referring, but the one we witness when we go out is a vibrant school
sports culture that is developing. There is integration from different
groups taking place and this bodes well for the future.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr C T FROLICK: The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I just want to pick up
where the hon Cedric Frolick left off regarding school sport. You see, the
difference between the hon Masango, Mr Cedric Frolick and Mr Reid, is that
Mr Masango is talking to Parliament about something he has absolutely no
clue about whereas the others are talking from experience of what is
happening.
Mr Masango was just making a speech whilst they were re-evaluating what is
going on. He only needs to accompany me one of these days and I will
introduce him to these programmes. And, as a matter of fact, he will see
the difference between two and three years ago and what is going on today,
including the perpetuation of those whites-only school competitions.

I intervened in one not so long ago. They do take place. But,
notwithstanding that, the overwhelming majority of our schools, teachers
and communities are involved in the resuscitation of school sport. I want
to inform Mr Reid that I spoke to them directly in March this year. I spoke
to Mr Ledwaba and his colleagues, including Skhumbuzo Oliphant and Bomza
Nkohla - all of them. I instructed them to go to their schools and begin to
do coaching for their school children. I am talking about something that is
happening.

I am talking about Sugar Ray Xulu whom we have now entrusted with the
responsibility of coaching football in KwaZulu-Natal and galvanising his
mates into a team of masters. We were in Giyani to see other masters in
football who are participating in the training of school kids in the art of
playing sport.

I am not theorising here. In the gallery I know there is Mr Xandila Mannie
who was my captain when I played my last game last month. [Applause.] I am
not just talking about sport here in Parliament but I am actually doing
sport with the children and our communities. You should have seen us
coaching the under-15 players at Bethalsdorp – how to pass the ball, Mr
Reid, how to tackle and how to drive and how to organise a ruck. I am not
talking about Mr Masango and his ilk who are just making political speeches
in this House, I am talking about the serious matter of playing sport.

I am not talking about Mr Lee who wears a cricket jersey once in a while.
[Laughter.] He was not at Adcock when I was there last month. He should
have seen what was happening on the sports field. He was not at the Gemsa
grounds when I was there in his own ... [Interjections.] That’s in the
past, I am talking about the present. He is talking about the past. Who
started the Gemsa grounds? I am talking about 2006. I am talking about what
is going on at the Gemsa grounds in respect of sport activism.

Now, this is the difference between us and politicians and professional
parliamentarians who just talk about these things. One common thing amongst
us is that we need money to get these things done, whether it is
incentives, the building of facilities or making kits available. We agree
on that.

We need money to make sure that more of our children who get selected do
travel and benefit from the sweat of our brows. Many of those who are
talking here were playing with the cat when we were sweating for these
benefits to be accessible to our own children. We are still there and we
are still fighting for the accessibility of these benefits to all our
children.

Comrade Gomomo, I was talking to some activists in Uitenhage, and we are
working at reviving boxing in that great town. We are also working at
reviving boxing in this great city of Cape Town so that the spirit of
“Phantom Killer” - remember the people of Kroonstad used to shout “Phantom
Killer” when Rakgajane entered the ring - the spirit of “Kid Dynamite”
Konzi, Qashe Sithole and other great boxers, can be resuscitated. That
spirit is being resuscitated in what Mr Reid was talking about regarding
the tournaments that took place last year until the beginning of this year.

Boxing SA is in the process of appointing a CEO. They have not had one
since 2003. They made interim arrangements by appointing a managing
director who has now been relieved of this post because it is
unconstitutional to have an MD in the first place. And, as custodians of
that parastatal, hon members should note that there is nowhere in the
boxing Act where it is said that boxing must be run by an MD. It is
specific that it must be headed by a CEO and we reported here last year
that, to correct all these administrative lacunas, we will insist that this
new board appoints a CEO. We cannot quarrel with them when they do that.

I would also like to report that I agree with the speakers who say that we
are looking in only one direction – in the direction of the big
federations. We forget that our Basetsana team are doing a wonderful job on
the football field. Those junior girls are doing very well. The same goes
for their elder sisters, Banyana Banyana. They are doing very well.

Our under-23s, Amaglug-glug - if you were watching them over this past week
- are beginning to lay the foundation of how sport should be played in this
country. [Applause.] And, of course, the SA Rugby Union will be sending
their under-21 representative side to France next week. We must watch very
closely how they perform.

But, what I want to say to all these federations is - and I agree with hon
Holomisa – we are not going to make a difference if we simply go for the
coaches in terms of dismissing them and hiring them. I do not think that is
a priority. Whether it is the gymnasts you saw tumbling outside, football,
cricket or athletics, the priority and the first step for all sport is
talent identification. The second step is the preparation of the athlete –
physical preparation, biokinetics and vascular performance. The psyche of
the athlete is important. We must correct their mindset and make them ready
to literally die for their country.

When the coach comes, regarding 2010, that coach must find this ready raw
material. I have raised this with Safa. It does not help to bring in a
coach in 2006 and expect this poor soul to win in 2010 when there is no
material. As a matter of fact, if I were recruited to coach Bafana Bafana,
the first thing I would say is: Show me your preparation plan. I would then
ask: Where did you take them? How fit are they? How fast are they? How
ready are they psychologically?

I hope, Mr Lee, that when you discuss that amending Bill you will not only
endorse it but also strengthen it to deliver those things.
Praatjies maak is niks, maar dis die doen wat belangrik is. [Talking
achieves nothing, it is actions that are very important.]

Get there and have these things done. The “getjank en gehuil” [weeping and
wailing] cannot deliver the goods. It is those who carry the burden that
must do so.

Lastly, I want to say to Mr Lee that no Minister of the World Cup has ever
been appointed by any country in the world over the past 100 years. There
is nothing like that. In Germany, the Minister who accounts to Cabinet
regarding the 2006 World Cup is the Minister of housing - in the same way
as the Minister of Sport and Recreation in this country accounts to
Cabinet. There is no add-on. He is simply deluding himself and misleading
this House.

Mr Franz Beckenbauer is the custodian of the success of the World Cup in
Germany. The Minister is the custodian of the delivery of the government
guarantees. That member is deluding himself and has stated the untruth in
this House, and that is not correct.

I want to thank everybody who has participated. They have not disagreed
with anything we have put forward here. They have added some twists here
and there. I want to agree that success on the sports field is directly
proportional to the resources allocated to sport. Please, support this
budget. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 10 – Public Service and Administration; Vote No 11 -
Public Service Commission; and Vote No 12 - SA Management Development
Institute:

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Madam Chairperson,
hon members of this august House, members of the public in the gallery,
representatives from various interest groups associated with this portfolio
- including five of our hard-working community development workers, kids
from school, our young citizens in the making - whose lives are affected
and their futures shaped by what happens in this portfolio, and everyone
present here, I would like to welcome you all here today.

I would like to start out with a quote:


  We are on course. Steadily, the dark clouds of despair are lifting,
  giving way to our season of hope. Our country which, for centuries, has
  bled from a thousand wounds is progressing towards its healing.


With these words, President Mbeki began his first state of the nation
address in June 1999.

You will recall that earlier this year the President returned to the
imagery of hope. In February he emphasised the centrality of the work of
this portfolio, referring to the legitimate expectation our people have –
that government will discharge its responsibilities effectively and
efficiently while honouring the precepts of Batho Pele.

Time is not on my side. For more detail, I will refer you to the written
Budget Vote document which has been handed out. I prefer to use this time
available to highlight some of the most strategic issues that concern this
portfolio and also to focus on all those institutions and components within
this portfolio.

As you will see from the programme against which we report today, this team
has a very wide remit, and it is constituted by the Department of the
Public Service and Administration, the SA Management Development Institute,
the Centre for Public Service Innovation, the State Information and
Technology Agency, the Public Service Education and Training Authority and
the Public Service Commission - that merely deals with its budget through
this portfolio.

It is a team that has gained tremendous experience and has improved greatly
on its own performance. However, this team is not immune against the same
challenges and capacity constraints that bedevil the work of the Public
Service elsewhere. This fact, once again, became evident during the Public
Service imbizo held at Chris Hani-Baragwanath Hospital in Soweto on Monday.

As much as public service transformation is about ensuring the
implementation of the government’s agenda in the different line functions
such as health, education, public works, policing, even sport and so on,
transformation of the Public Service is also about implementation. The
typical challenges it faces include resource availability, goal unity and
commitment, organisation systems and processes and the complexity of
ensuring joint activity, to mention a few.

We have to ensure that commitments are implemented. For example, we need to
ensure that we can support our specialist clinicians and nurses to be
exemplary professionals rather than obliging them to become managers. We
need to ensure that the talk about technology as a means to support service
delivery improvement does not remain at the level of talk only. We need to
ensure that, indeed, we put in place the means to secure appropriate
training of future generations of public servants.

We need to ensure that if we talk about complex schemes regarding co-
ordination and integration we can, at the very least, get the basics right
by having messages shared and passed on to the relevant people in the day-
to-day settings of public administration.

If we are unsuccessful in translating big talk into real change, our words
will ring hollow. I therefore remind my team, whose business is public
service transformation, that our work is not done once we have prepared a
document for Cabinet decision on a new initiative, no matter how intense a
work process it was to get to that stage. And I don’t want anyone to
misunderstand me. I am not dismissive of the importance of that part of the
process to get to a good decision.

However, in reality, our work only begins at that stage. If Cabinet passes
our decisions we have only received the green light to actually go out and
implement. We have to work at getting the balance right in the allocation
of our efforts between coming up with innovative ideas and nursing them
through to fruition.

We need to develop the stomach to astutely navigate our own initiatives
through difficult terrains of organisational politics or entrenched
interests that go against some of our transformation initiatives. I am
happy today to assure hon members that I am seeing a difference in the
programmes of action that the directors-general have committed to and the
performance agreements we are signing.

We are taking heed of the problem in terms of non-compliance with many of
our initiatives highlighted by the Public Service Commission. You will see
in the printed text a number of initiatives that have been taken to address
this matter. Tool kits and guidelines are developed, introduced to
departments and active support given with their implementation.

The monitoring and evaluation of all our initiatives is being strengthened,
spreading it between a range of organisations, each with their own peculiar
and particular focus, and their own purpose. Where necessary, we are
prepared to relook at the assignment of responsibilities and the issue of
devolution of tasks and functions.

We will not shy away from asking some of the difficult questions and
shaping some of the most controversial debates when we think it makes a lot
of sense, from an organisational structure point of view, to pursue certain
lines which have become politically unpalatable or contested.

We are also putting in place proverbial teeth to deal with situations where
giving the necessary support is simply not enough and non-compliance is a
persistent issue. We will propose a rewriting of legislation and regulation
where we deem it necessary to ensure better implementation.

In this respect, we foresee at least three legislative initiatives in the
foreseeable future. These initiatives will be the amendments to the current
Public Service Act, the introduction of a legislations framework regarding
the creation of a single Public Service or at least regulations regarding
the governance of public entities.

The past year saw issues of public administration - an area many a person
has confessed to thinking is dry and boring, utterly abstract and
incomprehensible - come to life in real drama that would put prime time
television drama to shame. If we were to analyse the headlines as well as
many of the current affairs programmes that have caught the interest of the
public, the principles, policies and abstractions the members of this
portfolio engage with daily, I am sure each one of us in this House would
be able to cite examples in these categories without much difficulty,
though I have referred to issues without naming them.

These were examples that have shown the aberrations in our system, because
we have different systems of public administration for national and
provincial administration on the one hand, and local administration on the
other. We saw examples demonstrating how complex the relationship that is
often referred to as the political administrative interface can become. It
demonstrated the need for a system that allows for due processes, in the
event of such relationships souring.

We had real life drama that demonstrated the dangers of senior public
servants abusing their office and the resources they control in the
interest of pursuing their own agendas. This demonstrated the importance of
ethical behaviour and integrity and the damage that corrupt behaviour does
to the views the population holds regarding all things official.

We have seen examples demonstrating the importance of having guidelines
that standardise decisions and protect those who make them when these
decisions are being questioned. There have been examples which demonstrated
the fact that centralisation or decentralisation is not a matter of
either/or but a very intricate balance of forces and counter-forces.

Some of the examples illustrated the need for proper co-ordination, since
many of the policy issues we deal with involve a range of organisations.
They demonstrated to us the very different effect that right and wrong
appointments can have in terms of how the public experiences bureaucracy.
In our overall system, the experiences demonstrate the importance of
governance regarding the principle of separation of powers but also the
imperfections and the limitations of this doctrine in reality.

If you permit me, I could quite enthusiastically continue to point out all
these public administration day-to-day dramas to demonstrate to you that
the work of this portfolio is anything but boring or abstract.
One of the central areas of this portfolio is the macro-organisation of the
state. A wide range of issues fall under this title and some of them have
assumed great currency and political relevance.

As Minister for the Public Service and Administration, I would be remiss to
remain silent when centralisation and decentralisation or the great
centralisation tendencies – as some refer to it – and the management
culture of the centre of government are discussed by all and sundry in the
way they choose. My position is informed and supported by the prevailing
thinking on organisational theory.

In addition, this portfolio looks at organisational structures that are
desirable in order to effect redistribution of resources as well as
organisational structures that are supportive of strong economic growth in
the developmental context. I have spoken on this issue before, both here in
Parliament and elsewhere. So there is nothing new in me advocating this
position.

The relationship between the centre and the periphery is a carefully
balanced system. In a highly decentralised system such as South Africa’s –
and this is not the word according to Comrade Geraldine but an assessment
by analysts that look comparatively at these issues in such a decentralised
system – it is fundamentally important to have a strong pulling force at
the centre of government which can hold relatively autonomous units
together through imbuing a shared strategic vision and maintaining high-
level oversight.

This is not a pathological desire to dominate and control but to maintain
necessary functional coherence within a bigger system. After all, we opted
to choose the unitary state in our Constitution as the form which we
adopted. We have allowed for an executive President in our Constitution.
This form obviously has some accompanying ways of working and systems that
are typical, the world over.

The desire for a strong strategic and oversight role at the centre should
not be confused with old-style ideas of micromanaging, hierarchy,
inflexibility and command and control modi operandi. Further to providing
coherent strategic direction and undertaking performance management, having
an interventionist capability at the centre is a desire that builds on the
idea that sometimes it is necessary to redeploy some from within the core
to ensure active involvement of the core in the more operational units, or
in public administration speak “the line department and executive
agencies”. Of course, the challenge always remains for the core to add
value to the way in which these operational units perform.

This way of working and organising can clearly be distinguished from the
models that rely on the command and control culture. The organisational
models that resemble our thinking regarding the role of the centre of
government in a modern democratic developmental state resemble some of the
most cutting-edge thinking in organisational design.

In regard to the organisational form required to pursue our redistribution
agenda, I can say the following: it is a well-known fact that
redistributive policy is the most difficult type of policy to implement. It
needs the strongest internal goal and organisational coherence in order to
pull it off and overcome resistance.

Last year, in an address to the National Council of Provinces, I cautioned
members that they should not be uncritical in the debate on
decentralisation. Although much can be said for decentralisation, in terms
of local empowerment and direct participation, we cannot ignore the
fundamental inequities in South African society when we discuss
decentralisation. We cannot allow empowerment to be seen in an entirely
localised fashion. It will result in the perpetuation into infinity of
prevailing inequities.

For the disadvantaged part, localisation without access to the larger
resource base will give rise to ever-growing gaps between the haves and the
have-nots, the empowered and the disempowered, thus effectively bringing
our ideals for transforming this country of ours to nought.

We also cannot ignore the fact that the discussion on decentralisation can
very easily play into an agenda that’s actively seeking to weaken the state
in the interest of a society where the behaviour of the strong and powerful
is unchecked and unregulated, and the citizen and the individual are at the
mercy of market interest.

Regarding this issue, again, I’d want to share the position. The tide has
turned in the international discussion on public administration. The
dominant paradigm is no longer one that argues for minimising state power
in the interest of an all-powerful market. The current thinking says a
strong state is a sine qua non, without which neither the market nor the
third sector nor the community sector can flourish. Minimising state power,
therefore, should be an undesirable option for all. [Applause.]
I invite those whose mental maps are shaped by extreme positions, either
the Stalinist notions of absolutist central control or, on the other end,
liberalism that cannot stomach any state control, to broaden the
perspectives with which they are engaging this discussion. Other
configurations of organisation are possible. And to focus the discussion on
the extreme options, as if other alternatives do not exist, is mischievous
and unhelpful.

Given that I firmly believe in the necessity for a strong state with a
particular configuration of roles and functions between the centre and the
operational structure, we will continue to steer this portfolio in a
direction that will contribute to the building of a kind of state machinery
which is based on ANC policies drawn from the Freedom Charter, which is
necessary at this point in time. [Applause.]

As part of our ongoing efforts to constantly do better, we’ve been looking
at the governance arrangements internal to the Public Service and
Administration portfolio. From April 2005 we brought the Centre for Public
Service Innovation temporarily back into the Department of the Public
Service and Administration. This will enhance accountability and improve co-
ordination.

The SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, is in the process of
reconsidering its institutional form and strategic direction. In order to
assist us with this important task, I’ve constituted a ministerial
committee under the chairpersonship of Prof Vincent Maphai. I think he and
his team are in the gallery somewhere - could you stand up so that everyone
can see you since you are accountable. I am looking forward to receiving
their recommendations within the next month.

During its formative years, the State Information and Technology Agency,
Sita, was beset with crippling start-up challenges. But, in the past couple
of years, the organisation has achieved a remarkable turnaround. And I
would like to express my gratitude for the expert guidance that was
provided by that Sita board under the chairpersonship of Ms Thenjiwe
Chikane, who is sitting in the space allocated to officials on my right
hand side. She took office in August 2005. [Applause.]

Some of the highlights are that, as a result of restructured procurement
services, the average turnaround time on tenders has been reduced from 240
to 75 days. The black economic empowerment component of the Sita-awarded
tenders has increased to over 16%. Revenue has increased by over 12% and
according to unaudited financial statements, the debtors’ days decreased
from over 80 days in 2004 to 54 days in 2005.

The Public Service Education and Training Authority is at last emerging
from a history of troubled performance. During the past year, great strides
were made by the interim board, the Department of the Public Service and
Administration and the Department of Labour in finalising the institutional
arrangements of the PSETA.

What is it that it has done well? It successfully eliminated all 55 non-
compliances reported to the SA Qualifications Authority and the Education
and Training Quality Assurance audit, and SAQA has granted the PSETA full
accreditation until 2008. It approved accreditation for 12 qualifications
and 12 unit standards that support general public administration and a
further four qualification standards are in the pipeline.

The year 2005-06 saw the implementation of eight learnerships for which 3
196 learners were enrolled. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate
those successful learners who are scheduled to graduate at the end of July.

We are in the fortunate position of being able to benefit from powerful and
well-considered feedback from the broader population through government’s
programme of izimbizo, surveys, Public Service Week and other mechanisms.
In addition, we receive regular and insightful feedback from the democratic
oversight institutions created in terms of our Constitution, as well as
from parliamentary structures that are related to this particular
portfolio.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson, the hon
John Gomomo and his committee for the outstanding work they have done in
playing their oversight role. Amongst the oversight bodies, allow me to
thank Prof Stan Sangweni and his team of commissioners – those who are with
us here today - for the diligence with which they fulfil their role.

We are firmly in the era of implementation. Much of the attention of the
executive is focused on capacity constraints. We have already embarked on
interventions to strengthen capacity in the Departments of Housing, Health,
Education, Justice and Constitutional Development, and Trade and Industry.

Our contribution has now also extended to include capacity assessments for
the implementation of Asgisa, through the Joint Initiative for Priority
Skills Acquisition, Jipsa. Asgisa includes a strong emphasis on skills
development. This portfolio is closely involved with Jipsa and Samdi plays
the leading role in the project management initiative sponsored by Old
Mutual South Africa.

The people aspect will always remain the most important factor in the
discussion on capacity; and the Public Service Commission’s view is that
notwithstanding the strides that the Public Service has made in the area of
human resource management, there still remains room for improvement. Areas
such as recruitment and selection, performance management, human resource
planning, the challenge of HIV/Aids and employment equity need more
attention if the Public Service is to maximise human potential, as
envisaged in Chapter 10 of the Constitution. We, accordingly, put the
programme of action for 2006-07 before you that we believe will begin to
address many of these prevailing shortcomings.

We’ve noted with concern the paucity of long-term human resource planning
in the Public Service. Accordingly, a project to improve the quality of
human resource planning at the departmental level in the Public Service
commenced in December 2005. We will request assistance from the Indian
government regarding the development of training and skills transfer
programmes in this area.

Building on the 1999 personnel expenditure review and the 2000 remuneration
policy, the Department of the Public Service and Administration has
commenced with a new Public Service expenditure review that will be
released later this year. A key focus area of this revised remuneration
policy will be the remuneration of professionals and other scarce
occupations.

Medical aid is one of the standard conditions of service employees expect
from an employer of choice. In order to address some of the problems we
have identified in this regard, we’ve proceeded to register a medical
scheme exclusively for government employees. It is popularly known as Gems.
This scheme became fully operational on 1 January 2006. Membership has
grown rapidly and is currently in excess of 8 500 principal members
covering 28 000 dependants.

The new context for Public Service delivery requires a significant
investment in skills development to enhance performance, productivity,
quality and cost-effectiveness. The demands of a complex and changing
economy require higher levels of skills and competence.

Public servants will need skills to support people-centred service delivery
and that’s dependent on working with others, within and outside of
government. In this respect, it is now five years since the launch of our
first Public Service human resource development strategy. A review of this
strategy is planned to inform the development of a second decision for 2007-
10 in the Public Service.

I also need to say that, given the prominence of information in modern
management, we are required to put in place improved information and
feedback systems. While statistical systems overall have been significantly
improved during the past decade, we are particularly proud that we’ve moved
into the realm of information systems that can support policy and
programmatic interventions.

There is much to be said about service delivery. In this year of the 50th
commemoration of the women’s march, I would like to focus quickly on the
situation of women in the Public Service.

Statistics continue to show that, whilst the Public Service has made
progress in achieving numeric targets for employment equity in terms of
race, women still need to be better represented at leadership levels. At
the end of the 2005-06 financial year, the senior management service had 6
727 members, and out of that number, 2 017 were women – that’s 30%.

We now have taken this commitment forward and Cabinet has approved that 50%
gender representation must be achieved at all levels of the senior
management service by 31 March 2009. [Applause.] We need to ensure that we
make that happen.

People with disabilities remain seriously underrepresented. In response to
this, Cabinet approved the 2006-10 job access strategy for the recruitment
and retention of people with disabilities.

In the gallery today we have, and I would like to welcome, Laurentia Mnguni
and Zukeya Mohamed, who are the respective youth Ministers for public
service and administration in Mpumalanga and Gauteng. I would like the two
of them to stand up. I don’t know where they are. Could they stand up to be
seen, please. They have been part of my day-to-day activities and they have
been making comments on the work in this particular portfolio. They are
sitting far back in the House. [Applause.]
There is much to be said about community development workers, learning
networks, the Expanded Public Works Programme learning network, our service
delivery review journal, the national anti-corruption thrust and much else
but time is running out and the clock is ticking.

As I draw this speech to a close, I would like to reflect on the fact that,
in our commitment to the African agenda, this portfolio is also involved in
an extensive international programme. The African Peer Review Mechanism is
one of the key initiatives that the African Union has adopted. As a
country, we are bringing our scheduled review to a close.

We have finalised the country self-assessment report that will be
considered by the national governing council on Friday. We are looking
forward to the APRM country review team coming to South Africa as from 12
July to do the review of our report. There is also much to be said about
the celebration of Africa and United Nations Public Service Day on 23 June,
but, again, time does not permit.

It would be an omission from my side if I did not talk about our work in
the DRC. I want the team from this portfolio that has been working in the
DRC to stand up - the whole team. Some of them are in the gallery and some
are seated on the right-hand side. [Applause.] This is part of a team that
is taking forward our work in ensuring that we assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s transitional government in their work around the
public service census. This project remains a priority in the run-up to
elections set for 30 July this year.

This particular portfolio, as part of South Africa’s commitment, will
assist in ensuring long-term sustainability of the work through the
establishment of a permanent census unit in the DRC Ministry by providing
technical support, and ensuring the implementation of an integrated human
resource management and development system. We are also involved in the
anticorruption and skills development front as well as the capacity-
building programme, where we are assisting them to strengthen their school
of public service. There is much else to be said and the clock is still
ticking.

At this point, I would like to say that the changes that were required to
make the administration an appropriate and suitable mechanism to drive
nonracial democracy and development were, and are, massive. Sometimes, when
reflecting on the period that I have been steering this portfolio, I am
grateful that the enormity of the task and the challenge of the DRC terrain
did not reveal themselves simultaneously. We detect them incrementally.
With perseverance, the task becomes less overwhelming and more manageable.

I believe that the initiatives we have embarked upon will make a huge
difference in bringing about the public administration that this country
requires, if we are to fulfil our hopes. I rededicate myself and my entire
team to working tirelessly to turn all these initiatives into a success
story for South Africa and Africa.

My task is immensely more manageable, thanks to the extremely generous
support that I enjoy from those who are in the personal and professional
domains of my life. I would like to single out my immediate family: Jabu;
my children, Thando, Themba and Solomzi; my mother who, as usual, is
sitting in the gallery; my mother-in-law; and my siblings who think that I
am an incredible burden at times.

When I become enamoured with a project, you listen, encourage and share in
the excitement. When I occasionally get exasperated or tired, you listen,
support and sacrifice your own needs by making less demands on me, and
increasing the share of the responsibility that you carry. When I debate
and argue a point, you stand your ground. To you, there is no moral dilemma
in speaking the truth to power. All of you share my love of and commitment
to South Africa, and you know that the personal sacrifice is just part of
what is demanded in the reconstruction of our country. Words are
insignificant in the gratitude I feel towards all of you.

I want to thank the staff and advisory team that work in close proximity to
me. This category of the team plays a very specific role in the political
and administrative machinery, and they are often underappreciated for the
contribution they make to allow the overall system to function. The
chairperson of the portfolio committee and the committee members maintain
constructive relations with me, as the executive head of the portfolio. I
would like to thank them for their role.

I would also like to thank the serving and acting heads of units within
this portfolio and all members of the respective teams – Richard Levin,
Stephen Hendricks, Odette Ramsingh, Mavuso Msimang and various others. The
nation is looking to to proceed rapidly and diligently with your work. Our
era of hope must translate into tangible progress and development for our
people, lest hope runs out and pessimism sets in. So I won’t give any slack
and I won’t demand any less. South Africans out there demand the best and
are entitled to the best. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P J GOMOMO: Chairperson, hon Minister for the Public Service and
Administration, other Ministers who are present here, members of
Parliament, representatives of organised labour and the public gallery,
ladies and gentlemen, directors-general, Prof Sangweni and all
commissioners, I rise to support the Budget Vote of the Department of the
Public Service and Administration, the State Information and Technology
Agency, the Public Service Commission and the SA Management Development
Institute.

I further welcome the debate on this Budget Vote, for it is this debate
that gives us an opportunity to share with this august House and the public
how our Public Service performs against the expectations of the masses of
our people and the objective mandate of our constitutional democracy.

There is no doubt that this country is much better off than it was before.
There is no doubt that the future holds much promise for this country, her
provinces and her people, and there should be no doubt in our minds that
all this is because of the once-hated liberation movement, and now the
ruling political party of the Republic of South Africa, the ANC.

It is because of this state of affairs that we proclaim without the
slightest doubt that today is better than yesterday, and tomorrow will be
far better than today.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that would promote and maintain a high standard of
professional ethics. We are proud today to realise that we have since
rebuilt our Public Service from the ashes of apartheid decay into one that
has a culture of morality and ethical conduct, and that we have put
policies in place to manage and guide the conduct of our officials to be
accountable in their call of duty.

For the first time in the history of this country we have officials who are
required by policy and legislation to declare their interests for public
scrutiny. For the first time in the history of this country we have an
instrument for fighting corruption in the Public Service, in terms of which
the actions of officials are regulated to ensure compliance with the
ethical requirements dictated by the order of the day.

Through these instruments to fight corruption we are succeeding to sustain
a culture of ethical conduct, because more often than not we manage to
catch the culprits, and we will continue to do that, despite the fact that
some opportunists such as the media and the so-called neutral research
formations would, from time to time, scavenge our endeavours and claim the
victory of being the source of exposing acts of corruption in the country.

We want to state that there should be no doubt in our minds that all these
things are at the level where they are because of the once-hated liberation
movement, and now the ruling political party of a liberated South Africa,
the ANC.

Of course, in that foundation that we laid, we knew that a public
administration in a democracy is a public administration firmly rooted in
delivery and subjected to public accountability through the process of
parliamentary oversight, in a clear separation of powers between
Parliament, the executive and the judiciary.

Accordingly, the Portfolio Committee on the Public Service and
Administration held a strategic planning session at the beginning of this
calendar year, where we took a decision to entrench and defend the
centrality of the committee in accelerating transformation and service
delivery in the second decade of democracy, while observing the functioning
of other portfolio committees in the line devolution of responsibilities
according to sectors.

In doing so, we will rise above mere simplistic complacency and turf silos,
and we will insist on compliance with the ethical standards that we set
ourselves. It is for that reason that we will soon dig deep into the recent
report of the Auditor-General that found that, among other things, there
are some public servants who did not acquit themselves very well through
nondisclosure of interests and moonlighting.

We are going to engage with that report, and get to the bottom of the
matter, and we will do so because that is exactly what Parliament has to
do, to work very hard to support our chapter 9 institutions, by ensuring
that the reports they submit to Parliament find their way to implementation
and execution.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that would promote efficient, economic and effective use of
resources. Of course, Chairperson, it is an untenable economic reality
that, whereas the needs of the people are not limited, the means through
which to address those needs are perishable and limited. We can therefore
not afford to be wasteful, and this is what marks a difference between our
new dispensation and the extravagant and wasteful apartheid system, which
would squander the limited resources to sustain the evil system.

They would build so-called administrative headquarters to appease their
puppets and fool them into believing that they were being serviced. They
would duplicate costly service delivery and sporting facilities, only
divided through a thin line of ethnicity, tribalism and racialism.

Some of these poorly planned developments of apartheid convenience are
becoming white elephants for us today, as we may not find any justification
for their continued existence but we also do not want to be seen to be on a
drive to simply destroy them.

Today we are here to do an introspection of our performance against this
objective of being efficient, economic and effective, and it comes out
clearly that the budget process enshrined in our policies and legislation
is meant to achieve this, as, through this process, we have departments
communicating their service delivery plans, and committing themselves to
spending the money on those plans, either over a fixed-year plan or over
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period.

As can be seen even in the current budget we are debating today, we have
different programmes on which the commitment of resources is based. The
same departments have a duty to come back to this Parliament six months
after each financial year, through their annual reports, to account as to
whether they spent the money efficiently, economically and effectively
against tangible service delivery programmes, as contained in their
strategic plans and budgets. We have no hesitation in stating that there is
general compliance with this accountability requirement, but we have noted
that there is room for improvement.

As a portfolio committee, and in line with our resolution to put ourselves
at the centre of insisting that our public administration complies with the
foundation we laid, we are going to call on departments to appear before us
and account for qualified audit reports on their annual reports, and we
have already scheduled the first such appearances, which include the
following departments: Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Department
of Housing, Department of Health, Department of Social Development, and
Department of Transport. Be ready, we want to see you.

Some will wonder why it should be so important to insist that there should
be underspending against budgets, because there are those individuals who
adhere to the school of thought that one should not be worried about that,
and should only be worried if there is overexpenditure. That is not how we
do things in this current dispensation. We say that underspending against a
budget is just as bad as overspending, and we call for accountability in
both instances.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that must be development-oriented. It is against this
commitment that today we see a public administration with a corporate
culture and with programmes clearly meant to fast-track development and to
eradicate poverty in order to ensure a better life for all.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that must provide services impartially, fairly, equitably
and without bias. We did so because of the understanding that a public
administration of a democratic South Africa should be a public
administration for the people.

In order to achieve this objective, we have introduced a service delivery
culture and standards, commonly known as Batho Pele, which is rooted in the
desire to put people first in the service delivery provision by our public
administration.

As we debate this Budget Vote today, we are proud to realise that this
culture of putting people first is an instrument that has become commonly
known in our system of public administration, and is helping to drive the
process of making sure that we have an accountable administration based on
the expectations of the people.

It is also through this development that we have taken democracy to the
service delivery points and empowered the people to take charge of their
own destiny in terms of the extent to which they want to be receivers of
services rendered by the state.

Of course, it may sound unfair if I did not mention the demonstrations we
have seen in recent times, demanding the delivery of services, that caused
some in this House to jump to the conclusion that such demonstrations
signalled a general dissatisfaction with our record of service delivery,
and they began counting their chickens before they were hatched to
pronounce themselves victors, only to be shocked at the end when the people
turned out in large numbers to vote for the ANC. Even where spoilers got
involved and the situation got out of hand, we still maintain that such
acts are common manifestations of democracy.

But I would be failing in my duty if I did not reflect on the failure of
some public servants to comply with the Batho Pele principles. There are
those people who will sing Batho Pele like a strange song for convenience,
while they do the opposite of the provisions of the Batho Pele principles,
particularly those public servants that entered our system through the
sunset clauses of the Codesa negotiations and those inherited from the
previous administrations of the apartheid structures.

Some of these people are just square pegs in round holes. They do not match
the challenges. What is frustrating is to note that in the majority of
cases these individuals are doing these things deliberately. They resist
change, yet they remain in their positions. We must make it clear that they
will not be allowed to obstruct us forever and that their days in our
administration are actually numbered. [Applause.] It is high time that they
begin to pack their bags and in fact leave before we push them out.
[Interjections.]

It would be wrong of me only to point a finger at those public servants we
inherited and turn a blind eye to some rotten apples from the post-
apartheid era of recruitment. The people talk to us as we do constituency
work and tell us that there are some new recruits who will subordinate the
Batho Pele principles to what they believe to be their contribution in the
liberation struggle.

It is time we made it clear that we will stop at nothing to insist on
compliance with the Batho Pele principles, and that we will give no quarter
to detractors who are hell-bent on seeing us compromised in our drive for a
clean administration. People must simply comply, comply and comply, or they
must go.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that must respond to the people’s needs and that must
encourage the people to participate in decision-making, because we knew
that the public administration of a democratic South Africa would be a
public administration for the people and by the people.

Through izimbizo, citizens forums and the integrated development planning
processes, the people are taken on board in terms of joining their
government to determine their own destinies and service delivery
priorities.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that must be accountable. Within our system of public
administration there is a Public Service which, among other things, must be
loyal in the execution of the lawful policies of the government. Our Public
Service is the delivery arm which at all times executes that mandate as
determined.

The effectiveness of any public service is seen through the actions of
individual public servants deployed to the various departments of our
government.

The ten-year review of our public administration suggests that we have gone
far as a government in terms of policy-making and that our challenge is to
ensure the implementation of those policies. We, as Parliament, should
therefore intensify our oversight role to ensure that this implementation
takes place as expected.

An important component of our public administration is the fact that we
created an independent Public Service Commission so that we may have
effective professional and technical oversight to monitor the
implementation of policies, to ensure that there is effective service
delivery for improving the lives of the people.

A quick glance at the operation of this important organ of the public
administration family suggests that we need to do an assessment of how
independent this independent Public Service Commission is and whether it is
not somehow psychologically compromised in terms of budgetary business and
the fact that it does not have enforcing powers in terms of its oversight.

The portfolio committee has resolved to lead a discussion on this matter
and we believe that we will benefit from the experience, as will all those
concerned in this matter.

As we laid the foundation, we committed ourselves to a public
administration that must foster transparency. I think we will all agree
here that this is one area where we are doing well. Gone are the days when
things would be swept under the carpet and only the bright side of things
was exposed.

The people are entitled to information about issues of governance. They
know the budgets and the plans on which such budgets are based. In terms of
the Access to Information Act, the people are even entitled to information
held by the state under conditions contained in the said piece of
legislation.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, your time has
expired.

Mr P J GOMOMO: I thank you, Chairperson. I must thank all the committee
members, the portfolio committees, and the Whip who is really on his toes
trying to ensure that the committee is doing the correct thing. I thank
you, Minister, for all the good work that you are doing for us. Thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mnr K J MINNIE: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, kollegas, gaste, ons het tot
dusver geluister na ŉ klomp bekende retoriek in die rigting van
sentralisasie. Eerstens is daar my gunsteling onderwerp vandag van die
afgelope twee jaar, naamlik die vestiging van ŉ enkele Staatsdiens.

Die afgelope vier of vyf jaar het die ANC baie oor ŉ voorgestelde enkele
Staatsdiens te sê gehad. In wese, dames en here, wil die Departement van
Staatsdiens en Administrasie ŉ uniforme Staatsdiens onder sy eie gesag
skep. Die departement sal alle aanstellings in alle munisipaliteite, sowel
as in alle provinsiale en nasionale staatsdepartemente, beheer. Die
departement sal ook die bevoegdheid hê om staatsdiensamptenare vertikaal te
ontplooi, met ander woorde van een regeringsfeer na ŉ ander, asook
horisontaal, met ander woorde van een munisipaliteit na ŉ ander.

Die Minister sal dan die mag hê om byvoorbeeld – en luister mooi – ŉ DA-
beheerde stad soos Kaapstad lam te lê, deur amptenare hot en haar te
verplaas en ANC-amptenare strategies te plaas om weer die politieke mag te
bekom. Die Minister moet vir ons sê of dit die bedoeling is dat artikel 57-
aanstellings ingevolge die Wet op Munisipale Stelsels ook hierdeur geraak
sal word.

Die President en die Minister is op rekord dat daar aan die einde van die
jaar wetgewing ter tafel gelê gaan word om aan ŉ enkele Staatsdiens beslag
te gee. Dit blyk uit beplanning dat daar teen die middel van die jaar
tegniese wysigings aan die Staatsdienswet aangebring gaan word, wat na my
mening die weg gaan voorberei vir wetgewing oor ŉ enkele Staatsdiens. Dit
is onverstaanbaar hoe die Minister en die departement dit gaan regkry om
oorkoepelende wetgewing daar te stel wat beheer gaan uitoefen oor
staatsdiens-, provinsiale- en plaaslike owerheidswetgewing.

Miskien moet die Minister vandag vir ons by dié geleentheid verduidelik hoe
die proses gaan verloop en watter wet oor watter ander wet gaan baasspeel.
Die DA is daarvan oortuig dat ŉ enkele Staatsdiens ŉ onhanteerbare mega-
burokrasie sal skep en ŉ verdere daling in personeel se moraal sal
meebring. Albei dié gevolge sal die vermoë om dienste te lewer ŉ gevoelige
slag toedien.

Tweedens, agb Voorsitter, kan ek nie nalaat om die Minister geluk te wens
met haar twyfelagtige prestasie om in beheer te wees van die departement
met die grootste besteding op die jaarlikse begrotingspos-partytjie nie.
Minister, R489 681 mag miskien nie vir u baie geld wees nie, maar dit is
baie geld vir die mense daarbuite wat aan swak dienslewering blootgestel
is. Ons sien met belangstelling uit na die Minister se verduideliking
waaraan sy dié enorme bedrag verlede jaar bestee het. Ek vertrou dat
vanjaar se “gala dinner” baie meer bekostigbaar sal wees. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr K J MINNIE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, colleagues, guests, up to
now we have listened to a lot of well-known rhetoric about centralisation.
Firstly, today there is my favourite subject of the past two years, namely
the establishment of a single Public Service.

Over the past four or five years the ANC has had a lot to say about a
proposed single Public Service. Essentially, ladies and gentlemen, the
Department of the Public Service and Administration wants to create a
uniform Public Service under its own authority. The department will control
all appointments in all municipalities, as well as in all provincial and
national state departments. The department will also have the power to
deploy public servants vertically, in other words from one sphere of
government to another, as well as horizontally, in other words from one
municipality to another.

The Minister will then have the power, for example – and listen closely now
– to paralyse a DA-controlled city such as Cape Town, by transferring
officials left and right and placing ANC officials strategically in order
to regain political power. The Minister must tell us whether it is the
intention that section 57 appointments in terms of the Municipal Systems
Act will also be affected by this.

The President and the Minister are on record as having said that
legislation will be tabled by the end of the year to establish a single
Public Service. Planning indicates that technical amendments will be made
to the Public Service Act by the middle of the year, which in my opinion
will pave the way for legislation regarding a single Public Service. I
cannot understand how the Minister and the department are going to succeed
in drafting all-encompassing legislation that is going to exercise control
over Public Service, provincial and local authority legislation.

Perhaps the Minister should explain to us on this occasion today how the
process will be followed and what Act is going to take precedence over what
other Act. The DA is convinced that a single Public Service will create an
unmanageable mega-bureaucracy and will result in a further lowering of
staff morale. Both these consequences will have a detrimental effect on the
ability to deliver services.

Secondly, hon Chairperson, I cannot neglect to congratulate the Minister on
her dubious achievement of being in control of the department with the
highest spending on the annual Budget Vote party. Minister, R489 681 may
not seem like a lot of money to you, but it is a lot of money for the
people out there who are exposed to poor service delivery. We look forward
with interest to the Minister’s explanation as to what this enormous amount
was spent on last year. I trust that this year’s “gala dinner” will be a
lot more affordable.]

This year the Minister has shown precious little leadership in tackling her
department’s failure to ensure service delivery. During its oversight
visits at the end of last year, the portfolio committee found the Public
Service to be in a shocking state.

Verder, agb Voorsitter, hoef ons nie vandag met mekaar te twis oor Suid-
Afrika se groot gebrek en tekort aan mense met die nodige vaardighede nie.
Dit is ŉ gegewe, dit is ŉ feit wat oral kommer wek. Dit is ŉ realiteit wat
ons vinnig inhaal. Dit is ŉ ernstige saak wat onmiddellik toegespitste
aandag nodig het. Menige positiewe beleidsrigtings, goed bedoelde
inisiatiewe en uitvoerbare programme is besig om ineen te stort weens die
tekort aan goed opgeleide mense.

ŉ Driejaar-studie deur die RGN het laat in 2003 aan die lig gebring dat
Suid-Afrika ŉ kritiese tekort aan spesifieke tegniese vaardighede gaan hê.
Tussen 1986 en 1998 was daar reeds ŉ afname van 13 249 vakleerlinge wat per
jaar in die totale arbeidsmark opgelei is. Op ŉ vraag aan die Minister of
die Staatsdiens sedert Januarie 2000 verklein of vergroot is, was haar
antwoord soos volg: (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Furthermore, hon Chairperson, we do not have to argue with each other
today about South Africa’s great lack and shortage of people with the
necessary skills. It is a given fact, a cause for concern everywhere. It is
a reality that is rapidly catching up with us. It is a serious matter which
needs immediate focused attention. Many positive policies, well-intended
initiatives and feasible programmes are failing because of the shortage of
well-trained people.

A three-year study by the HSRC indicated late in 2003 that South Africa was
going to have a critical shortage of specific technical skills. Between
1986 and 1998 there was already a decrease of 13 249 apprentices who were
trained in the total labour market annually. When the Minister was asked
whether the Public Service had become smaller or larger since January 2000,
her reply was as follows:]

The size of the Public Service is determined by the service delivery
imperatives and priorities of government, in order to fulfil the
constitutional requirements of a developmental Public Service. The number
of employees is currently larger than in January 2000.
In Desember 2000 was daar 1,041 miljoen staatsamptenare en in Desember 2005
was daar 1,077 miljoen staatsamptenare. Agb lede, ŉ vermeerdering van 34
232 siele. Die realiteit is ŉ vergrote Staatsdiens met minder opgeleide
mense en swakker dienslewering by die dag.

Op ŉ parlementêre vraag oor hoeveel amptenare pakkette of vervroegde
aftrede sedert 2001 geneem het, het die Minister soos volg geantwoord:
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[In December 2000 there were 1,041 million public servants and in December
2005 there were 1,077 million public servants. Hon members, that is an
increase of 34 232 people. In reality there is a larger Public Service with
fewer trained people and service delivery that is worsening by the day.

In response to a parliamentary question on how many officials had taken
severance packages or early retirement since 2001, the Minister replied as
follows:]

Since 1 January 2000 no employer-initiated severance packages were granted
to employees in the Public Service. A total of 9 295 employees, however,
opted for employee-initiated severance packages. A total of 68 121
employees retired from the Public Service during this period, which
includes employees who took early retirement.

An HON MEMBER: Why?

Mnr K J MINNIE: Die vraag ontstaan: hoeveel van die mense wat vroeg
afgetree het, was goed opgeleide en vaardige mense? Dít is deel van ons
probleem. Ons sit hier met ŉ veelkoppige draak wie se bedreiging van die
hoogste, professionele vlak tot op die werkersvlak sigbaar is en ervaar
word. Dit geld vanaf patoloë tot vragmotorbestuurders.

Op die boonste vlak is die mense fisies net nie meer daar nie. Dit is onder
andere die gevolg van die Regering se beleid van regstellende optrede wat
daartoe gelei het dat baie kundiges eenvoudig landuit is. Op die onderste
vlak is die mense fisies teenwoordig, maar dit is mense sonder vaardighede.


Die ergste is dat die kundigheid wat daar nog is, só uitgestoot word, dat
hulle later ook die hasepad kies. Swak dienslewering op alle vlakke waaroor
klagtes by die dag meer word, kan basies toegeskryf word aan die gebrek aan
kundiges.

Op ŉ vraag aan die President oor die Regering se standpunt oor of swart
kandidate bo bruines aangestel moet word, was die President se antwoord dat
die Regering eerder gelyke behandeling voorstaan. En ons stem daarmee saam.

In Beeld se hoofberig van 22 Mei 2006 skryf die redakteur dat gelyke
behandeling ŉ welkome stap in die regte rigting van nie-rassigheid is. Nou
moet die President nog net die ander groepe in die land – onder meer die
wittes, Indiërs en Sjinese – ook gelykstel. Indien dit gebeur, sal daar
reeds ŉ groot sprong na die oplossing vir die gebrek aan kundigheid gegee
word. Die resultaat van alles wat ek nou gesê het, is dat die onderste en
armste deel van die bevolking die swaarste ly, weens swak dienslewering.

AGB LEDE: Hoor, hoor!

Mnr K J MINNIE: Korrupsie is die een aspek van die samelewing wat saam met
swak dienslewering en ŉ gebrek aan kundigheid hierdie land kan lamlê. Die
hoof van die Skerpioene het onlangs aan die Portefeuljekomitee oor Justisie
bevestig dat korrupsie tans die tweede grootste misdaad in die land is. As
voorsitter van die anti-korrupsieforum, agb Minister, het u ŉ
verantwoordelikheid om die totale samelewing te betrek en nie net sekeres
nie.

Die DA het ŉ bydrae om te lewer en wil dit graag lewer, soos reeds
uiteengesit in ŉ skrywe van die voorsitter van die kommissie. Die Minister
het verder na al die jare nog nie daarin geslaag om beheer te neem oor die
verklaring van amptenare se belange nie. Die agb voorsitter van die
portefeuljekomitee het netnou daarna verwys. Die gesloer hiermee moet nou
eindig en dit is tyd dat dit na die tafel gebring word.

Dames en here, ter afsluiting, ŉ Staatsdiens waar daar ŉ gebrek aan etiek
en waardes, toewyding, stiptheid, dissipline, getrouheid, eerlikheid en
oorgawe vir jou roeping is, is gedoem. Ek dank u. [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mnr K J MINNIE: The question arises: how many of the people who took early
retirement were well-trained and skilled people? That is part of our
problem. We are dealing here with a multi-headed dragon whose threat is
visible and is being experienced from the highest, professional level to
the workers’ level. This applies to workers as divergent as pathologists
and truck drivers.

At the highest level the people are no longer there physically. This is,
inter alia, the result of the government’s policy of affirmative action
which caused many experts simply to leave the country. At the lowest level
the people are present physically, but these are people without skills.

Worst of all the experts who still exist are being pushed out to such an
extent that they eventually also flee the country. Poor service delivery at
all levels, which is causing more complaints by the day, can basically be
ascribed to the lack of experts.

In reply to a question to the President regarding the government’s
standpoint as to whether black candidates should be appointed in preference
to coloureds, the President said that the government was rather in favour
of equal treatment. And we agree with that.

In the leading article in Beeld on 22 May 2006 the editor states that equal
treatment is a welcome step in the right direction towards nonracism. Now
all the President still has to do is to equalise the other groups in the
country – inter alia the whites, Indians and Chinese. If that happens,
great strides will have to be taken in the direction of a solution to the
lack of skills. The result of everything that I have just said is that the
lowest and poorest part of the population is suffering the most, because of
poor service delivery.
HON MEMBERS: Hear, hear!

Mr K J MINNIE: Corruption is the one aspect of society, together with poor
service delivery and a lack of skills, which can paralyse this country. The
chief of the Scorpions recently confirmed to the Portfolio Committee on
Justice that corruption is at present the second-biggest crime in the
country. As chairperson of the anti-corruption forum, hon Minister, you
have a responsibility to involve society as a whole and not only certain
people.

The DA has a contribution to make and would like to make it, as was set out
in a letter from the chairperson of the commission. Furthermore, after all
these years the Minister has still not succeeded in taking control of the
declaration of officials’ interests. The hon chairperson of the portfolio
committee referred to this a while ago. This procrastination must now come
to an end and it is time this matter is brought to the table.

Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, a Public Service lacking in ethics and
values, dedication, punctuality, discipline, loyalty, honesty and
commitment to one’s vocation is doomed. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Prof E S CHANG: Chairperson, Minister, chairperson of the committee, hon
members, the IFP would like to acknowledge the importance of this debate,
which focuses on four important arms of the government: the Department of
the Public Service and Administration, the SA Management Development
Institute, the State Information and Technology Agency and the Public
Service Commission, that are primarily responsible for service delivery.

My colleague Usha Roopnarain was supposed to present this speech. She is
away on maternity leave. The following is essentially her thoughts on the
debate.

Despite the successes of the Department of the Public Service and
Administration, enormous challenges remain, the main one being the exodus
of skilled workers from much-needed professions. My speech is premised on
the loss of scarce skills. In KwaZulu-Natal there are more than 26 000
vacancies for medical specialists and emergency workers.

Some scholars feel that the brain drain may fuel the vicious cycle of
underdevelopment and cost poor countries the very people who are able to
resist corruption and bad governance. Devesh Kapur and John McHale argue in
their book Give Us Your Best and Brightest that the loss of institution
builders, hospital managers, university department heads and political
reformers could trap countries in poverty.

Developing a coherent and targeted strategy to meet skills gaps is tied to
the fact that South Africa is a continental leader in the provision of high-
quality tertiary education relevant to the demands of a rapidly
globalising, competitive, information-driven world. These skills are
readily transferable and in high demand in industrialised countries.

South Africa is the number one host country for international students in
Africa and compares favourably with the rest of the world. But South Africa
has not developed a coherent policy to welcome international students as
potential job-seekers, as other countries are doing. South Africa must be
part of the race to attract the best brains.

In developing the ability to attract skills quickly, South Africa needs to
take into consideration that industrialised countries are also experiencing
a brain drain. What can South Africa do?

In managing the need to import skills, the task team put together by the
Deputy President will need to develop a coherent human-resource database
quantifying specialist skills required in government sectors and business.
The task team will need to map out a comprehensive recruitment strategy to
compete globally for people with high-level skills.

The recruitment drive must go beyond individual Ministers’ initiatives in
seeking to identify skills needs in their particular departments. The
recruitment strategy should take into account the fact that South Africa
can attract skilled people in the health care profession precisely because
of experiences that only the South African environment can provide. The
drive should tap into the skills pool that exists in other countries, whose
citizens wish to make South Africa their home.

Press reports of late show the South African government is on a “shopping
spree” for skilled people, as one journalist put it. There has to be a
“skills revolution”, as proclaimed by the Deputy President recently.
Professional skills are desperately needed as the country “moves into
higher economic gear”, she declared.

The IFP believes that the skills shortage needs to be dealt with as a top
government priority. There are far too many graduates that are unemployed.
There is too much dependency on foreign skills, dear hon Minister. The
question I ask is: What about retraining our own people? Here, the SA
Management Development Institute can move away from the same curriculum and
begin training where skills are needed. Government has to be serious about
this and put people first. The unemployment figures are soaring; and
HIV/Aids is decimating our most productive force.

In one advertisement, a Saudi Arabian food company advertised for a series
of highly specialised jobs in which the ad declared unambiguously, “highly
competitive financial packages will be tailored to attract the best talent
available”. It is significant that these international companies now
advertise aggressively in South African newspapers.

One weekly employment supplement consisted of 40 pages packed with
government, municipal and parastatal jobs. Week after week, newspapers
carry more and more job ads, and week after week they are not filled.
Looking at the qualifications needed to meet the requirements of most of
the posts, it’s no wonder. Given the paucity of skills within South
Africa’s black sector, the government will continue its jobs merry-go-round
until the whole public sector implodes upon itself.

It is no wonder that the cream of our people are being poached overseas.
And why not? Why bother to apply when your chances of getting the job are
virtually nil?

During our oversight visit to KwaZulu-Natal hospitals, namely the Northdale
Hospital and Grey’s Hospital, we found that the ratio of doctor to patient
is one to 300. How does one define quality of service? How much time is
spent on interacting with the actual patient? Very little.

South Africa’s IT performance is slipping. The World Economic Forum Global
Information Technology Report for 2005-06 ranked South Africa 90th on a
list of 115 countries with regard to the availability of scientists and
engineers. There is a huge shortage of air traffic controllers in South
Africa. They are being lured overseas, and not enough people are undergoing
training to replace them, according to the trade union Solidarity. The
biggest psychiatric hospital in the country has only one psychiatrist and
one psychologist on its staff. There is also a shortage of between 1 200
and 2 000 engineers in South Africa at present.
What is to be done? The IFP believes that it is time for government to
relook at the exodus of skills, to better incentivise jobs and to halve
unemployment. In terms of the PSC, the commission has produced some
excellent reports. The calibre of research is of an exemplary quality, but
very often they fall short of carrying out the recommendations. They need
to be more accountable. This is where our portfolio committee can come in.

Here, I would like to thank our chairperson, the hon John Gomomo, and all
the members of this portfolio committee who have managed to steer the ship
through some turbulent water. The IFP supports the budget. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Chairperson, hon Minister and other Ministers present,
hon members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, the responsibility
of the SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, is capacity-building, as
a specialised part of the present wider emphasis on building the capability
of the state.

Samdi’s programme makes a vital contribution to a strong, efficient and
effective Public Service, which can meet the professional development needs
of public servants. However, its role must not be underestimated; it plays
a vital role. It relates to the ANC’s emphasis on ensuring an appropriately
capacitated and well-skilled public servant who delivers services to the
people. Such a public servant places people first, as emphasised in the
principles of Batho Pele.

It is important to reflect on what is meant by “appropriately capacitated
public servants”. Samdi has a very important role regarding what this
means. The Department of Public Service and Administration and the Public
Service Commission have done work on this topic. However, it is important
for Samdi to take it further.

In this regard, the difficulties noted in the Public Service report of 2006
concerning the implementation of the Promotion of Administrative Justice
Act must be taken account of. It is not only in courts but also in many
Public Service institutions, especially at local government level, that the
administration of justice has to take place.

We must be truthful about the history on which the present is built. It is
an absolute truth that people, especially in remote areas, were not
recognised by the apartheid bureaucracy. The result is that, under
apartheid, the Public Service and Administration system did not provide
basic services such as clean running water, proper sanitation, safe and
secure social service paypoints, properly serviced roads, schools, clinics
and hospitals for the masses of poor black people in rural areas.
[Applause.]

Because the ANC has a contract with the people, and because it is a
responsible and accountable government of the people, it aims to put in
place a different bureaucracy; different from the apartheid bureaucracy
where public servants were rubberstamping separate and unequal service
delivery.

This developmental state needs a bureaucracy in which public servants
administer services on a much more equal basis than ever before. In order
to do so, we require a public servant who is committed to equalising
service delivery through every Act of the Public Service and
Administration, whether it is in a court of justice, a rural clinic or a
primary school.

As mentioned earlier by other speakers, the budget is a developmental tool.
It is a tool through which we believe that the Public Service and
Administration system must be enabled to roll out programmes that will
improve the lives of the people.

In this regard, we note the 23,1% increase from the 2002-03 to 2004-05
financial years to strengthen Public Service along the principles of Batho
Pele. This allocation is certainly welcome as it is in line with the aim of
the liberation movement to ensure a government that is focused on the needs
of the people.

As our President mentioned in the state of the nation address earlier this
year, this is a period of hope during which the ANC-led government is
stressing the need to accelerate change. It stresses the need to accelerate
delivery among all sections of the population. It stresses the need to
unify and integrate service delivery across the three spheres of
government.

To do so, we need a management development institute that ensures the
development of courses that capacitate public servants to deliver services
that are people-centred. These courses would ensure that public servants
are more committed to their tasks and that they would carry out their
duties proudly to improve the lives of the people while continuing to
deepen their knowledge and skills base.

This training of public servants should be thought of as the backbone of
the developmental state. It is a developmental attitude that would ensure
the acceleration of service delivery to the people in all areas, more
especially in the rural areas where so many people need assistance to live
better.

The 2004-05 financial year has been characterised by some significant
milestones towards improving our public servants by Samdi. It saw the
introduction of various internal structures and systems to improve Samdi’s
operations and service delivery. These include, among others, firstly, a
redesigned quality development and assurance system; secondly, a
streamlined monitoring and evaluation function through an electronic
statistics system; and thirdly, a blueprint to establish Samdi’s e-learning
capacity.

A further noteworthy achievement has been the successful implementation of
Samdi’s new training model, which involves strategic partnerships with key
departments to strengthen their capacity to deliver on their core
functions.

Samdi continues to develop quality standards, guidelines and norms for
courses aimed at capacitating public servants. These courses will ensure
the development of key skills that public servants in all three spheres of
government need to deepen service delivery.

Samdi is also working towards ensuring that all curricula will meet the
National Qualifications Framework principles. Samdi is now able to make
sure that its curricula can meet the needs of individual departments and
government structures by including case studies and incorporating learning-
by-doing research processes so that public servants apply what they learn
in their areas of service delivery.

Samdi’s expenditure trend over the 2005-06 financial year is testimony to
the increased demand for its training programmes. Expenditure increased
marginally at an average annual rate of 5,8% from R30,7 million in 2002-03
to R34,4 million in 2004-05. It is expected to increase over the Medium-
Term Expenditure Framework period to reach R57 million by 2008-09, since it
was decided that the trading account should become more self-sustainable.

In researching some of the skills needs in Public Service institutions in
all spheres of government, the niche areas of project and financial
management have been found to be crucial. It is believed that training in
these areas would greatly assist in accelerating service delivery to the
people. In recognition of this, it must be noted that the National
Treasury’s Vote for this financial year has included funds for capacity-
building programmes in project and financial management for public
servants.

In conclusion, allow me to state a fact. The ANC has won every single
national and local government election in this country. That translates
into a consistent mandate from the masses, that we are doing some things
right. It also means that we are being entrusted with the duty to transform
this country and its institutions in the best ways possible to accelerate
and deepen transformation.

The SA Management Development Institute is one such institution. As the ANC
we will continue, through our deliberations, to assist the institute by
arranging and restructuring it to play a key role in capacitating public
servants.

Before concluding, allow me to raise just two issues that may require
attention. The first one relates to Samdi’s development of appropriate
curricula for public servants through a learning-by-doing process. It may
have to investigate induction programmes through which new public servants
who enter the service are able to learn in more practical ways how to
discharge their duties the Batho Pele way.

Secondly, Samdi, together with the Department of the Public Service and
Administration and the Public Service Commission, may also have to
investigate the unintended consequences of decentralisation of the Public
Service.

We have the Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act, but there are things
happening that are pulling us apart at key places where we should do
better.

Finally, as the ANC, we support the budget allocations to Samdi as part of
the recognition that it plays a crucial developmental and training role in
the Public Service of this developmental state. However, we look forward to
keeping an eye on how these are used to improve the lives of our people
through appropriately developed courses for our public servants. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mnr H B CUPIDO: Voorsitter, agb Minister, ek kan nie noodwendig met alles
wat u, Minister, vandag hier gesê het saamstem nie, maar ek wil u
komplimenteer met die wyse waarop u, u begroting hier vir ons kom voordra
het.

Net gister het ons van hierdie podium moes luister na die haglike toestand
van die Departement van Binnelandse Sake. Dit wil vir die ACDP voorkom dat,
na aanleiding van die onlangse verslag van die staatsdienskommissie, daar
ook rooiligte vir die staatsdiens self flikker. Ons is seker dat die agb
Minister en haar departement alles in hul vermoë doen om die uitdagings wat
die menslike element in die staatsdiens bied te oorkom.

As oud-staatsamptenaar, wel nou baie jare gelede, is dit my ondervinding
dat amptenary op vele vlakke nie meer die trots van dienslewering aan die
publiek dra nie. Op sekere gebiede is daar pragtige en bewonderenswaardige
vordering gemaak waarvoor waardering uitspreek moet word. Daar is egter
kommer dat korrupsie - en uself het daarna verwys, agb Minister - en ander
wanpraktyke wat nie voldoende aangespreek word nie, en dat “whistle-
blowers” veral, nie genoeg beskerming ontvang nie.

Tydens ’n onlangse inbelprogram op Radio Sonder Grense, asook in die
briewekolomme van die koerante, kon afgelei word dat baie mense as gevolg
van vrees en intimidasie, en vrees vir vervolging veral, nie die fluitjie
wil blaas nie. Dit vind plaas in beide die staatsdiens en die
privaatsektor. Goeie amptenare en lede van die publiek verlang ’n skoon
administrasie en daarom wil hulle korrupsie met alle mag uitgeroei hê.

Die ACDP wil die departement en die ministerie aanmoedig om die klagtes van
die publiek as dringend te hanteer. Ons wil die vertroue uitspreek dat
dringend aandag geskenk word aan amptenare wat direkte kontak met die
publiek het en dat veral gewerk word aan die gesindheid van amptenare. ’n
Vriendelike gesindheid van ’n amptenaar los baie keer ’n probleem makliker
op vir ’n persoon van die publiek.

Omdat die ACDP dan ook ’n gesonde en doeltreffende staatsdiens verlang, sal
ons hierdie begroting ondersteun. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, hon Minister, I do not necessarily agree with
everything that you, Minister, said here today, but I would like to
congratulate you on the manner in which you delivered your budget to us.

Just yesterday we had to listen to what was said from this podium about the
critical situation in the Department of Home Affairs. It seems to the ACDP
as if, with reference to the recent report of the Public Service
Commission, the Public Service itself is also in danger. We are sure that
the hon Minister and her department are doing everything they can to meet
the challenges presented by the human element in the Public Service.

As a former public servant, although many years ago now, in my experience
officials at many levels no longer take pride in service delivery to the
public. In certain areas wonderful and admirable progress has been made,
for which we express our appreciation. However, there are concerns about
corruption – and you yourself referred to that, hon Minister – and other
malpractices that are not being properly addressed, and the fact that
whistle-blowers, especially, do not have enough protection.

With reference to a recent phone-in programme on Radio Sonder Grense, as
well as the letters columns of newspapers, it can be deduced that a lot of
people do not want to blow the whistle due to fear and intimidation and
fear of persecution. This is happening in the Public Service as well as in
the private sector. Good officials and members of the public are longing
for a clean administration and hence they want corruption to be eradicated
at all costs.

The ACDP wants to encourage the department and the Ministry to address the
complaints from the public as a matter of urgency. We want to express the
hope that urgent attention will be given to officials who have direct
contact with the public and that, in particular the attitude of officials
will be addressed. A friendly attitude on the part of an official often
makes it easier to solve a problem for a member of the public.

As the ACDP also longs for a sound and efficient Public Service, we will
support this budget.]

Mr M R SIKAKANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, as a budding economist, I went
into town this morning and read the Business Times, particularly the item
with the headline: “Expansion Crisis Break”. I felt so good because that
meant that the CPIX, the consumer price index minus mortgage costs, has
remained steadfast, ceteris paribas.

I’m saying this because I’m going to talk about the State Information
Technology Agency, Sita. Perhaps, for the benefit of those who were not
here in the past, I should mention that this is a business concern, with
government as a shareholder and the Minister representing the government.

Sita is a business concern that was established by an Act of Parliament. It
was established in 1999 to consolidate and co-ordinate the state’s
information technology resources in order to achieve cost-saving through
scale, increased delivery capabilities and enhanced interoperability.

Sita is committed to leveraging information technology as a strategic
resource for government to manage IT procurement and the delivery process;
ensuring that government gets value for money; and using IT to support the
delivery of e-government services to the citizens of South Africa.

We have to assess whether Sita has served the purpose it was established
for. It was established to recruit, develop and retain skilled IT
personnel; to use IT to support transformation and service delivery; to
effectively utilise expensive IT resources; and to integrate IT
initiatives.

Sita is currently in the process of undergoing significant restructuring,
based on the need to radically improve the quality and levels of service
that it delivers to government departments. Without Sita, government
departments wouldn’t be able to function properly. A business operating
model designed to facilitate the achievement of the set objectives has been
developed and is being implemented.
Financially, Sita closed the year with 100% growth in revenue and decreased
its debtor days to 54, compared to 90 debtor days of the previous year.
Client satisfaction has improved from 40% to 64%. As a result, there is
better engagement with clients.

Sita’s procurement cycle has decreased the average tender days from over
240 days in 2004 to less than 75 days in 2005, and I am directing this to
those who are interested in tenders and have been complaining about the
lengthy process.

Local economic development is also being addressed, with the tender process
ensuring that revenue is retained within the provinces by allowing
provincial governments to procure locally from local vendors.

The manager training programme saw 20 middle managers, mainly women,
undergo training through the Gordon Institute of Business Science and
practical training in London. The programme is continuing, and 20 managers
will graduate in a month’s time after attending a practical course in
Singapore.

May I pause here and specifically address the issue of our suffering in the
past, when employees were not judged on their ability to do work but on how
much the boss liked them. I am referring to transformation here.

Minister, you know that change causes pain and brings about victimisation
in some cases. This should not happen within a government parastatal such
as Sita.

There shouldn’t be bosses who are allowed not to follow procedures. There
are cases of grave concern within Sita, which need to be investigated by
top management. Transformation must not bring about victimisation, where
cases are trumped up so as to frustrate employees’ chances of progressing.

The Minister responsible for the Public Service has stated that the aim is
to establish one Public Service combining all three spheres of government.
Sita has pre-empted that and it has already entered the terrain of
municipalities to equip those areas that need e-government. This concerns
the identification of the current system and its application within
municipalities.

I now come to human capital. Profitability per employee has increased to
19%. As many as 63% of employees are black; 38% are female - the aim is to
reach 45%.

I’ve noticed that Sita has jumped threefold from where it was in the past
two years. Our staunch clients are SAPS and health departments. Sita
reported that the workload of the IBM main framework technology platform
operated at the Bisho and Ulundi data centres, in Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-
Natal respectively, was consolidated into the Pietermaritzburg data centre,
resulting in a significant reduction in operational costs. The operational
costs of the previous administration were very high.

The disaster recovery capability was developed to accommodate the justice
department’s accounting system, the State Attorney system and the court
policy system. This is processed for the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development at various courts to ensure system recovery
within a 4-hour timeframe.

Sita has established a command centre. Hon members, you must take note of
this because sometimes you get stranded in Pretoria and you don’t know what
to do, when you could go to this centre to access information, which you
could pass on to your constituencies. This, indeed, is an achievement.

It provides information technology support to government organisations
through the utilisation of fault-logging and routing services. The cableway
call centre, which services both citizens and business, was created to
provide seamless access to information and services provided by the
government, and is operational 24 hours a day.

The new regional operating model attempts to accommodate structural
imperatives. Firstly, it mirrors the corporate operating model in terms of
structure and process. Secondly, it addresses client processes at both
national and provincial level.

The integration of provincial information and communication operations into
the Sita infrastructure has been under way for a while. This has resulted
in significant savings by provincial authorities.

Minister, I am concerned about this: very soon we will be lazy to do things
for ourselves because technology from Sita will be there to do things for
us. We must introduce technology gradually, because we may end up not
having to move from our seats since Sita will be doing everything. The big
question is: What more do we want, as Sita is there for us and it is there
for the people?

I would like to urge members to visit the Sita offices in Pretoria. It is a
wonderful establishment. You can’t believe that whilst Sita is based in
Pretoria, it can cause the functioning of this House to collapse. It is
therefore important for you members to go to Pretoria one day and look at
the establishment called Sita, otherwise you might find yourself sitting
under the ground.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. That was a
bit scary. Hon members, I now call upon the hon W D Spies.

Mr W D SPIES: Chairperson, it’s “Spies”. It’s the Afrikaans word for
“assegaai”, not the English word for izimpimpi [spies]. [Laughter.]

Sedert 1998 is meer as 60 000 skeidingspakkette in die Staatsdiens
aangebied. In daardie stadium was die Staatsdiens oorvol en daar was
algemene konsensus dat die Staatsdiens kleiner gemaak moet word. Sedertdien
het sake aansienlik verander. Onlangse berigte dui daarop dat meer as 20
000 kundige staatsamptenare tans in die Staatsdiens benodig word. Verskeie
inisiatiewe is onlangs deur die regering aangekondig om hierdie tekort aan
te spreek, en daarmee kan die VF Plus nie fout vind nie.

In antwoord op ’n vraag aan die agb Minister verlede jaar het dit geblyk
dat daar, gebaseer op die riglyne gestel in die Wet op Billike
Indiensneming, tans in die Staatsdiens oor die algemeen ’n
onderverteenwoordiging van wit sowel as bruin werkers is. Indien die
persentasies omskep word in syfers, kom dit neer op ongeveer 20 000 wit
werkers en 10 000 bruin werkers minder as wat nodig is.

Die agb Minister het destyds in haar antwoord aangevoer dat die
onderverteenwoordiging regverdigbaar is omdat die topbestuur van die
Staatsdiens nog nie ten volle verteenwoordigend van die bevolking is nie.
Maar, agb Minister, is dit billik om 30 000 mense uit laer posvlakke te hou
terwyl slegs die boonste 5% van die poste nie verteenwoordigend is nie? Ons
kan mos nie toelaat dat 5% van die Staatsdiens die res gyselaar hou nie.

Wat betref pakkette wat reeds aangebied is, kan die VF Plus u daarop wys
dat daar ’n geweldige groot hoeveelheid kundige oud-amptenare daar buite is
wat jare gelede pakkette geneem het, en nou gereed, gewillig en selfs
desperaat is om weer in die Staatsdiens te begin werk. Daar is al openbare
uitsprake gemaak dat die beperkings op die herindiensneming uitgewerk gaan
word, maar op die oomblik word dit slegs op ’n ad hoc-basis gedoen.

Agb Minister, die VF Plus sal graag met u in gesprek wil tree oor maniere
en algemene amnesties wat toegestaan kan word, sodat ons seker is dat
hierdie mense sonder hindernisse weer terug kan kom na die Staatsdiens toe.
Ons praat graag met u daaroor. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Since 1998 more than 60 000 severance packages have been granted in the
Public Service. At that stage the Public Service was too congested and the
general consensus was that the Public Service should be scaled down. Since
then matters have changed significantly. Recent reports suggest that more
than 20 000 experienced public servants are currently needed in the Public
Service. The government has recently announced many initiatives to address
this shortage, and the FF Plus cannot find fault with that.

In answer to a question put to the hon Minister last year it transpired
that, based on guidelines set out in the Employment Equity Act, in general
there is currently an underrepresentation of both white and coloured
workers in the Public Service. If the percentages were to be converted into
figures, this would amount to approximately 20 000 white workers and 10 000
coloured workers fewer than required.

At that stage the hon Minister argued in her response that the
underrepresentation was justified, as the top management of the Public
Service was not yet fully representative of the population. But, hon
Minister, is it fair to keep 30 000 people out of lower job levels whilst
only the top 5% of posts are not representative? Surely we cannot allow 5%
of the Public Service to hold the rest hostage.

With regard to the packages that have already been granted, the FF Plus
wants to point out that an enormous number of experienced ex-officials who
accepted packages years ago, are out there and are now ready, willing and
even desperate to start working in the Public Service again. Public
statements have been made that the restrictions on re-employment will be
worked out, but at the moment this is only being done on an ad-hoc basis.

Hon Minister, the FF Plus would like to talk to you about general amnesties
and ways in which they can be granted, so that we can be sure that these
people are able to return to the Public Service without any hindrance. We
will gladly talk to you about it. Thank you very much.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Spies. I have
corrected myself now.

Mr K K KHUMALO: Hon Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, guests in the gallery, I rise on behalf of the ANC in support of
the Budget Vote on the Public Service and Administration. In particular, I
hope the budget will help us realise our vision of a single Public Service.

The barometer for measuring the strengths and weaknesses of our government
resides within the ambit of the capacity, organisation, vision and
commitment on the part of its Public Service to deliver. It is this arm of
government that is charged with the responsibility of delivering on the
strategic objectives of government, in the context of understanding and
advancing the key ingredients for deepening democracy in our developmental
state.

It, therefore, becomes absolutely imperative that the Public Service is
resourceful so as to be able to identify and recognise institutional
challenges and turn them around. This will bring about a sustainable and
comprehensive service delivery network that is pro-poor and, in fact,
deliberately directed at benefiting the poorest of the poor at grass-roots
level.

In the state of the nation address, on 3 February 2006, the hon President,
Comrade Thabo Mbeki, called upon the nation to celebrate this age of hope.
He also reminded us that this age is accompanied by high expectations, and
called upon us to do whatever is possible to meet them. But the question
arises as to how we should do this. It is our view that this can be done
within the context of recognising the contention of the ANC, as captured in
our national conference resolutions at Stellenbosch, and I quote:


  The fundamental transformation of local government into a democratic,
  developmental and accountable component of the state is not yet complete,
  and the system contains dysfunctionalities.


These dysfunctionalities in service delivery at local level, as alluded to
by the ANC, are rooted in the fragmentation of service delivery between
municipalities, departments and service delivery agencies. They are further
exacerbated by tensions resulting from jurisdictional arrogance and red
tape between departments and within municipalities.

Although the multipurpose community centres and community development
workers provide a focused service, it is difficult to measure their
collective impact on broader substantive service delivery. These
multipurpose community centres are few, and one wonders why it is that we
have so few of these in the rural areas and some urban areas whereas there
is a budget for this service to be rendered. This causes a further breach
in the service delivery chain.

The above scenario, coupled with the lack of capacity at local government
level as exposed through Project Consolidate, clearly is a call for
institutional interventions by national government to align state
institutions in such a way as to complement one another. This would
synergise the provision of services, resulting in integrated service
delivery through co-operative governance.

Chapter 3, section 41, of the Constitution provides that all spheres of
government and all organs of state within each sphere must co-operate with
one another in mutual trust and in good faith, by fostering relations,
assisting and supporting one another on matters of common interest, co-
ordinating their actions and legislative processes. Section 41(2) provides
that an Act of Parliament must be established to provide for structures and
institutions to facilitate governmental relations.
In order for institutional arrangements such as co-operative governance to
be realised in the single Public Service, it must be sustainable for the
purpose of effective service delivery. As established by the Department of
the Public Service and Administration, this can only manifest if there is
mobility between institutions of service delivery. Mobility in this context
refers to the transfer of functions between spheres of government in order
to allow for service to be delivered where appropriately needed and also to
enable managers to be deployed where they are needed in government.

Ngamanye amazwi, injongo yethu apha kuhanjiso lweenkonzo zoluntu kukuba
sidibanise iinkonzo ukuze izinto esifuna zenzeke, zenzeke ngokukhawuleza.
Ukuba siyajonga phaya kweli linge lokwakhiwa kwezindlu le-Gateway, siya
kufumanisa ukuba kuye kwadibana iphondo, umasipala kunye nozwelonke ukuze
kugqitywe ela linge. Sithetha loo nto ke xa sithetha ngohanjiso lweenkonzo
oluhlangeneyo kwaneenkonzo zikarhulumente ezihlangeneyo.

Kwakhona, enye injongo yethu kukuba siseke iqela labasebenzi abaza kuthi
basebenzele urhulumente ukusuka phezulu kuzwelonke ukuya kutsho kumaphondo,
ukuhla, sisenzela ukuba wonke umntu akwazi ukuphendula kurhulumente, ukuze
singabi nabantu abaza kuthi xa kufuneka benze izinto ezithile bathi, hayi
bona baphendula kumasipala kuphela. Kufuneka ukuba baphendule kurhulumente
ngokupheleyo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Our objective is to synergise services, resulting in an integrated service
delivery process that renders them faster and in a more easily accessible
manner. The Gateway project is an example of co-operative governance
between the province, the municipality and the national housing offices.
That is our idea of co-operative and integrated service delivery.

It is also one of our intentions to establish a flexible, cohesive
workforce that can be transferred easily between the different spheres of
government and can be deployed anywhere and everywhere they are needed in
government in such a way that no one can say they are accountable to the
municipality and not to other institutions. They should be accountable to
government as a whole.]

This will, therefore, create a cohesive workforce through all the spheres
of government. [Interjections.]

Ek weet nie wat praat julle daarso nie. [Tussenwerpsels.] [I do not know
what you are talking about over there. [Interjections.]]

An HON MEMBER: We are talking about top down.

Mr K K KHUMALO: What top down?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Just continue with your speech, hon
member.

Mr K K KHUMALO: It’s correct that we are in government. We are going to
determine how the Public Service functions, and that is it. We are going to
do that. What you are doing here in Cape Town, sabotaging the national
interest of this government will come to an end. [Applause.] It’s going to
come to an end when we introduce a single Public Service that will account
to the ethics of the ANC. [Interjections.]

Julle raas! [You are making a noise!]

I must also come back to the age of hope referred to by our President
during his state of the nation address. Indeed, as the President said,
there is hope because our people went out in their numbers to vote for the
ANC and for a better tomorrow. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us that we
look into the expectations of the people, as alluded to by the President. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, the UPSA supports Budget Votes 11 and 12. I consider
the Department of the Public Service and Administration to be one of the
most important role-players in ensuring effective service delivery out all
levels of government. This responsibility requires the implementation of a
human resource policy and strategy that complements the objective of
effective and efficient service delivery.

South Africa has very specific guidelines for human resource practices
aimed at ensuring that remedial action is taken regarding employment
practices of the past. I specifically wish to refer to the Employment
Equity Act, with its primary aim of providing for employment equity.

There appears to be a grave misunderstanding as to the practical
implementation of employment equity, which now seems to create a new set of
disparities, especially in the Public Service sector. This deduction is
based on the hon Minister’s reply to a written question from hon Spies
towards the end of last year.

The statistics given then by the Minister clearly illustrated that there
was a clearly misconstrued interpretation of the definition of “black
people” by human resource practitioners in the public sector as they
considered this legislation as intended to set out a hierarchy. This
practice has serious negative effects on our much-needed human relations
and nation-building, as well as solidarity amongst all our people.

Die agb President het op die 18de Mei vanjaar erkenning gegee aan die erns
van hierdie aangeleentheid deur die korrekte interpretasies te bevestig dat
daar geen onderskeid getref behoort te word tussen die komponente van
hierdie generiese term nie. Ek wil ’n dringende en ernstige beroep doen op
die agb Minister ... (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[On 18 May this year the hon President acknowledged the seriousness of this
matter by confirming the correct interpretation that no distinction should
be made between the components of this generic term. I want to make an
urgent and serious appeal to the hon Minister ...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr S SIMMONS: ... om leiding te gee in die vorm van byvoorbeeld ’n
direktief wat groter duidelikheid ... [Tussenwerpsels.] [... to guide us by
way of, for instance, a directive to provide greater clarity ...
[Interjections.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired!
[Interjections.]

Mr S SIMMONS: ... en sekerheid sal bewerkstellig oor die interpretasie.
[... and certainty about the interpretation.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Simmons, your time has expired.
Thank you!

Hon members, the following member will be making his maiden speech.
[Applause.]

Mr I F JULIES: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, on 26 February this year
President Mbeki was quoted in the City Press as having said he had not been
presented with any information that indicated that public servants ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, the member is making
his maiden speech and please give him an opportunity.

Mr I F JULIES: The City Press quoted the President as having said he had
not been presented with any information that indicated that public servants
in different levels of government are dying of Aids. “These is no crisis,”
said President Mbeki. He said there were no alarm bells being sounded in
the Presidency that people are dying and that no one had told him they were
losing 10% of government staff every year because of Aids.

I would like President Mbeki to tell us if he thinks that the only people
affected ... [Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, maybe the member has the wrong speech. I heard
him debating about HIV/Aids. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Bloem, can you sit down. We said
this is a maiden speech. Let’s just respect it for that, unless you want me
to read the Rules to you. Please, let’s just respect that. In a maiden
speech, anything can be said.

Mr I F JULIES: I thank you, Chairperson. Maybe hon Bloem doesn’t understand
what is going on. Sit still and listen, hon Bloem. I would like President
Mbeki to tell us if he thinks the only people infected and affected by this
crippling disease are the general electorate and not our esteemed public
servants, colleagues.

If that is what the President thinks, the DA would like to challenge
President Mbeki to take a walk through the hallowed halls of the Public
Service to see just how many of the staff actually are at work on any given
day. We, however, welcome the fact that in the very same article President
Mbeki said that we need to do research to establish what levels of deaths
there are in the Public Service as a result of natural and unnatural
causes.

The statement was released in February and now it is the end of May. It is
no surprise that there is still no conclusive study being conducted within
the Department of the Public Service and Administration around the
prevalence of HIV and Aids within the workforce of the Ministry. Clearly,
no alarm bells are being sounded because the administration seems not to
really care whether or not its own staff are affected by a disease that
killed more than 2,5 million people last year in Sub-Saharan Africa alone.
The department does have a very impressive policy on employee wellness and
the hon Fraser-Moleketi always seems very eager to engage the seriousness
of this epidemic, as witnessed through the Public Service health journal.
But, hon Minister, what we need now is action on this policy to ensure that
service delivery to all the people – a direct mandate given to this
government - will happen without negative impact.

Hon Minister, you owe it to those who make it possible for you to manage
this department to ensure that you vigorously work towards ensuring that
the department doesn’t sit without skills by the next election.

The DA challenges the department to put in place key strategies aimed at
assessing the prevalence of HIV and Aids in the DPSA workforce. The DA also
challenges you to then draw up a risk profile concerning the skills that
could be lost, and that you take into account and project into the future
the cost to the department and the people of the country if you don’t
mitigate the negative impact of HIV and Aids.

I now want to direct my attention to community development workers, CDWs.
We in the DA challenge the Minister to go back and take another look at the
intended imperatives set out for community development workers. These
community development workers are not the private recruiters for the ANC.
They are not a lobbying group which works solely for the interest of its
members and supporters.

Our people are crying out that your CDWs are once again causing the
opportunity to divide and rule at local level by prioritising the support
of the ruling party and ignoring the basic needs of those with the good
sense to support the opposition parties. The CDWs have a responsibility to
take government to all citizens.

Yes, Minister, they are meant to facilitate access to services for all our
people. The abuse of this publicly-funded programme is a direct indication
to your electorate, hon Minister, that Batho Pele is indeed for a select
few only. Batho Pele principles are for creating a people-centred and
people-driven Public Service. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs L MALONEY: Chairperson, I think we should respect the previous speaker
because it is Wednesday today. All he was doing was to pose a follow-up
question to the President. I think we should give credit for that.
[Interjections.]

Since this morning, all the DA speakers have been talking about the gala
dinner, which is not part of what we are debating. Maybe this gala dinner
is their theme of the year but I don’t think that it’s a gala dinner per
se. They only have one: Parliament is transforming and most black people
are coming to Parliament to experience what the ANC is doing inside
Parliament. That is what their concern is, as regards the gala dinner.
[Applause.]

My take on this Budget Vote on the Public Service and Administration will
be around the Public Service Commission. This structure was established by
the Constitution with a clear mandate and terms of references. One of the
responsibility enshrined in the Constitution is for the Public Service
Commission to be impartial. It must exercise its powers and perform its
functions without fear, favour or prejudice and in the interest of
maintaining an effective and efficient public service.

The commission must be regulated by national legislation. This is a huge
responsibility that the Public Service Commission is faced with. This task
cannot be done by the Public Service Commission alone. This is a shared
responsibility and it needs all structures, organisations and civil society
organisations who are doing work on monitoring and evaluation to assist the
Public Service Commission. This is where the portfolio committee features,
through our oversight role to monitor and evaluate the executive
departments and provinces. We can whip where we see that work has not been
done.

Our participation and interaction regarding the Budget Vote of this
department does not only start today, the portfolio committee engaged with
the department during the strategic planning workshop which took place some
two months back. So we are familiar with the issues and we are on top of
the issues. This is just carry-forward work that has been done.

At least, we know about the vision and mission of the department, and we
know where it comes from and where it is going. This shows that portfolio
committees are not rubber-stampers nor are they passive recipients, but
they are active participants in the end product of whatever it is that
departments do.

Through the strategic workshop, the portfolio committee together with the
Public Service Commission have come up with a toolkit on how to take
forward the monitoring and evaluation programme of the department.

There are nine principles that govern the Public Service Commission. I am
not going to deal with them one by one as they are all important components
of driving the strategic plan of the Public Service and Administration.
They are all compulsory to the Public Service sector.

At no stage can we have public servants performing better as regards
certain principles and not doing better as regards principles that govern
the Public Service Commission. I would suggest that even the evaluation of
the performance of managers should be based on these principles. It should
be a matter of “you break one you lose everything; you fail the test”.

The ANC supports this Budget Vote, with the hope that the lives of our
people will be better today than yesterday and their tomorrow will be
better than today. According to the Public Service Commission report,
departments are not complying fully when they report financial misconduct
cases, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act. For instance, in this
area, national departments reported only 30% of cases and provinces
reported only 61%. This needs attention.

Another area of concern is non-compliance of heads of departments in
disclosing financial directorships that they hold outside the Public
Service. Up until now, 78% of HODs from national departments have
disclosed. We still need to reach 100% and this is a problem we are faced
with as a monitoring and oversight portfolio committee. North West province
has the highest number and stands at 82% while the lowest is the Eastern
Cape, at 38%. As the portfolio committee, we take exception to this bad
conduct. All those who are not complying are nothing but counter-
revolutionaries.

Beside these setbacks that I have alluded to, the Public Service remains
focused on its mandate. A number of initiatives have been set up by the
Public Service Commission regarding how well the Public Service meets its
obligations of impartiality, fairness, equity and non-bias.
[Interjections.] I know that it’s after lunch and the deputy chair is
coming from the private room there, next to the bar. That’s why he is
howling like this. [Interjections.]

The Public Service Commission has introduced mechanisms such as the Batho
Pele audit, the national anticorruption hotline and citizen survey to test
whether citizens do experience government as meeting those ideals.

On average the budget of the Public Service Commission has increased. This
does not mean more money in their kitty but it goes with more demands and
more expectations, and this is going to put pressure on staff members of
the Public Service Commission, who only number 185. Also, the role that the
Public Service Commission plays within the SADC region, internationally and
otherwise, is going to be increased because of the money that we have put
in. So the demands are going to be more and more.

The capacity considerations concerning the challenges ahead are well noted.
What I always fail to understand is when you are told that the department
has spent all the money from the Treasury and there are no roll-overs but
on the other hand you are told that the department has no capacity. I do
not get it: How do you spend money but at the same time you are having a
capacity problem concerning the delivery of services? Maybe the recruitment
and selection strategy of the Public Service will address this.

The strategy should also look at gender imbalances and equity in the Public
Service. The targets set are difficult to reach. For instance, while the
target of 2% had been set regarding disabled people in the Public Service,
there were only 0,25% in 2002. Thus far we have had 0,16% of disabled
people. But I am very glad that the Minister has addressed this area of
concern.

A framework on how to conduct inspections of service delivery sites will be
used by the Public Service, starting this coming year. This framework will
entail announced and unannounced visits to service delivery sites, as it
was agreed that public servants should be at the coalface of service
delivery points.

Programmes of the Public Service Commission are in line with government
objectives. But what does not go down well with me is when I read an
evaluation of the anticorruption co-ordination committee concerning the
Public Service anticorruption initiative. I am told that it is subject to
the availability of donors. This also needs to be looked at, because we
cannot keep such a committee idle because we don’t have donors coming
forward.

What is exciting when it comes to labour relations is the improvement of
performance grievance rules which are to be translated into all official
languages. I know there are new rules. The new rules say that, after 30
days, if there isn’t anything that is happening in the department, those
rules must be shifted to the Public Service Commission. That also creates a
problem because the department will not work or may delay the process and
just shift those grievances to the Public Service Commission, and this will
add more pressure to the Public Service Commission.

Regarding the hotline for handling queries, thus far 1 338 complaints have
been received through this system. But the question of how to control
whistleblowers is still a problem. There is still that old tradition of
thinking that if you report misconduct you are an impimpi [informer].

Hon Minister, you know yourself that this name has bad connotations.
However, hon Minister, it should be brought to the attention of those who
do not condone corrupt practices in the Public Service that, if you do not
report misconduct in the Public Service you are as corrupt as the person
who is engaging in corrupt activities in that department. [Interjections.]
[Applause.] You are becoming sober now.

Local government will remain a strategic area for service delivery.
Regarding this aspect, we should not allow the DA, which won with only one
vote, to spoil the good work that the ANC has done in that council. There
is one good rule that the DA must learn: “You must not mess up so badly
that nobody can work there again.” We are not going to allow a tsunami-
style of administration that the DA is bringing to this council.
[Interjections.] The hon Zille must know that she needs to govern. She must
stop being a TV celebrity. People need service delivery down there.

Community development workers must also be given a course on Asgisa and
Jipsa in order for them to be better able to explain these new concepts.
They are the best people who are strategically located to interact directly
with the people.

Regarding floor-crossing, I think the DA needs this floor-crossing
legislation. You know what is going to happen to them? Zille is an
unstoppable tsumani. So it will be difficult for them to control her. She
is such a bully they can’t even control her. So the only thing that will
control Zille is floor-crossing. [Interjections.] This is what we are going
to do.

This Public Service Commission does not exist by accident, it is an
integral part of the developmental state and plays an appropriate role in
accelerating transformation towards better service delivery. Whoever is not
complying should know that he or she is not only undermining the Public
Service Commission but also the Constitution that established the
commission. I thank you very much, Chair.
The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you,
Chairperson and hon members. Many issues have been raised in this debate
today and there have been a large number of inputs, many of which I
welcome.

I’d like to state that the area this portfolio is responsible for will
never be perfect. What we are doing and what we will do is aspire to a
situation where we continually improve. We will show progress in the
direction that we have set ourselves. In the light of all the criticisms
that have been levelled, we will take them on board – some of them – and
try to improve in order that by next week, next month and next year we will
show progress.

I believe, fundamentally, that we do not give enough recognition where
recognition is due. Albeit on a small and symbolic level, I would like to
recognise a special public servant on the gallery today and his name is Mr
Sipho Tiger Ndlovu, the headmaster of Dover Combined School in KwaZulu-
Natal. Mr Ndlovu, would you stand up, please. [Applause.] I think Mr Ndlovu
was here earlier.

I wanted to make this example, because earlier on I heard various
allegations being levelled and flung from the side of the DA, suggesting
that public servants are incompetent, unskilled, low-level, and they cannot
really deliver. Let me just tell you a little bit about him. Through
dedication, smart work, innovative problem-solving and creative application
of technology; mobilisation between the landowners, business and other
organisations; and the use of volunteers, both local and international, he
transformed Dover Combined School from a traditional farm school on the
north coast of KwaZulu-Natal into a modern public school that excels and
has achieved 100% Matric pass rates for the past five years. [Applause.]

I would like us to honour Mr Ndlovu for his individual achievements and to
celebrate him as a symbol of all our hard-working public servants who
display the characteristics that make him an exceptional public servant.
May people like this who overcome the challenges that they face in their
service delivery situations inspire others to go the extra mile.

I also want to commend a group of people who call themselves Bara people.
These are health workers at the Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital; people who
have stayed there and work under very difficult conditions. [Applause.]
And, in the words of Prof Mativa, a clinician:

I am amongst the best when it takes to pulling a person from the brink of
death, resuscitating that person and I can do that work. I will do it and I
do it very well. What you need in the transformation process is to take
away some of the management issues from me. I don’t want to be involved in
that.

Those are people who are willing to work and make a difference. There are
many other health workers and people who do not want to be referred to as
“low-level, unskilled, incompetent people and people who shouldn’t be
there”. That is what came from this side of the House. In the words of hon
Minnie, who spoke about the Public Service ...

... en hy het gedink mense kan hom nie verstaan nie. Hy het gepraat oor
swak dienslewering, van die feit dat ... [... and he thought that people
could not understand him. He spoke of poor service delivery, the fact that
...]

... at a senior level the senior skills are not there, and so on. He said
that others are being pushed out. Nonsense. It is very clear that he is not
following what is happening. If I could take the words of my colleague,
even when you listen to Minnie ...

... as hy praat van ’n enkele Staatsdiens. Hy sê dieselfde goed hierdie
jaar wat hy verlede jaar gesê. Ek vra myself af: is dit omdat hy doof is?
[...when he speaks of a single Public Service. He is repeating the same
things this year that he said last year. I ask myself the question: Is it
because he is deaf?]

Must we ensure that we get a hearing aid for him so that he can actually
engage with this? Let me withdraw that. I don’t want to equate Minnie to
anybody who may be disabled, because it would be unfair to the disabled
sector.

Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, I wonder if I could address you on a point of
order. I just wondered if it was parliamentary for the hon Minister to talk
about an hon member of this House simply as “Minnie”. Is that
parliamentary?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, address all as hon
members.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson, hon
Minnie is Minnie and he is honourable and I will ensure that I refer to him
as hon Minnie.

Mr D V BLOEM: Minister, maybe you must call him Cooper Minnie. Cooper
Minnie. That is better.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you,
Chairperson. I suppose a better reference at this point, when we are
looking back at the issues that were raised by some, is a quote by Toffler
that says:

The illiterate of the future will not be the person who cannot read. It
will be the person who does not know how to learn.

I am rather saddened by the fact that there seem to be some members who,
even at this stage, seem as if they don’t know how to learn or are not
willing to learn. I think we should ensure that we do learn and draw on
what is happening within the Public Service, bearing in mind the
complexities that exist.

Hon Matsomela raised the issue of Samdi and one would want to agree with
the issues that were raised. In relation to the induction programme, I want
to indicate that that is indeed a priority programme that Samdi is
unfurling. We do need to extend the capacity to ensure that it reaches all
public servants.

Concerning the issue of the unintended consequences of decentralisation, I
think that is indeed part of what one had raised earlier. I think,
generally speaking, one would be in agreement with what has come up. I do
want to raise one or two further issues.

The issue that has come up today, both from the chair of the portfolio
committee and other members, has been the whole issue of the declaration of
financial disclosures by public servants. I do want to say that that
particular work done by the Auditor-General was commissioned by the
Minister for the Public Service and Administration and the chairperson of
the Public Service Commission. We wanted to have a sense of the levels of
compliance.

That particular report indicated that more than 50 000 public servants had
not declared or disclosed their financial interests. What I want to state
to this House today is that 50 223 public servants are non-designated. They
are not required by the regulatory framework to declare at this particular
point in time. However, regarding the designated public servants that
should declare, as has been stated here, 78% of them have declared. That is
a system that we have put in place since 2000. We have a responsibility as
the executive to ensure that we do have 100% disclosure and we will strive
towards this disclosure.

There is indeed the reality that heads of department and directors-general
must take steps against those senior managers that have not disclosed. I
have been in communication with members of the executive and I am expecting
a report from them on the levels of disclosure to date, so that we can take
action in the instances where it has not happened.

To hon Spies, the whole issue of the voluntary severance packages was
discussed previously and we indeed need to systematically look at how we
can bring those who have left the Public Service on voluntary severance
packages back into the service. It is not a matter that can be done
unilaterally because it has been a Public Service co-ordinating bargaining
chamber resolution. We have gone back to the chamber and requested a review
but we need to do it within the framework.

We also need to ensure that we do not have double dipping, that is people
who have left the Public Service on a package trying to come back and be
employed like everyone else. We are looking at issues such as tenure that
is specific to timeframes and so on. The point that I want to make is that
we are engaging with these issues.

There was an hon member who delivered his maiden speech today and I think
he regrettably disgraced himself and lost an opportunity to reflect that he
was coming in new, making a new speech and that he had done his homework.
He tried to get me to second-guess the President. I must respond for what
the President thinks about issues and not what is in our policies or what
has been raised.

It is a rather strange thing. Maybe he thinks for the hon Tony Leon. That
may explain some of the crises in policy within the DA and hence the
perception that there is overcentralisation and centralisation.

One cannot blame him. He is really in the wrong party. We don’t want him
anyway. With that level of thinking, he is not going to add any value. He
then went on and said that the whole issues of CDWs ...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: On a point of order, Madam Minister,
I want him because I can work on him.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Our Chief Whip has
always been a courageous man. He is reflecting his courage once more. We
have had a policy in the past that said we should win over the enemy as
well. This is part of it.

I should probably pause and focus on hon Julies. I can probably have some
political discussions with him and it may just have some impact on him. I
want to conclude with a last point about him. He left immediately after
speaking and I thought where I grew up, we had a name for a man who runs
away before an answer is given. He came back into the House very quickly,
so I presume he only went to the bathroom for a short period and it wasn’t
a case of fleeing, like some of his colleagues have done.

There is a further point that I would like to raise and that is the point
that the hon Minnie raised as well. I just want to find the note on that
particular aspect. He spoke about ...

... ’n enkele Staatsdiens. Hy het gesê dat ons tog asseblief moet wegbly
van ’n die enkele Staatsdiens, want hulle wil nie hê dat ons die Kaap moet
lamlê nie. Ek wil sê: Helen Zille het niemand nodig om haar te help om die
Kaap lam te lê nie. Sy doen ’n baie goeie taak daarvoor. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[... single Public Service. He told us to please stay away from a single
Public Service, as they did not want us to paralyse the Cape. I want to
say: Helen Zille does not need anybody to help her to paralyse the Cape.
She is making an excellent job of it.]

And a single Public Service is not about disabling anything. It is about
taking issues forward.

On a more serious note and ignoring the kinds of comments that came from
this quarter that were very unhelpful, I think there is also a need for us
to note that there were positive aspects that were mentioned in the State
of the Public Service Report, 2006. It found that, in general, the Public
Service has sound policies in place to sustain the consolidation of its
transformation and improve service delivery; and that it has shown the
capacity to promote and implement ethical and normative frameworks, such as
the national anti-corruption forum and Batho Pele.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, if you could conclude.

Mr C M LOWE: Yes, please.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: I will conclude and
say: There are notable improvements in the capacity of the Public Service
and the country as a whole to address corruption.

I’d like to thank all those who have joined in this debate and I’d like to
use the words of Theodore Roosevelt, who said:

  It behoves every person to remember that the work of the critic is of
  altogether secondary importance. In the end, progress is accomplished by
  the person who does things.


Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 19:17.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Health


          a) Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28754 of 28 April 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Health of
         the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on
         31 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

2.    Bills passed – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly on 30 May 2006:


         (a)     Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
             Amendment Bill [B 32F - 2005] (National Assembly - art 75).


TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Finance

      1) Government Notice No 362 published in Government Gazette No 28740
         dated 13 April 2006: Publication of Local Government allocations
         and frameworks, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act, 2006 (Act
         No 2 of 2006).


      2) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Learnership Training System Programme,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      3) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Learnership
         Training System Programme.

      4) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Legislative Drafting Programme, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      5) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Legislative
         Drafting Programme.

      6) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Mpumalanga Rural Development Programme,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      7) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Mpumalanga
         Rural Development Programme.

      8) Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium and the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa on Technology-Aided
         Distance Self Learning in the South African Police Service, tabled
         in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

      9) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
         the Kingdom of Belgium and the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa on Technology-Aided Distance Self Learning in the South
         African Police Service.

     10) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Technology Diffusion through Technikons,
         tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     11) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Technology
         Diffusion through Technikons.

     12)  Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
         South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Peace and Development Project, tabled in
         terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     13) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Peace and
         Development Project.

     14) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Programme to Develop Markets for Business
         Development Services, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
         Constitution, 1996.

     15) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Programme
         to Develop Markets for Business Development Services.

     16) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning the Project: Skills Development Strategy Initiative
         (SDSI), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
         1996.

     17) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project: Skills
         Development Strategy Initiative (SDSI).

     18) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of South
         Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
         concerning Financial Cooperation in 2005, tabled in terms of
         section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

     19) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
         Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
         the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Financial Cooperation in
         2005.

2.    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs

    (1)    Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on Restitution
         of Land Rights for 2005-2006 [RP 54-2006].


3.    The Minister of Safety and Security

    (1)    Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
         January 2005 to December 2005, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the
         Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998) [RP 56-2006].
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security on
      Proclamations 4, 6, 9, 13, 14, 65 and 66 by the President in
      accordance with section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional
      Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No
      33 of 2004), dated 24 May 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the Proclamations by the
        President in accordance with section 25 of the Protection of
        Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities
        Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), recommends that the House, approve
        the said Proclamations.


Request to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the Joint
      Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
      Radioactive Waste Management, dated 31 May 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
        the request for approval by Parliament of the Joint Convention on
        the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
        Radioactive Waste Management, referred to it, and having conferred
        with the Portfolio Committee on Health, recommends that the House,
        in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said
        Convention.


Request to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
      Tourism on Joint Strategic Planning Workshop with the Department of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Public Entities and Select
      Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, dated 30 May 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  having
      participated in a Joint Strategic Planning Workshop with Department of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism and its public entities as well with
      the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs,  reports  as
      follows:


   1. Legislative background


      The public  service  regulations  give  responsibility  for  strategic
      planning to the executive authority of the Department  concerned.  The
      regulations issued in terms of  Public  Finance  Management  Act  1999
      provide for further requirements with respect to strategic plans.

      They require strategic plans to  cover  the  Medium  Term  Expenditure
      Framework (MTEF) period to which they relate. These plans are supposed
      to be submitted to the Parliament or the relevant legislature at least
      seven days before the discussion of the budget vote of the Department.




   2. Joint Strategic Planning Workshop


      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism  and  the
      Select Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs  held  a  join
      strategic workshop on 13-14  March  2006  at  Lord  Charles  Hotel  in
      Somerset West (Western Cape)  with  the  Department  of  Environmental
      Affairs and Tourism and Public Entities (i.e.  South  African  Weather
      Services, South African Tourism, Grading Council, Tourism  Hospitality
      Sport Education,  South  African  National  Parks,  Greater  ST  Lucia
      Wetland Park and South African Botanical Institute).

      The main objective of the workshop was to present to both  Members  of
      the Portfolio and Select Committees an overview  of  the  Departmental
      and the Public Entities’ work  as  per  their  strategic  plans,  with
      specific focus on main deliverables in each programme for 2006/07.

   3. Ministerial opening


      In his  opening  address,  the  Minister  of  the  Department  of  the
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Hon, Marthinus van Schalkwyk tabled
      five strategic priorities of the Department in terms of  the  resource
      allocation and overall coordination. These included:

   a) The finalisation of new environmental  impact  assessment  regulations
      and capacities;

        b) Keeping climate change and national responses at the  centre  of
           the domestic and international agenda;

        c) Strengthening compliance and enforcement capacity; unlocking the
           potential of the Tran- frontier conservation areas; and

      (d)   Building on the major growth achievements in the tourism sector,
           especially in preparation for the 2010 soccer world cup.

   4. Presentation on the Strategic Plans of the Department and Public
                 Entities

      Through the Co- Chairing of Mr L Zita, Chairperson  of  the  Portfolio
      Committee of Environmental Affairs and Tourism  and,  Rev  P  Moatshe,
      Chairperson of the Select Committee of Land and Environmental Affairs,
      the Director-General and Deputy Director- Generals of  the  Department
      and Chief Executive Officers of Public Entities made presentations  on
      2006/07 strategic plans.  The presentations  focused  on  the  vision,
      mission, achievements, challenges, commitments and 2006/-07  strategic
      priorities.


      As the achievements of the Department and  the  Public  Entities  were
      reported in their 2005 Annual  Reports  and  the  Portfolio  Committee
      presented its report to Parliament  on  the  15  November  2005,  this
      report will only cover the challenges and 2006/07 strategic priorities
      presented to Members of Committees during the workshop.


      The main objective  of  capturing  only  the  challenges  and  2006/07
      strategic priorities, is to  provide  Members  of  the  Portfolio  and
      Select Committees with a monitoring  and  oversight  tool  that  could
      ensure Departmental and public entities accountability in terms of the
      2006 State of the Nation Address and programmes allocations in  Budget
      Vote 27 as contained in 2006 Estimates of National Expenditure.

       4.1. Overview of strategic priorities of the Department


      This section provides an overview of the 2006/07 strategic priorities
      of the six programmes of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
      Tourism. The main focus of the overview is on programmes such as
      administration and support presented by the Director General and
      environmental quality and protection, marine and coastal management,
      tourism, biodiversity and conservation presented respectively by
      Deputy Director Generals.


     1. Administration & Support Programme


      The Director General, Ms P Yako presented the strategic  plan  of  the
      administration programme. The  presentation  focused  on  the  vision,
      mission,  2005  achievements,  challenges  as  well  as  the   2006/07
      strategic priorities. According to the Director General,  the  2006/07
      strategic priorities of the administration programme will include:

    ❑ Implementation of black economic empowerment scorecard;


    ❑ Investment in skills development;


    ❑ Development of staff retention strategy and stakeholder engagement;
                 and


         ❑ An increase of the representation of people with  disability  to
           at least 2% and women in Small Medium Enterprise (SME) to 26%.

     2. Environmental Quality & Protection Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Ms J Yawitch, presented 2006/07 strategic
      plans of environmental quality and protection programme. According  to
      the Deputy Director General, the following strategic  priorities  will
      be pursued in 2006/07:


         ❑ Establishment of comprehensive programme to  support  provincial
           and local government in capacity;
    ❑ Impact evaluation of plastic bag legislation;


    ❑  Strategic  enforcement  actions  directed  at  major   polluters   or
      dangerous
                 pollutants;


    ❑ Finalisation of Waste Management Bill and publication public
                 comment;


    ❑  Finalisation  of  tyre  and  asbestos  regulations  and  ambient  air
      standards;


         ❑ Delegation of landfill permits to provinces on basis  of  agreed
           implementation plan and capacity building support;


         ❑ Permits review of  major  polluting  industries  and  long  term
           scenario planning on climate change; and


    ❑ Improvement of air quality management training for provincial and
                 local government


     3. Biodiversity & Conservation Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Mr  F  Mketeni,  made  presented  2006/07
      strategic  plan  of  the  biodiversity  and  conservation   programme.
      According to Deputy Director General, the 2006/07 strategic priorities
      of the biodiversity and conservation program will include:
         ❑  Finalisation  of  the  management  framework  for   Genetically
           Modified Organisms (GMO);

    ❑ Development of the biodiversity framework;

    ❑ Listing ecosystem in terms of NEMBA;

         ❑ Development of the norms and standards  for  the  regulation  of
           hunting  industry  and  the  management  of  elephant  in  South
           African;


    ❑ Regulations for threatened, protected, aliens  and  invasive  species;
      and

    ❑ Declaration of new National Parks in Wild Coast and Blyde River
            Canyon.

        4.1.4    Marine and Coastal Management Programme

      The Deputy Director General,  Dr  M  Mayekiso  presented  the  2006/07
      strategic plan of the marine and  coastal  management  programme.  The
      presentation focused on 2004/05 achievement and challenges.  In  order
      to address the compliance, research development,  resource  management
      and integrated management challenges, 2006/07 strategic priorities  of
      Marine Coastal Management include:

    ❑ Promulgation of coastal management act;

    ❑ Finalisation of aquaculture policy;

    ❑ Allocation of shark cage diving and boat based whale rights;

    ❑ Development of skills development strategy and research output

                 through collaboration;

    ❑ Filling of new and vacant positions and Increase number of  inspector;



    ❑ Develop financial and procurement system and cost recovery

                 framework; and

    ❑ Development of recreational permit system.




        4.1.5    Tourism Programme

      The Deputy  Director  General,  Dr  P  Matlou  presented  the  2006/07
      strategic plan of the tourism programme. The presentation focused 2005
      achievements  and  challenges  as  well  as  the   2006/07   strategic
      priorities. According to the  Deputy  Director  General,  the  2006/07
      strategic priorities of the tourism programme will include:

    ❑ Addressing tourism skills demands;


    ❑ Facilitating tourist  safety  and  security  and  building  a  tourism
      friendly
                 nation;
    ❑ Improving movement of tourist to and within South Africa;


    ❑ Supporting local government to grow the tourism sector in 9 priority
                 areas;

    ❑ Developing and entrenching accurate research instruments; and

    ❑ Implementing broad based black economic empowerment.

   5. Strategic priorities of public entities


    This section provides an overview of the 2006/07 strategic priorities of
    the public entities accounting to the  Minister  of  the  Department  of
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism. As indicated in the  introduction  of
    this report, this section will  focus  only  on  the  2006/07  strategic
    priorities presented respectively by the Chief  Executive  Officers  all
    public entities.

     1. South African Grading Council


    The Chief Executive Officer, Dr S Siddo presented the 2006/07  strategic
    plan of the South African Grading Council. The presentation  focused  on
    2005 achievements and  challenges  as  well  as  the  2006/07  strategic
    priorities.


    According  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officer,  the  2006/07   strategic
    priorities of the South African Grading Council will include:
         ❑ Working with Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
           and provinces to monitor government procurement of graded
           establishment;
              ❑ Accelerating grading of conference venues;

              ❑  Finalizing  and  launching  grading  of  tourist  transport
                services; and


         ❑ Initiating of development of  grading  schemes  for  golf  n  ad
           endorsement  of  star  grading  by  domestic  and  international
           operators.


     2. Tourism Hospitality Sport Education Training Authority


    The  Chief  Executive  Officer  Dr  M  Tsotetsi  presented  the  2006/07
    strategic plans of the Tourism Hospitality Education Training Authority.
    The presentation focused on 2005 achievements,  challenges  and  2006/07
    strategic priorities. According to  the  Chief  Executive  Officer,  the
    2006/07 strategic priorities will focus on:

    ❑ Reconstruction of the board;


         ❑  Submission  of  new  30   qualifications   to   South   African
           Qualifications Authority (SAQA);

    ❑ Accreditation of training providers;

    ❑ Research scarce and critical skills in the sectors;
    ❑ Conducting skills audit; and

    ❑ Streamline processes and procedures to ensure rapid deployment of
                 resources.

     3. South African National Parks


    The  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Dr  D  Mabunda  presented  the  2006/07
    strategic plans of the South African National  Parks.  The  presentation
    focused on 2005 achievements and  challenges  as  well  as  the  2006/07
    strategic priorities.  According  to  the  CEO,  the  2006/07  strategic
    priorities of the South African National Parks will focus on:


    ❑ Implementation of infrastructure development programme;


    ❑ Finalization and implementation of tourism model  and  brand  strategy
      D;

    ❑ Rolling out park management plan and reporting on the state of the
                 park;


         ❑  Mapping  of  cultural   resource   in   all   the   parks   and
           Implementation of balance score card; and

    ❑ Development of scientific and biodiversity research strategy.

     4. South African National Botanical Institute


    The Chief Executive Officer, Professor B Huntley presented  the  2006/07
    strategic plans of the South African National Botanical  Institute.  The
    presentation focused on the 2005 achievements and challenges as well  as
    the 2006/07 strategic  priorities.  According  to  the  Chief  Executive
    Officer, the 2006/07 strategic priorities of the South African Botanical
    Gardens will include:


    ❑ Developing network of national botanical gardens;


         ❑  Ensuring  legislative  coherence  in  relation  to  genetically
           modified organism and bio prospecting,  threatened  species  and
           ecosystems;

    ❑ Gap analysis of national capacity in biodiversity;

    ❑ Collection of taxonomy and future of natural history;

    ❑ Developing biodiversity knowledge management system; and

         ❑ Conducting research that  focuses  on  global  change  and  risk
           assessment, land degradation and adaptation to  climate  change,
           threatened and ecosystem.


     5. Greater St Lucia Wetland Park


    The Chief  Executive  Officer,  Mr  A  Zaloumis  presented  the  2006/07
    strategic plans of the South African National Botanical  Institute.  The
    presentation focused on the 2005 achievements and challenges as well  as
    the 2006/07 strategic  priorities.  According  to  the  Chief  Executive
    Officer, the 2006/07 strategic priorities of the South African Botanical
    Gardens will include:


         ❑  Implementation  of  revised  commercial  strategy  focusing  on
           public access, refurbishment of existing park facilities and new
           investment;


    ❑ Support settlement of land claims and implementation; and

    ❑ Consolidation of uMkhuze, Ozabeni and Eastern Shores into one open
           ecological area.

      6.    Evaluation of the Strategic Planning Workshop


    On the 24 March 2006, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental  Affairs
    and Tourism evaluated the strategic planning workshops in terms of  its
    objectives and outcomes. The following are  the  observations  made  by
    Members of the Committee during the meeting:

         ❑ The workshop had provided  a  good  platform  for  members  and
           government  officials  to  discuss  departmental   and   public
           entities’ past achievements, challenges and  2006/07  strategic
           priorities;


         ❑ But due  to  time  constrains  the  workshop  did  not  provide
           adequate time to question the presentations;


         ❑ The presentations focused more on past achievements and  little
           on what will be done during the 2006/07 financial periods;


         ❑ As the result the workshop did not discuss  issues  related  to
           implementation of international instruments, climate change and
           diversification;

         ❑ Furthermore, the workshop did not  discuss  challenges  related
           to allocation rights in terms of new fishing policies;

         ❑ More time and duration should be given to future workshops  and
           must be held in one of the national parks rather  than  in  the
           hotels;


        ❑ The Committee further resolved that  future  strategic  planning
          workshops should be held in one of the national parks  and  more
          time should be allocated with more focus on strategic priorities
          and less on past achievements that can  be  captured  in  annual
          reports.


      7. Recommendations


    In  order  to  facilitate  parliamentary  oversight  and   executive
    accountability on Departmental and Public Entities  programmes,  the
    Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and Tourism  recommends
    that:

        a) The Department and Public Entities must during the  2006  Second
           Term of Parliamentary Session come  and  brief  Members  of  the
           Committee  on  poverty  alleviation  projects;  NEPAD  and  SADC
           Tourism  Plan;  Greening  of  the   Nation   Project;   Elephant
           Management Strategy; 2006 /07  Legislative  programmes;  Tourism
           Black Economic Empowerment Scorecard; Fishing rights policy  and
           breakdown   analysis   of   allocation;   Environmental   Impact
           Assessment; Skills development plans and  retentions  strategies
           of all the public entities and Hunting regulations;


        b) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must  during
           the 2006 third term of parliamentary session provide training to
           Committee Members on all the  international  instruments  passed
           since 1994 and departmental programmes;


        c) The Portfolio Committee to undertake oversight visits to  Kruger
           National Parks and St Lucia Wetland Authority  during  the  2006
           third term of parliamentary session to assess the progress  made
           in respect of  land  claims,  extended  public  works  programs,
           infrastructure  development,  eco-tourism  and  black   economic
           empowerment;

        d) During  the  2006  third  term  of  parliamentary  session,  the
           Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must arrange and
           coordinate  workshops  with  Members   of   the   Committee   on
           Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative in South  Africa  (ASGISA),
           and on Genetically Modified Organism and National  Environmental
           Management Act;


        e) With effect  from  1  April  2006,  the  Department  and  Public
           Entities should provide quarterly  reports  to  Members  of  the
           Committee on all progress made with regard to their activities.

        f) The Department and Public Entities must ensure  that  in  future
           the  strategic  planning  workshops  focus  more  on   strategic
           priorities and less on past achievements that can be captured in
           annual reports as per requirements of Public Finance  Management
           Act of 1999.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Budget
    Vote 9: Public Enterprises, dated 31 May 2006:


      The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered
      Budget Vote 9: Public Enterprises, reports as follows:


      1.    Introduction


           1.1   The briefings on the budget of the Ministry and Department
               of Public Enterprises (DPE) took place on 10 and 11 May
               2006. These briefings followed on the “Annual Workshop of
               the Public Enterprises Ministry, Department and Portfolio
               Committee”, held on 15 March, and the “Autumn School”, held
               from 3 to 7 April, which both served, in different ways, as
               a background to the budget briefings and facilitated the
               expeditious processing of the briefings.


          1.2    The Committee adopted fairly detailed Budget and “Annual
                Report” reports in previous years. This year’s report should
                be seen against the background of these reports, especially
                those adopted in 2005. In this report we seek to avoid
                repeating issues covered in previous reports, except where
                necessary. Moreover, following the “strategic shift”,
                organisational restructuring and appointment of new managers
                over the past two years, the Department has become more
                stable and its programmes more consistent and easier to
                follow; and, as a Committee, we also now have a better grasp
                of our portfolio.  This report should be seen in this
                context – and our aim in future is to have reports that are
                less elaborate on what the Department says and focus more on
                the Committee’s views.  The current report is longer than it
                should be; but it serves as an important reference for us to
                play our oversight role more effectively.


          1.3    This report offers a brief summary of the presentations
                made by the Department at the briefings on its budget. The
                presentations, including the very useful Strategic Plan for
                2006-2009, can be obtained from our Committee Secretary, Mr
                Chris Thisani.


          1.4    Those who appeared before the Committee for the briefings
                on the budget included Minister A Erwin; Director-General
                (DG), Ms P Molefe; Deputy Directors-General (DDG) Ms S
                Coetzee, Mr L Mcwabeni, Mr T Mphuti  and Mr J Theledi; JPF
                Co-ordinator, Ms K Venier; Chief Financial Officer, Ms S
                Hutchings; and Chief Operating Officer, Ms R Issel.


        2.  Minister’s Political Overview


          2.1    Minister Alec Erwin explained that the Department would
                respond in detail to the issues raised in the Committee’s
                2005 reports. His brief response to the issues included:


                The Department’s new three-year Strategic Plan would provide
                greater clarity and precision on the role of the Department
                and the state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Defining the
                contribution of the SOEs to the Accelerated and Shared
                Growth Initiative of South Africa (ASGISA) had also enforced
                the need for this.
                There has been progress in defining more clear measurable
                objectives for the Department and the SOEs, but this is
                still “work in progress”, especially in respect of the SOEs.
                Defining shareholder compacts has proved to be “a very
                interesting intellectual and economic challenge”. The
                process will take “a bit longer” but the “quality of the
                compacts will be better – and that is important”.
                There has been “considerable improvement in risk management
                both in the Department and across the SOEs, but this is a
                massive area, it’s not simple, and we are looking at further
                ways of institutionalising these systems”.
                Reporting from the SOEs to the Department had also improved
                in the past year.
                The retention by SOEs of non-core businesses will not assist
                in employment; in fact, badly managing them would worsen the
                situation. Disposing of non-core businesses could save jobs.
                It is by allowing SOEs to focus on their core functions and
                contributing to economic growth that they can make a useful
                contribution to job creation.


          2.2    Minister Erwin said that the new Strategic Plan sought to
                more clearly define SOEs and their role. Whereas a private
                company sought to maximise profits, an SOE sought to
                maximise an economic rate of return. An SOE must achieve
                certain strategic economic goals set by government – but it
                must do this efficiently. Efficiency is necessary because it
                has to be financially successful and be able to raise
                capital in the domestic and international markets. Measuring
                the cost of capital therefore is an important criterion to
                judge the performance of an SOE’s Board. Many countries are
                moving towards a “much more precise classification,
                categorisation and measurement of SOEs”.


          2.3    The Minister said it is important to have clear
                shareholder compacts and mandates for the SOEs and appoint
                “exceptionally competent and professional Boards” and have
                good management teams. “We don’t want to micro-manage SOEs.
                We want them to be clear about what they must do and then
                get on with it.” Criteria by which SOEs will be measured
                include:


                How efficiently are SOEs utilising capital? This is
                especially important in view of the government’s macro-
                economic strategy.
                What are the SOEs investment plans, how strategic are they,
                and how effectively are they being implemented?
                How are SOEs contributing to the efficiency of the economy?
                Are the SOEs “taking this economy to the leading edge of
                efficiency of the operations of infrastructure”?
                Are SOEs complying with the Public Finance Management Act
                (PFMA) and other legislation?


          2.4    The greater clarity on the nature and role of SOEs has set
                the stage for new legislation. DPE is working with National
                Treasury and the Department of Public Service and
                Administration to amend the PFMA and introduce legislation
                on shareholder management.  The legislation will be tabled
                next year.


          2.5    The Minister said that the power outages had “tested Eskom
                and the Department quite considerably and highlighted that
                we have underinvested as an economy in infrastructure over
                the past 10 years. But we are pleased with progress on
                Eskom’s very big investment programme, so much so that we’ve
                asked the Board to give us a revised plan which would speed
                up the projects if we need to. We need to stabilise the REDs
                (Regional Electricity Distributors). We need some clarity on
                the national RED, in which Eskom could play a facilitating
                role. Otherwise it’s full steam ahead for Eskom”.


          2.6    Transnet had made progress in reorganizing its divisions,
                giving them clarity and beginning the disposal of non-core
                assets, said the Minister. Metro Rail had been transferred
                to the Department of Transport with effect from 1 May. The
                separation of SAA from Transnet was “technically
                exceptionally challenging because of the overlapping
                financial and loan links. There are two important steps. One
                is, at what value do we transfer the assets? And, two is,
                once separated, what about the capitalization of SAA?” The
                Minister explained that rate of growth of container traffic
                is higher than it has ever been, and that the ports have to
                be expanded.
          2.7    Denel has “embarked on a fundamental and critical
                reformulation of the strategy which means it will not be a
                full systems manufacturer in the international markets, but
                will be a systems integrator for the South African National
                Defence Force. This has probably been the most difficult of
                the turnaround strategies. The first step was to persuade
                Treasury that we at least had a turnaround strategy that was
                worth financing. Denel received R2 billion.  And I’m pleased
                that we’re on track to sign our first partnership deal in
                the aerospace sector with SAAB. There’s going to be no magic
                turnaround in the financial fortunes of Denel. The aim is to
                stabilise Denel in the next two years or so.”


          2.8    The Minister said that a settlement of the Richtersveldt
                land claim was “very close. We have an excellent
                relationship with the community. I congratulate the
                community leaders for their courage and vision.”  He said
                that “the uncertainty on the legal status of Alexkor is
                destroying its viability”. With the settlement, Alexkor
                would be revitalised commercially. There is “no strategic
                reason” why the state should own a diamond mine, and once
                Alexkor transfers its current state responsibilities to
                local and provincial government and becomes commercially
                viable, the state may withdraw from Alexkor.


          2.9    The Minister explained that Safcol’s role is being
                reviewed and a new strategy being developed.
          2.10   Arivia.kom will not be disposed of as a whole, but parts
                of it may be ring-fenced and sold. A new ICT infrastructure
                company (Infraco) may be formed. It will deal with broadband
                infrastructure.


          2.11   A new SOE to cater for the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor
                (PBMR) is to be established by the end of 2006. The aim is
                to develop the technology to provide environmentally
                friendly and cheap electricity and to develop a leading edge
                nuclear industry in South Africa. “This is a scientifically
                and technologically path-breaking project. The world is once
                again looking closely at the nuclear industry again. We in
                South Africa are making an exceptionally big intervention in
                the nuclear industry and our partners are some of the
                world’s top nuclear companies. Many people say this is not
                dissimilar to the early days of Sasol.”


          2.12   The Minister explained that the major SOEs were trying to
                revive their old apprenticeship systems, and Eskom and
                Transnet will be playing leading roles in the Joint
                Initiative for Priority Skills in South Africa (JIPSA).


          2.13   The Minister explained that the Department had a
                relatively small budget, but “was changing a bit from being
                an administrative department to having a budget that
                reflects transfer payments for capitalisation of SOEs.” The
                R2 billion allocation to Denel is an example.


          2.14   The Committee feels that the new Strategic Plan is very
                much clearer about the role of the Department and its
                programmes, measurable objectives, and structures. The Plan
                also provides greater clarity on the nature and role of the
                SOEs and what is required of each SOE. The Committee
                welcomes the Minister’s direct responses to the issues
                raised in our 2005 reports, and accepts that there has been
                meaningful progress in addressing these issues. Obviously,
                we will pursue the matter of tabling shareholder compacts in
                Parliament once they are finalised – and will exchange
                further with the Minister on this. We accept that job
                retention cannot necessarily be ensured through the SOEs
                retaining their non-core assets; the Committee’s concerns
                are about effective negotiations with the trade unions, the
                effectiveness of Social Plans, employee share option
                schemes, and other issues related to the disposal of non-
                core assets. The Committee congratulates the Transnet
                management and trade unions on their amicable settlement of
                the strike. Of course, the Committee does not understand the
                full complexities of the dispute, and hopes that both sides
                have drawn useful lessons from it. There may well be some
                lessons for other SOEs in the Transnet strike. We find the
                criteria for assessing the performance of SOEs set out in
                section 2.3 above useful – and need to explore how we use
                them, together with any other criteria relevant to a
                portfolio committee, to become more rigorous in our
                oversight role.


          2.15   The Committee welcomes too the Minister’s statement that
                the power outages have highlighted the underinvestment in
                infrastructure over the past 10 years. The Committee feels
                that there should be greater acknowledgement of the
                consequences of this. We feel too that the Executive must
                take its fair share of responsibility for this
                underinvestment and draw the necessary lessons. But
                Parliament too cannot escape its responsibility for this –
                and our and other parliamentary committees need to also draw
                lessons and become more effective in fulfilling our
                oversight responsibilities.


          2.16   The Committee feels that as Denel has been allocated R2
                billion from the national fiscus and is likely to be
                allocated more money to meet its R5,1 billion
                recapitalisation target, we should be more rigorous in
                monitoring progress in the implementation of Denel’s
                turnaround strategy and its financial recovery. Since the
                budget briefings, the Committee received a briefing from
                Denel, and was impressed with Denel’s greater clarity of
                vision, strategy, programmes and structures, and the
                progress it has made in the past six months, notwithstanding
                the considerable challenges.


          2.17   The Committee is keen to hear more from SAA about its new
                strategy and how it is being implemented.


          2.18   The PBMR project is very new for the Committee, and we
                will have to develop an understanding of the key issues
                entailed, especially in view of the significance and
                complexities of the project.


          2.19   The Committee welcomes the much-needed legislation
                proposed on the new shareholder management model.


          2.20   The Committee recognises that the portfolio of the
                Ministry is constantly expanding and increasing in
                significance. Yet the funding and resources available remain
                essentially the same. The progress achieved over the past
                year and the programmes decided on for this financial year
                therefore have added importance.


          3.     Overview of Strategic Plan and Budget


          3.1    Overall, the DG, Ms Portia Molefe, complemented much that
                the Minister said, and gave further details. She stressed
                that the new Strategic Plan went a long way to clarifying
                the role of DPE and the SOEs. She said that the
                classification of SOEs, given their variety, is quite
                complex, and suggested that the Committee considers holding
                a workshop so that the Department can engage with us more
                fully on the new shareholder management model and broader
                issues raised in the Strategic Plan.


          3.2    But for some refinement, the DPE’s mandate, vision and
                mission are essentially similar to last year. The DG said
                that the Department was still working on making these more
                concise and “refining the language”.


          3.3    To ensure a more focused and integrated role in
                transactions, DPE has merged the Corporate Finance and
                Transactions Unit with the Legal, Governance and Secretariat
                Unit to form the Legal, Governance and Transactions Unit.
                Programme 5 will now deal with special projects such as
                Aventura and Alexkor. The Joint Projects Facility (JPF),
                reporting to the Minister and the SOEs Chief Executive
                Officers Forum, has been established.


          3.4    The DG explained that the five priority areas of DPE
                activities are to implement an effective shareholder
                management system, ensure the implementation of the
                infrastructure investment programme, strengthen SOE balance
                sheets, introduce private sector partners where optimal, and
                leverage the SOE’s Capex programme to “catalyse new economic
                activities and re-established industries”.


          3.5    DPE is increasingly focusing on the “medium-term to long-
                range economic and developmental goals of the SOEs and the
                country. For example, if we are to achieve our target of 10%
                clean energy, we need to know where we are going to get our
                gas supplies 20 years from now.”


          3.6    DPE is paying keen attention to the investment programmes
                of the SOEs and their contribution to economic growth.
                Eskom’s 20-year investment programme is being reviewed to
                take account of higher economic growth forecasts. Transnet
                is to soon finalise its 20-year investment programme. DPE
                has developed an investment dashboard to monitor progress.
                DPE is also giving attention to investment by the private
                sector in the SOEs and the sectors in which the SOEs play a
                role.


          3.7    DPE is also concerned to ensure adequate local content in
                procurement by SOEs, especially with the massive Capex
                programme underway. A procurement guide is to be finalised
                by September 2006. This guide will also be used by
                government generally in the overall Capex programme.  DPE is
                also focusing on the role SOEs can play in fostering call
                centres in rural areas as a contribution to job creation.


          3.8    DPE has also developed its Transaction Guidelines further,
                particularly in respect of processing significant and
                material transactions in terms of section 54(2) of the PFMA.


          3.9    The total number of posts allocated to DPE is 157, of
                which 127 are filled. The vacancy rate is 19% and the
                turnover rate is 13%. The Department of Public Service and
                Administration benchmark for turnover rate is 8%. Sixty-
                three per cent of DPE’s staff comprises women. Of these 47%
                are at senior management level. There are no people with
                disabilities employed at DPE. The target is to employ 15
                people with disabilities over a two-year period. The DG said
                that the Department is much better skilled this year and is
                running more efficiently. Internal processes and procedures
                and the documentation system have improved and there is
                better co-ordination across the entire Department. Co-
                operation on project management has improved and “we now
                have a project management system where we can, at any given
                time, check progress on any project”.


          3.10   Of the Department’s budget of R683,4 million, R580 million
                comprises transfer payments, the largest being to the PBMR.
                In effect, the DPE’s budget is R102,3 million, which
                includes R10 million for the JPF, previously funded by SOEs.
                The Department underspent by 0,2%. This rises to 4,77% if
                the transfer to Denel is excluded. The reason for this is
                that the R3, 1 million due to Diabo Share Trust was not
                transferred because its audited financial statements were
                not available.


          3.11   The Committee welcomes the DG’s commitment to refining and
                making even more concrete and clear the Department’s
                mandate, vision and mission, even though there have been
                improvements since last year. The DG wants these functions
                to be more concise and in simpler language. This is
                surprising, coming from a senior manager in a government
                department! MPs have often complained about the bureaucratic-
                speak and unnecessarily technocratic language used by
                officials of a department, which often tends to hide or
                obfuscate (we cannot find a simpler word that conveys this
                precise meaning!) issues – and we have had to really
                struggle to get anywhere with officials of a department on
                this. So the DG’s attitude is a breath of fresh air. Of
                course, this is not to deny that the complex technical work
                of some departments sometimes requires technical language
                which is not easy to simplify – but in general there is
                certainly room to be more precise, concise and simple. This
                too should be a measure of a department’s progress.


          3.12   The Department’s re-organisation referred to in section
                3.3 above seems very reasonable. The Department is again
                commended for the high percentage of women it employs. That
                not a single person with disabilities is employed is
                unacceptable. The Committee would be interested to see what
                progress there has been by next year’s budget briefings in
                addressing this, especially as the Department has set a
                target.


          3.13   It seems to the Committee that the Department is very
                productive in the use of its budget. The underspending is
                understandable.


          3.14   The Committee welcomes the DPE’s project management
                system.


          3.15   The Committee is very keen to see progress on the call
                centres referred to in section 3.7 above.


          3.16   The Committee is keen to engage further with the
                Department on its investment dashboard and Transaction
                Guidelines, and will arrange briefings on these within six
                months. The Committee has arranged for a workshop on the new
                shareholder management model and will also deal then with
                outstanding issues raised in the Strategic Plan.


          4.     Programme 1: Administration


          4.1    This programme is responsible for managing the Ministry
                and Department and providing administrative support
                services.


          4.2    The Chief Operating Officer, Ms Rashida Issel, said that
                this programme “ensures an infrastructure geared to respond
                effectively and timeously to the needs of core programmes.
                We are responsible to ensure adherence to the Department’s
                mandates through various units.” These units are:


          Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation;
          Human Resources;
          Communication and External Relations;
          Information Management;
          Corporate Services;
          Finance;
          Internal Audit and Compliance.


          4.3    The programme’s budget of R44,3 million is similar to last
                year’s allocation, but there are shifts in allocation
                between different items. These are due mainly to internal
                capacity building needs and the costs of leases and
                accommodation.


          4.4    Two key concerns of this programme for this financial year
                are to upgrade the Department’s ICT system and ensure
                effective skills training for the staff.


          4.5    From what the Committee can tell, the administration and
                technical co-ordination of the Department seems to be
                improving, and the achievements of the outputs for this
                financial year will take DPE further in this direction.


          5.     Programme 2: Analysis and Risk Management


          5.1    This programme has been covered in some detail in previous
                reports of the Committee and will be dealt with briefly
                here.


          5.2    DDG Mr James Theledi said that the main purpose of the
                programme is to “analyse and monitor the financial,
                operational and socio-economic performance of the SOEs to
                ensure compliance with corporate plans and shareholder
                compacts, and actively mitigate key risks flowing from SOE
                activities”.


          5.3    There are three sub-programmes: Management; Analysis; and
                Risk Management.


          5.4    The key risks include safety; occupational health and
                HIV/AIDS; environment; security of key infrastructure, such
                as pipelines, ports, railways and airports; security of
                supply against demand in a growing economy; industrial
                action; skills; solvency of SOEs and their contribution to
                national financial stability; governance; and litigation.


          5.5    Among the outputs for this financial year are the
                following:
              • Progress on specific aspects of the review of SOE pension
                and medical aid funds (October);
              • Approval of financial analysis manual (May);
              • Standardised Annual Reports (December);
              • Approved KPIs and benchmarks (November 2006);
              • Publishing 5-year review of SOE performance (June 2006);
              • Progress on Risk Register for SOEs (September);
              • Approved Risk Management Framework (August);
              • Implementation of the Risk Management System (November);
              • Submission of the proposed Crisis Management System to the
                CEOs Forum (May).


          5.6    Mr Theledi explained that DPE actively engages with the
                SOEs on risk management and advises them on section 54 PFMA
                applications and materiality frameworks. DPE identifies
                risks that it has to monitor, assess their impact and
                likelihood, and set up early warning and reporting systems.
                “The SOE Boards and management are responsible for
                enterprise-wide risk management. The Department is more
                concerned with the aggregate risk profile and mitigation
                plans and the key risks that have a systemic impact with
                limited Board responsibility.”


          5.7    Mr Theledi said that the electricity power outages in the
                Western Cape highlighted the importance of having a
                functioning risk management system. “Some of the reasons for
                the outages are beyond anyone’s control, but with an
                effective risk management system it would be possible to
                anticipate some risks and take measures to avoid them.”


          5.8    The programme’s budget more than doubled from R7,09
                million last year to R16,72 million this year. This is
                partly to fill vacancies in the financial risk section. An
                amount of R2,5 million has been allocated for consultants,
                contractors and special services, and R2,8 million for
                computer services. The increases for consultants are
                necessary for capacity building in risk management, projects
                in Alexkor’s internal control review and exploration
                programme, and SOE risk assessments. The increased computer
                services are for setting up the risk management,
                benchmarking and integrated financial systems.


          5.9    The Committee feels that this programme is making steady
                progress and we do not have much to add to what we have said
                in previous reports. We feel that the outputs projected for
                this financial year and the deadlines provided are good. We
                would, however, be interested to better understand how a
                more effective risk management system would assist in
                dealing with electricity outages – and what precisely is
                being done to ensure that this happens. We look forward to
                the finalisation of the Risk Management Framework which is
                set for August. The Committee feels that greater emphasis
                should be placed on measuring financial risk, including
                through such measures as “
                Value at Risk”. The programme’s budget seems to us to be
                appropriate for the activities and outputs intended.
          6.     Programme 3:  Legal Governance and Transactions


          6.1    As explained in section 3.3 above, this programme is the
                merger of two previous programmes. It seeks to provide SOE
                mandates, and ensure alignment of SOE governance systems,
                compliance and performance with government’s policy
                objectives.


          6.2    Its measurable objectives are to “develop effective
                governance, transaction and policy frameworks that ensure
                that all SOE activities are performed with integrity,
                honesty and in compliance with appropriate legislation”.


          6.3    Its sub-programmes are Management; Legal and Litigation;
                Governance and Secretariat; and Legal Transactions.


          6.4    DDG Sandra Coetzee explained that more work is being done
                on drafting the new SOE legislation (referred to by the
                Minister in section 2.4  above). The precise classification
                of SOEs is proving challenging. Consideration is also being
                given to using categories such as state-owned and state-
                reporting enterprises. How precisely is government as a
                shareholder different from shareholders in private
                companies? How should the state deal with SOEs in which
                government is the sole shareholder compared to where it
                shares the shareholding with other partners? These and many
                other issues are being addressed in the draft legislation.


          6.5    “I find the analogy of a jockey and a racehorse useful“,
                said Ms Coetzee, “to communicate the relationship between
                DPE and the SOEs. We are the jockey steering the potential
                winning racehorse in the right direction. It’s not always
                easy. Racehorses can have a mind of their own. But without
                the jockey, the racehorse is not worth much, and the same
                applies in reverse. We are working on becoming better, more
                confident jockeys”.


          6.6    Among the outputs for this financial year are the
                following:


              • Reduction of outstanding litigation by 25-50%;
              • Establishment of Legal Panel;
              • Regular reports on impact of draft legislation;
              • Internal DPE procurement guidelines;
              • Finalisation of new SOE legislation;
              • Setting Minimum Requirements for Memoranda and Articles of
                Association of SOEs;
              • A generic shareholder compact and key performance areas and
                indicators;
              • More effective Board management: remuneration guidelines;
                Board induction toolkit; Board profiling and Shadow Board
                Database; improved AGM and strategic intent general
                meetings; and better Board evaluation;
              • Transaction Good Practice Framework: Transaction Management
                Guidelines; Employee Share Option Schemes and Management Buy-
                Out guidelines; Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment and
                Preferential Procurement  guidelines; corporate structure
                guidelines; and model shareholders agreements;
              • Transaction Execution: Eskom Finance Corporation
                securitization; PBMR; SAA; Property Project; Infraco; and
                Safcol.


          6.7    “This is a heavy-loaded work year”, said Ms Coetzee. “We
                want to establish consistency in shareholder management
                during this financial year so that in the following years we
                focus on implementation and further precisioning. So this is
                a year of building, heavy building activity in this
                programme.”


          6.8    To ensure that there is effective co-ordination within DPE
                and across government and that messages given to the SOEs by
                different parties are consistent, DPE is working on a
                governance workflow model.


          6.9    The budgets for the two separate programmes that have been
                merged will be consolidated during the adjustments estimates
                process. The significant increase in salaries is due to the
                original restructuring of the unit and the need for highly
                skilled staff. A portion of the budget allocation for the
                new Programme 5, Special Projects, will be retained to
                accommodate the expenditure which will be incurred in this
                programme. This will also be addressed during the
                adjustments estimates process. The 30,2% expected average
                annual growth in expenditure is mainly to provide for
                increases in staff, higher costs of specialists and
                refurbishing equipment.


          6.10   The Committee feels that this new programme is an advance.
                It is coherent and comprehensive. But is it aiming to do too
                much? Are there the personnel and resources to effectively
                achieve the targets?


          6.11   That the new shareholder management model is going to be
                encapsulated in legislation is most welcome. Progress in
                this regard seems to be good. The Committee looks forward to
                the Bill.


          6.12   Co-ordination between DPE and the regulatory and other
                departments that impact on SOEs seems to be improving, and
                is meant to be consolidated further this year. The Committee
                is keen to see this happen. The Committee welcomes the
                governance workflow model that is being shaped, and is
                interested to pursue this further with the Department.


          6.13   The Committee welcomes the Department’s commitment to
                speedily addressing outstanding litigation issues.


          6.14   The budget of the programme seems very reasonable given
                the aims, activities and intended outputs.


          7.     Programme 4: Corporate Strategy and Structure


          7.1    The aims of this programme are to define and implement
                industry structures; and ensure public/private service
                delivery and SOE strategies that will optimise overall
                industry efficiency, service provision, pricing of services
                and economic development.


          7.2    The overall objective of this programme is to design
                strategies and structures for the SOEs and the industries in
                which they operate that ensure delivery on government’s
                economic growth objectives. This will be achieved through
                increased competitiveness; lowest sustainable input costs;
                globally competitive services; sufficient capacity
                provision; and utilising SOEs to strengthen key sectors.
                Other objectives include improving the quality of
                infrastructure investment and liaising with the JPF in
                development of strategies.


          7.3    Its sub-programmes are transport; energy; strategy;
                Economic Research Unit; and JPF.


          7.4    DDG Mr Litha Mcwabeni set out in detail the work programme
                and DPE objectives for each SOE – amplifying the
                presentations of the Minister and DG in sections 2 and 3
                above. He said a key concern of this programme is to ensure
                that SOEs reduce the cost of business and strengthen key
                sectors of the economy as part of ASGISA. “The gross fixed
                capital formation as a percentage of the GDP has declined in
                the past 10 years and the state is determined to change
                this.” He also stressed the important role of the private
                sector. “For example, we need private sector participation
                in the ports, particularly in Coega, Richards Bay and
                Saldanha, at the level of operations, not infrastructure
                ownership at this stage.”


          7.5    He said that with the separation of SAA from Transnet, DPE
                will have to play a more direct monitoring role and develop
                expertise in this. “It presents peculiar challenges because
                SAA is involved in a fairly volatile environment which is
                influenced by fluctuations in both the exchange rate and oil
                price. So unlike other SOEs, here we have oversight without
                any control over two major variables.”


          7.6    Among other issues he dealt with are:


              • Eskom’s pricing framework, and the financing of its Capex
                programme while keeping its balance sheet positive;
              • The role of the Capex programme in resuscitating certain
                dormant industries and also drawing on “local content” to
                encourage job creation;
              • The need to address the SOE Capex programme being hampered
                by the “tedious administrative process” of securing
                Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs);
              • A study on the mining sector as it impacts on Alexkor;
              • The need for state ownership of Safcol for now because
                “demand is higher than supply” and also to “encourage small
                players in the industry and diversify the market share”.


          7.7    Among the outputs for this programme during the current
                financial year are the following:


              • Procurement of Private Sector Partner for Coega container
                terminal;
              • Separation of SAA from Transnet;
              • Pricing Policy for Electricity Sector (October);
              • Introduction of Private Sector Participation in electricity
                industry;
              • Key partnerships for Denel;
              • Beginning of sale of Denel’s non-core assets (September);
              • Development of Safcol strategy (September).


          7.8    JPF Co-ordinator, Ms Katherine Venier,  explained that the
                JPF is “a financial facility for the development of projects
                that enhance the value of an industry or can leverage off
                the assets and/or capabilities of the SOEs to benefit SOEs
                and  the economy as a whole”. Its measurable objective is to
                facilitate the rapid development of projects so that an
                operational company or financial investor accepts an
                investment case and/or costed operational plan.


          7.9    The six areas for projects are ICT; property; energy and
                pipelines; human resources; continental investment; and
                investment optimisation.
          7.10   Among the outputs for the JPF are:


              • Efficient SOE infrastructure investment in the Continent;
              • Pipelines Masterplan;
              • Training Facilities and opportunities for SOE capital
                expansion programme;
              • Provision of low cost telecommunications infrastructure and
                reduction of telecommunication costs by 50%;
              • Disposal of SOE non-core properties;
              • Consolidation of SOE procurement for supplier industry
                development.


          7.11   The Corporate Strategy and Structure budget increased from
                R8,5 million last year to R600,7 million. This is because of
                the R580 million that has to be transferred to the PBMR
                project and the increases for salaries and goods and
                services.  Excluding the PBMR, the budget for this programme
                is expected to rise at an average annual rate of 38,6% and
                reach R24,8 million in 2008/9. The allocation to JPF is
                expected to increase by R10 million per year for the next
                three years.


          7.12   The Committee’s views on many of the issues covered in
                this programme are expressed in section 2 above and will not
                be repeated here. Overall, the programme is clearer this
                year. The work that has to be done in each particular sector
                is more clearly defined. Of course, it is not easy to set
                deadlines for certain outputs, especially with certain
                ongoing activities, and it would not do to impose mechanical
                deadlines, but consideration should be given to setting more
                specific deadlines for aspects of this programme.


          7.13   The Committee is very interested in the Department’s focus
                on the role of the SOE Capex programme in revitalising
                certain dormant industries and encouraging “local content”,
                and will monitor this keenly.


          7.14   The Committee agrees that some of the administrative
                requirements of the EIAs may be too cumbersome, but the
                changes effected should not serve to dilute the need for and
                goals of EIAs. The Committee needs to better understand EIAs
                and also further develop our views.


          7.15   The Committee will follow the progress on Eskom’s pricing
                framework.


          7.16   The Committee is interested to see what emerges from the
                Alexkor and  mining sector study.


          7.17   The Committee feels that, for the reasons referred to in
                section 7.6 above and others, Safcol should, for now, remain
                in state hands.


          7.18   The JPC is interesting, exciting and laudable. To the
                Committee, the challenges seem more formidable than is made
                out, and the Department’s willingness to take them on is
                impressive. Are there adequate staff and resources to carry
                the project through?


          7.19   The Committee will obviously be monitoring progress on the
                delivery of the overall Capex programme very keenly, and
                will focus on this in greater detail during the Department’s
                first quarterly briefing on this on 14 June.


          8.     Overview of Committee’s Response to the Strategic Plan and
                Budget


          8.1    The Committee’s specific views on different aspects of the
                Department’s programmes and budgets are covered in different
                sections of this report, and will not be repeated here
                except as necessary.


          8.2    Given the scope and complexities of the Department’s
                portfolio, we feel DPE has made significant strides since
                the last budget briefings, is much clearer about its role
                and current programmes, and has budgeted appropriately for
                the achievements of its targeted outputs in this financial
                year. The new Strategic Plan for 2006-2009 is commendable,
                as expressed in section 2.14 above, and there is a much
                better fit between the Plan and the budget than in previous
                years. We will be able to better assess after we have
                considered DPE’s Annual Report for the last financial year
                when we consider it later this year, but, at this stage, we
                feel that DPE has made effective and productive use of last
                year’s budget.


          8.3    Of course, major challenges persist, but the Committee
                feels, at this stage, that the Department certainly has the
                potential to meet most of these challenges. The Department’s
                senior managers are new, young and enthusiastic – and hold a
                lot of promise. The skills level of DPE has improved since
                the last budget sittings, although challenges remain. It was
                a more confident Department we engaged with this year.  The
                Minister and new DG must be commended for putting together
                such a potentially good team. The challenge, of course, is
                to create a productive harmony of this new team and most
                effectively deploy their skills and passion – and here too
                the signs are promising. Of course, given the nature of the
                interaction between departments  and  parliamentary
                committees, and for a variety of other reasons, there are
                aspects of the a department’s role and functioning, usually
                negative, that we are unable to see, but with this
                qualification, we are very clear: DPE is doing well, and is
                poised to do better. Of course, time will tell!


          8.4    There is a fairly high level of synergy between the
                Minister and DG’s approach to their portfolio and this is
                also reflected in the approach of the senior managers – and
                this too suggests the clarity being forged in attending to
                this portfolio.


          8.5    There seems to be increasing co-ordination between DPE and
                the policy, regulatory and other relevant departments. Of
                course, this co-ordination can be challenging – but the
                Committee notes the progress, and hopes to see more.


          8.6    As the SOEs stabilise and their new role becomes clearer,
                DPE is increasingly focusing on the long-term economic and
                developmental needs and goals of the country – and this is
                to be welcomed.


          8.7    Given the importance of the SOE Capex programme, the
                Committee will meet with DPE quarterly to receive progress
                reports.


          8.8    As explained earlier, the Committee looks forward to the
                new SOE legislation.


          8.9    As happened last year, DPE’s presentations at the
                briefings were in respects different from what appeared in
                Vote 9 (Public Enterprises) of the “Estimates of National
                Expenditure” (ENE), including the financial figures. The
                quality certainly of the Strategic Plan and the
                presentations at the briefings was significantly superior to
                that found in the ENE. The Committee feels that the
                different time cycles are not enough to explain the
                differences. While there have been major improvements in the
                presentation of National Treasury budget documents over the
                years, there is still space for some improvements in the way
                Vote 9 is presented so that it is clearer and more
                accessible – and the Committee feels that DPE should engage
                with Treasury about this, especially since it agrees with
                the Committee on this. The differences between the ENE and
                DPE documents presented at the briefings serves to reinforce
                the Committee’s concern to receive DPE budget documentation
                at least seven days before the briefings so that the
                Committee can prepare properly.


          9.     Challenges for the Committee


          9.1    For the Committee to get a better sense of DPE’s Strategic
                Plan, programmes and budget, we need to be able to evaluate
                how effectively the Department fulfilled its programmes and
                used its budget for the previous financial year. Yet such an
                evaluation cannot be properly done until we consider DPE’s
                Annual Report for the 2005-6 financial year – but this
                report will be tabled in parliament at the end of September.
                Of course, there are National Treasury and DPE documents,
                including DPE’s Quarterly Reports, that provide information
                on progress on programmes and use of budgets. In the
                consistency and manner we play our oversight role, and the
                way we make use of a variety of documents, including
                Quarterly Reports, we need to more effectively link
                assessments of a Strategic Plan, proposed programmes and
                budgets during a budget briefing with progress achieved on
                Strategic Plans, programmes and budgets of the previous
                financial year.


          9.2    This report has focused more on plans, strategies and
                programmes, and not enough on the concrete details of the
                budget. We need to address this in the way we manage future
                budget briefings and report on them.


          9.3    We need to develop our skills in evaluating DPE’s budget
                and become more rigorous in our oversight role.


          9.4    We need to more actively pursue the possibility of
                engaging the services of technical experts in the energy,
                defence and transport sectors.


          9.5    The Committee needs to visit more SOE sites as part of our
                study tour programme to better understand several aspects of
                DPE’s programmes and assess progress.


          10.    Appreciation


          10.1   The Committee expresses its appreciation to the Minister,
                DG and other officials of the Department for their co-
                operation in processing the budget briefings.


          10.2   The Committee expresses its appreciation to researcher, Ms
                Desmoreen Carolus, for the background report on which this
                report drew.


5.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals  and  Energy  on  Budget
      Vote 30 – Minerals and Energy, dated 24 May 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered
      Budget Vote 30 – Minerals and Energy, reports as follows:

      A.    Terms of Reference

           The Committee resolved to conduct budget briefings on 16 and 17
           May 2006. The objectives of the briefings were to:

            • Establish how allocated funds and transfers to statutory
              bodies were to be spent;
            • Monitor the achievement of targets, and whether funds
              allocated meet those targets;
            • Monitor progress made and establish problems encountered;
            • Fulfill its mandate of overseeing the Department of Minerals
              and Energy and statutory bodies that fall within its
              portfolio;
            • Determine whether policy developments take place in accordance
              with the key objectives and aims as stated in the Department’s
              strategic plan;
            • Determine whether policy developments take place in accordance
              with government’s priorities of poverty alleviation, job
              creation Black Economic Empowerment (BEE), human resource
              development and growing the economy;
            • Monitor compliance with the Public Finance Management Act
              (PFMA).

      B.    Introduction

           The first day of the two–day session with the Department of
           Minerals and Energy was a joint session with the Select
           Committee of Economic and Foreign Affairs. The Director-General
           presented the Department’s strategic plan for the 2006/7 MTEF
           period. The focus of the first day was on programmes 1 to 4,
           which covered Administration; Mine Health and Safety; Mineral
           Regulation; and Mineral Policy and Promotion. The focus of the
           second day was on Hydrocarbons and Energy Planning, Electricity
           and Nuclear and Associated Services.


      C.    Overview of Departmental Programmes


           The Director-General explained that Department’s strategic plan
           was informed by a commitment to ensure that its implementation
           plans, programmes, time and resources were allocated to
           activities aimed at advancing the economy, bridging the gap
           between the first and second economies, redressing past
           imbalances, developing of appropriate skills needed to grow the
           economy, facilitating job creation and fighting poverty. Special
           attention was also paid to providing access to energy and
           ensuring security of energy supply to all South Africans. The
           implementation of key legislation, such as the Mineral and
           Petroleum Resources Development Act, the Petroleum Products
           Amendment Act and the Petroleum Pipelines Act, demanded a shift
           in focus from policy making to policy implementation. This also
           meant that restructuring the Department would be imminent to
           effectively improve service delivery.

      D.    Key issues emanating from the presentation


           1.    Mine Health and Safety Branch


                 The purpose of this programme is to regulate and promote
                 health and safety in the mining industry to the highest
                 standards in the world, thereby improving the quality of
                 life of those employed in industry and those affected by
                 industry’s activities. Its measurable objective is to
                 reduce mining-related death, injuries and ill health. The
                 Department highlighted “the fatality rate per million hours
                 worked has decreased from 0.25 in 2004 to 0.21 in 2005 –
                 this corresponds to 246 deaths in 2004 and 202 deaths in
                 2005.” (These statistics were taken from the Director-
                 General’s presentation notes). Much more work was needed to
                 bring it in line with international rates. As it stood, the
                 rate was at its lowest in South African mining history.
                 Detailed statistics were made available to the Committee.

           2.    Mineral Regulation Branch


                 The main aim of this programme is to effectively promote,
                 manage, transform and regulate the mining sector to achieve
                 transformation and sustainable development. This branch’s
                 responsibility was to implement the Mineral and Petroleum
                 Resources Development Act (MPRDA) and other mineral
                 policies. It would also be incumbent upon the branch to
                 improve the turn-around time for processing prospecting and
                 mining licence applications in this sector, with a special
                 focus on assisting first-time entrants in the industry.
                 Statistics on progress relating to licences and
                 applications were made available to the Committee.


           3.    Mineral Policy and Promotion Branch


                 This branch is effectively responsible for policy
                 formulation and promotion. Work has already started around
                 amending the MPRDA, which proved to have some unintended
                 negative consequences to the spirit of the Act.


           4.    Energy


                 4.1   Electricity


                       The first Regional Electricity Distributor (RED) was
                       launched in Cape Town last year in an attempt to
                       consolidate the country’s electricity distribution
                       industry. Following a Cabinet directive to establish
                       a seventh RED, the Department has started to explore
                       the viability of this National RED, which will cover
                       the areas outside the six metros already identified.
                       Other highlights included the launch of the National
                       Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA), a single
                       energy regulator for electricity, piped-gas and
                       petroleum pipeline industries.


                       In terms of reaching the targets for universal access
                       by 2012, the Department was behind schedule as a
                       result of inadequate financial allocations. The same
                       challenge was experienced with the Integrated
                       National Electricity Programme (INEP) which made
                       provision for the electrification of 500 000
                       households per annum, but the funding provided in the
                       2006/7 budget only allowed for 89 525 connections.


                 4.2   Nuclear


                       Investment in nuclear research and development
                       capabilities will increase during this MTEF period.
                       Cabinet’s approval of the Radioactive Waste
                       Management Policy necessitated the establishment of
                       structures to facilitate the implementation of the
                       policy.


                 4.3   Renewable Energy


                       Legislation was being developed to address areas in
                       the White Paper on Energy (1998), which had not yet
                       been covered by existing legislation. Special
                       attention will be given to promoting the uptake of
                       renewable energy, energy efficiency and climate
                       change.


                 4.4   Hydrocarbons


                       The petroleum industry in South Africa will for the
                       first time this year be regulated by way of licensing
                       and fuel quality regulation. The Petroleum Products
                       Amendment Act and the Petroleum Pipelines Act would
                       be key regulatory tools. The unsatisfactory results
                       from the five-year review of the Liquid Fuels Charter
                       necessitated the establishment of a supplier
                       development agency, SASDA, to address issues around
                       procurement.


                       The Department set out to conclude the paraffin
                       safety strategy this year, which will ensure the
                       phasing out of paraffin as a household fuel, while
                       looking at other more environment-friendly fuels. The
                       provision of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and other
                       renewable energy sources to households will be
                       intensified.


      E.    Budget

          The Committee was given a breakdown of the Department’s budget. Of
          the total budget of R2, 548 billion, transfers and subsidies
          accounted for R2 billion, of which R1,5 billion was allocated to
          electricity and the remainder to the public entities. An amount of
          R500 million was used in the department of which R290 million went
          to employee compensation. The remainder was allocated for goods
          and services.  Mining rehabilitation programmes also took up a
          large portion of the budget.


      F.    Public Entities



           A large portion of the Department’s budget was transferred to
           the public entities. The Department plans to improve the
           monitoring of the operations of its entities and also to align
           the entities’ objectives with those of the Department and
           Government.





      G.    Other Key Focus Areas


           Restructuring of the Department to improve service delivery,
           finalising its strategy on the support of SMME’s, using the
           transformation legislation to ensure effective and efficient BEE
           and gender empowerment would receive special attention in all
           line function programmes. There would be a commitment towards
           continuous capacity–building within the minerals and energy
           sectors.


      H.    Issues raised by the Committee

            • The Committee expressed concern at the lack of information
              around the motivating factors to establish RED 7. The
              Committee was taken through an extensive process of
              understanding and overseeing work towards the establishment
              of the other six REDs. The Committee was not aware of any
              evaluation of the RED process, which would inform the
              viability of a seventh RED, nor had it been involved in any
              discussion in relation thereto. The Committee, therefore,
              questioned its establishment at a time when only one of the
              six REDs had been launched.
            • Were there enough mine inspectors to visit the mines?
            • How would the new Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
              regulations affect the Department?  Would the Department be
              bound by the new EIA authorisations and would there be a need
              to amend the MPRDA, which also provided for regulation on
              Environmental authorisations?
            • Clarity was sought on the Department’s youth and gender
              focus.
            • How would electricity targets be met from the current budget?
            • Did the Department have a reliable staff retention programme?
            • What was being done to identify suitable sites for high-level
              nuclear waste? What was the Department’s position with regard
              to the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR)? How much more money
              would be required for the PBMR?
            • What portion of the budget goes to ESKOM, and why was only
              10% allocated to electricity and nuclear? Would such a low
              allocation not cause the Department to run into problems in
              these areas?
            • What were the time frames for filling vacant posts in key
              offices of delivery?
            • How was the Department monitoring the mining scorecard and to
              what extent were companies complying?
            • Could legislation be used to address the issue of “fronting”?
            • Was progress being made with regard to SMMEs. in the mining
              sector, and what statistical information was available in
              that regard?
            • If the need arose to urgently assess a mine, would the
              Department have the flexibility to attend to it? What was the
              line of communication in drawing attention to a particular
              mine, given that the presentation made mention of the
              involvement of the Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry
              and Environmental Affairs and Tourism?
            • What happened to the Committee that was established and
              tasked with overseeing compliance with the Liquid Fuels
              Charter?
            • The Department should explore developing policy to encourage
              government departments to procure energy-saving appliances in
              terms of stand-by time.
            • The Committee commented on the opportunity for BEE in
              relation to biofuels and was looking forward to the strategy
              on biofuels. It was suggested that one should look beyond
              just using agricultural products for biofuels. Weeds from
              wetlands might be an option to consider.
            • The presentation did not place much emphasis on climate
              change, commitments and plans relating to the Kyoto Protocols
              although South Africa was a signatory thereto.
            • Tax and other incentives with regard to renewable energy were
              not sufficient.

      I.    Responses by Department
            • The substance of the Department’s policy was to de-racialise
              the South African mining industry and to introduce previously
              disadvantaged South Africans into this sector. The shift from
              policy formulation to policy implementation exposed a number
              of challenges. These challenges related to activities of not
              only established companies, but also to the beneficiaries of
              this process. Black people allowed themselves to be used to
              defeat the objectives of the law. In an attempt to penalise
              “fronting“, the Department wanted the documentation submitted
              in this respect to be in the form of a declaration, so that a
              false declaration would constitute criminal liability
              according to law.
            • Compliance with the mining scorecard was being monitored.
            • Staff retention and vacancies remained a challenge due to the
              scarcity of skills and the skills requirements were knowledge-
              intensive. This also has an effect on the time frames for
              filling vacancies.
            • The evaluation of the business case for RED 1 was not only
              confined to the Department, but also involved broader role
              players.  At the implementation phase of RED 1 and at the
              time of making the business case for RED 1, it was felt that
              some things might have been overlooked by the Department,
              which necessitated the establishment of the National RED. A
              process of engagement on this matter between the Committee
              and the Department should follow.
            • There were enough inspectors to visit mines.
            • In terms of mine rehabilitation, the Department was
              prioritising the most polluted mines, but these priorities
              could be shifted. Provisions under the MPRDA were still being
              enforced, but there were consultation processes with the
              Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry and of
              Environmental Affairs and Tourism.
            • There had been a five–year review on the Liquid Fuels
              Charter.
            • The Department could not respond to questions on the PBMR as
              its governance, operational and shareholding functions were
              located in the Department of Public Enterprises. The
              Department of Minerals and Energy was the policy department
              as far as the PBMR was concerned. The Director-General
              explained that the same applied with Koeberg and ESKOM, where
              the Department of Minerals and Energy was only responsible
              for the regulatory environment.
            • The development of the biofuels strategy would result in
              enormous opportunity for rural development and upliftment.
              The Committee would be updated as the strategy was being
              developed.





      J.    Conclusion and Way Forward


           1.    The Committee acknowledged the open manner in which the
              Department presented its strategic plan and budget,
              highlighting both strengths and challenges. The Committee
              resolved to follow up on key issues raised with the
              Department on an ongoing basis. The Committee undertook to
              strengthen its oversight and monitor the implementation of
              programmes and projects highlighted in the Department’s
              strategic plan. The Department’s annual report will have to
              reflect the extent to which it had delivered on its services
              efficiently, effectively and economically, and whether these
              services had impacted on or made a difference in terms of the
              strategic priorities identified.


           2.    The Committee was not satisfied with the Department’s lack
              of response on PBMR matters. The Committee noted the movement
              of this project from the Department of Minerals and Energy to
              the Department of Trade and Industry, and questioned the
              current location of this project within the Department for
              Public Enterprises. In discussing its scope for oversight on
              nuclear-related matters, the Committee resolved to seek
              clarity on the situation of the PBMR project through a
              meeting to which both the Ministers of Minerals and Energy
              and Public Enterprises will be invited in order to start a
              process of discussion on the subject.  The Committee was also
              concerned about the minimal role the state utility on nuclear
              issues, the Nuclear Energy Corporation of South Africa
              (NECSA), had to play in the PBMR process. It recommends that
              the Executive be requested to arrange for a much more
              meaningful role for NECSA in the PBMR process to be explored.
              Role clarification was necessary to ensure accountability.

           3. The Committee recommends that the Department strengthen its
              leadership initiatives in the profiling and highlighting of
              key departmental programmes and policies. Specific reference
              was made to the Minister of Public Enterprises’ recent
              pronouncement on the biofuels strategy, once again motivated
              by the issue of role clarification between
              departments/ministries to give effect to meaningful oversight
              and accountability.


           4.    On the issue of electrification and the inability of INEP
              and the Department to meet their targets due to insufficient
              budget allocation, the Committee has decided to approach
              National Treasury to arrange a briefing session for Members
              of the Committee to enhance their understanding of how
              allocations were made to departments that were tasked with
              specific goals by the President, but that lacked the
              financial resources to implement.

           5.    The Committee expressed concern over the lack of
              consultative processes regarding the establishment of a
              seventh RED and will invite all relevant stakeholders to a
              meeting to discuss, through a public participatory process,
              the decision to establish the viability and role of this
              seventh RED.


Report to be considered.







