---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-08
---

WEDNESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I will move:

   That the House congratulates the National Prosecuting Authority on the
   sterling work they are doing in bringing criminals and offenders to book
   without fear or favour and affirms Parliament’s view that no one is above
   the law.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, I give notice on behalf of the ACDP that I
shall move:

  That the House debates issues of alcohol abuse in South Africa and the
  need for urgent and relevant responses by government and other
  stakeholders.


                DEBATE ON MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT


The SPEAKER: I now call the hon Nene. Hon Nene? Hon Nene, did we catch you
by surprise? [Laughter.]

Mr N M NENE: Thanks, Madam Speaker. I just hope I have the right speech.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: We all hope so.

Mr N M NENE: Yes, definitely. Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, the
success story of the South African economy ever since the ANC took over the
reins cannot be downplayed, not even by our political foes in this House.

The ANC has stood firm on its founding principles of equality, justice and
democracy for all. Macroeconomic policy has evolved over time to respond to
the material conditions that affect the vast majority of our people,
particularly those that were previously marginalised.

The tabling of the tenth Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement on 25 October
2006 is further confirmation of our government’s commitment to transparency
and accountable governance. According to one of the commentators on the
MTBPS, the Minister of Finance “opted”, to quote that commentator, for a
more responsible route in this statement.

Mr Michael Biggs, an economist with the Deutsche Bank, says fiscal policy
will act countercyclically to reinforce monetary policy. He goes on to say
that National Treasury’s investment forecasts are optimistic relative to
our own projections. Treasury’s exchange rate forecasts, in contrast,
appear to be pessimistic.

His observation is that the extent of government dissaving should decline
and so contribute to current account stabilisation during the course of the
MTEF. His view is that this should only contribute to a more structural
stabilisation in the deficit should it continue. He further states that
these projections imply a public sector borrowing requirement that surges
in 2009-10.

While, in the interim, the current account implications of investment
spending are more moderate, the improvement in savings is incidental rather
than fundamentally reflecting a shift in expenditure and so financing
patterns of government.

In terms of the major features of the MTBPS, this statement outlines the
government’s focus on sustainable economic growth and development aimed at
improving the lives of all South Africans. This is demonstrated by the
choice the ANC government makes when faced with fiscal space that prevails.
Despite continued revenue overruns, the MTBPS expresses concern about the
potential for fiscal policy to exacerbate emergent imbalances in the
economy, in particular the current account.

Expenditure on infrastructure and social services continues to be
prioritised, and this is financed from the higher than expected revenue
collections and a decline in debt service cost. As such, the statement
projects a budget balance reaching a surplus of 0,5% of GDP in 2007-08
before moving to a moderate deficit of 0,4% in 2009-10.

Appearing before the committee, one of the economists, Mr Dennis Dykes of
Nedbank, noted that even though demand-side elements are in place, the
supply side has lagged behind. National Treasury, in the 2005 MTBPS, also
expressed this view. This has been reflected in inadequate capital
formation. He also warns that short-term growth will be hampered by
physical and financial constraints – referring to the exchange rate,
inflation and interest rates - but is optimistic about the long-term growth
which he says will ratchet higher with increased physical infrastructure,
capacity and skills development key ingredients.

Mr Lumkile Mondi, the Executive Vice President of the IDC, provides a
balanced analysis of this MTBPS - that unemployment is a major challenge.
He provides a detailed, calculated analysis that concludes that our economy
will have to grow at a much faster pace than the current and projected
rate. Using the Human Development Index as a measure of the country’s
economic and social wellbeing, it is clear that more needs to be done,
particularly in the rural areas.

Uhulumeni kaKhongolose uzibophezele ekuthuthukiseni umnotho waleli zwe
ukuze ukwazi ukwenza ngcono izimpilo zabantu bonke. Lolu hlelo lokwethula
isandulelo sesabiwomali lweminyaka emithathu luqonde ukwethulela isizwe
umgomo kahulumeni mayelana nokusetshenziswa kwemali kule minyaka ezayo,
ukuze abantu babe nezwi ekutheni lowo mgomo uyahambisana yini nezidingo
zabo.

Ukukhula komnotho okusimeme kule minyaka edlule kubeke isisekelo esiqinile
sokuba kukwazi ukuthi kuqiniswe ukwakhiwa kwezingqalasizinda
ezinjengemigwaqo, ukufakwa kukagesi, ukusatshalaliswa kwamanzi nokwakha
izindlu.

Isasasa lemidlalo kanobhutshuzwayo ye-2010 nalo liyisigwadltulo esikhulu
ngoba izodala amathuba emisebenzi nokutshalwa kwezimali okuthe xaxa kule
sikhathi nangemuva kwale midlalo - uma lezi zakhiwo zizokwakhiwa ngendlela
yokuthi zikwazi ukwenza eminye imisebenzi. Izinkundla zemidlalo kufanele
zikwazi ukudlalela izinhlobo zonke zemidlalo, ziphinde futhi zikwazi ukuba
yizindawo zokubambela izingqungquthela nemihlangano emikhulu. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The ANC-led government has committed itself to developing the economy of
this country so that it can make a better life for all. This three-year
cycle programme of presenting a debate on the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement aims at presenting the nation with the government’s fiscal policy
on public spending in the coming years, so that people will have a say
whether that policy is in line with their needs.

The sustainable economic growth in these previous years intensified the
establishment of the infrastructure like the building of roads, connecting
electricity, supplying water and the building of houses.

The hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup will make a major contribution
because it will create job opportunities and greater investment during and
after these games – if these buildings are going to be built in a multi-
factorial way so that they could be used for other things. Stadiums must be
able to be used for other sporting codes and they must also be used as
conference venues.]

In terms of policy priorities and the division of revenue, the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement proposes the following changes to the division of
revenue: R18,6 billion of additional resources to the provincial equitable
share; R9,6 billion to supplement conditional grants to provinces;
R18,9 billion for local government, of which R12,1 billion consists of
conditional grants in support of the 2010 Fifa World Cup; and R32,9 billion
for national department functions, which includes provision for
recapitalisation requirements of state-owned enterprises.

Increased provincial allocations support the broadening of access to
services, and local government allocations support infrastructure-related
spending and the extension of basic services to poor communities.

The committee considered the statement and had hearings to test the
opinions of outside observers, whose submissions I have referred to, and we
are satisfied with the macroeconomic policy as presented. The committee’s
report we table here today has two recommendations: firstly, that
government continue to give priority to the issue of resolving the skills
shortage and that a progress report be brought before this House quarterly
in order to evaluate the impact of the programme; secondly, that government
create an environment that encourages higher investment through addressing
the competition and regulatory constraints.

The ANC supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement 2006 and commends
the Minister and his team on putting it together, and trusts that the
implementation of this policy and engagement with stakeholders will yield
the desired results of bringing about a better life for all. I thank you,
Madam Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Speaker, during the Budget debate in February, I
complimented the Minister on his achievement of putting South Africa’s
public finances in excellent shape. As a result of primarily high domestic
and public consumption expenditure, we achieved a gross domestic product
growth of 4,9% last year. A fairly high tax rate, now approaching 28% of
GDP, and excellent tax collections resulted in bumper revenue overruns,
thin budget deficits, reduced borrowing, and both high infrastructure
rollouts and public service expenditures.

As the Minister observed, we’re in a good space, more particularly because
of the fiscal room that has been created. If our public finances are in
good shape, what of the underlying economy? A more truthful observation
would be that despite repeated and valiant attempts by South Africa to
escape its narrow economic straitjacket, we have been stuck in a low-
investment, low-growth and low-employment paradigm. The 4,9% GDP growth was
essentially achieved, as I said, by higher consumption and expenditure.

Indeed, as the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework indicates, we are
consuming twice as much as we are producing, resulting in the deterioration
of the deficit on our current account. To add to our woes, the strong rand
has caused havoc with our nonresourced export industries which, in the
main, absorbed high levels of unskilled labour.

How does the policy statement respond to these challenges? Our objective is
spelled out quite clearly by the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
for South Africa. If you are going to halve unemployment by 2014, you have
to achieve GDP growth of 4,5% between now and 2009, and 6% thereafter.

How can we judge Asgisa’s potential for success? We can’t as yet judge the
outputs, but we can scrutinise the inputs. In this context, we have the
benefit of the working papers of the panel of economists led by Professors
Houseman and Roderick from the Centre for International Development at
Harvard, which was commissioned by the government to assess Asgisa as a
strategy.

One of the main elements of Asgisa to date has been the public sector
infrastructure rollout. Last year, it was R372 billion but now it was
raised to R409 billion for the particular period. While it is acknowledged
that the large infrastructural spending is necessary because of past years
of neglect, it is the nature of the investment that the Harvard papers find
problematic.

Because it is focused on the nontradeable sector of the economy, and is
essentially financed by inflows into the financial account, Harvard’s
financial forecasting model, using both Treasury and BER numbers, indicates
that these investments will, paradoxically, most likely lead to further
external imbalances. As they rightly point out, international studies
indicate that growth accelerations – that is exactly what we want – will
only eventuate with improvements in the external imbalances of the economy.

Another question raised is whether the amount of resources we have and the
associated productivity levels will be sufficient to deliver the levels of
output and growth rates envisaged by Asgisa. Asgisa sets out to raise total
investment from 18% to 25% of GDP, but a proper analysis of that 18%
indicates the problem I identified earlier, namely, that the major portion
of the investments has been in a nontradeable sector. The investment in the
tradeable sector, namely, manufacturing, mining, and agriculture has
oscillated around 5%, and is indeed declining.

In any event, can we sustain these relatively high levels of token
investment? Well, a warning light is showing in respect of foreign inflows.
Net foreign investments up to the time of the MTEF were about R82 billion,
broken down for the five months from January to May. Inflows into the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange and bond markets were R58 million. For the
second five months, this inflow dropped to R15 billion with no signs of
recovery.

If overseas savings are drying up, what of the domestic ones? The problem
is that South Africans are notoriously bad savers. South African savings,
as a percentage of GDP, have dropped now to 13,75%.

The conclusion that the Harvard Working Papers come to, once again, is that
large increases in spending will put pressure on domestic resources,
requiring significant increases in government and private sector saving, or
alternatively, will lead to further external imbalances.

In respect of productivity, they note that Asgisa tends to achieve 2%
growth from a 6% increase in investment, a required investment three times
larger for the equivalent output of successful international growth
successions. This speaks directly to employment and productivity growth,
which both have to improve dramatically. Unfortunately, the Reserve Bank
points to a continuing decline in productivity, and Roderick points to an
unemployment problem which is structural in nature with wage levels being
too high in the economy.

Their conclusion is that given the employment and productivity performance
of our economy, even such large investments as envisaged in Asgisa, will
barely deliver the desired growth rates while imposing an impossible burden
on investment. This is even before discussing the feasibility of increased
savings to finance the growth without further increasing the external
vulnerability of the economy.

As a result, they believe that Asgisa has serious macro inconsistencies
that need to be addressed. This is why the DA believes that the policy
statement was a disappointment. There were no indications of how these
macro inconsistencies are going to be addressed, going forward.

Roderick is quite clear that an export-orientated strategy that increases
relative profitability of producing tradeables for world markets will
generate economic growth by pulling labour into productive activities where
their marginal product is much higher. Therefore, what we need to do is
encourage investment into the productive side of the economy by way of a
range of fiscal incentives that boost long-term confidence, increase
savings and create a positive climate for investment.

That is exactly what we have to do with that fiscal space that is
available. We have to lower the corporate tax rate over a period of time
from 29% to 25%. This will produce the savings. This will create the right
climate. We have to provide tax offsets for new jobs created. We have to
provide export incentives to priority sectors.

Professor Houseman actually identifies those sectors: manufacturing;
manufacturing machinery and equipment; pharmaceuticals; agriculture; and
ironically, chemicals. Why do I say ironically chemicals? It is because
Sasol is mentioned by name, and we should be providing incentives to Sasol,
not putting windfall tax on Sasol.

The GDP growth which creates employment has to be our major priority. The
Harvard Working Papers are an extremely important contribution to the
debate on how we achieve this. We all have to be part of that debate. It is
vitally important; otherwise we won’t have the shared growth that we wish
for. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Speaker, the IFP would like to congratulate the hon
Minister of Finance on a well-constructed and positive medium-term Budget.

The IFP will indeed be in support of the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement as presented to Parliament by the Minister. We welcome the Medium-
Term Budget Policy Statement, and particularly the plans set out in this
mini Budget to alleviate the economic hardships of the desperately poor of
South Africa.

Although more could have been done in this regard, we realise that other
urgent and pressing demands are being put on the Minister, and the Budget
cake must indeed be shared equitably.

The looming 2010 Soccer World Cup will have a very positive effect on the
economy of South Africa, and it is with this in mind that the IFP applauds
government for setting aside R14,9 billion for major capital projects for
the World Cup, and over R4 billion to upgrade our overstressed public
transport system.

I am a firm believer in the multiplier effect, and I am confident that this
spending will, through the ripple effect of the multiplier effect,
eventually be ten-fold in terms of what is going to be spent here. We will
give you all the support in this regard.

We must, however, warn that the perception of lawlessness in South Africa
could have a disastrous effect on the World Cup. About 45 000 visitors are
expected for the event, with tourism revenue projected to be around R13
billion. Official estimates are that 130 000 jobs will be created and R21,3
billion contributed to the gross domestic product. Should South Africa’s
crime crisis not be solved soon, there could be a low attendance, and that
could possibly ruin our economic gains.

The IFP applauds, furthermore, the directing of a large portion of
additional spending towards capital expenditure with an eye to upgrading
roads and hospitals. We welcome the increase in spending on education and
health and the R3,5 million allocated to Justice and crime prevention.

The IFP wants to reiterate its call that economic growth in South Africa,
through the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, is
of the utmost importance. Seven per cent annual growth is non-negotiable.
Interest hikes, however, could be detrimental. We agree that excessive
borrowing and credit should be controlled. Most definitely, there are other
ways to curtail credit.

I think that here there should be the payment of a deposit in purchasing
moveable or immoveable assets, particularly motor vehicles. Imagine that
you can today get R5 000 cash back if you buy a new vehicle. That would
mean that if you’re really broke, down and out, then you buy a new vehicle
to get that money in your pocket. Those are the things that should be
addressed.

In conclusion, the Minister of Education, with her disciplinary action in
schools, will receive all the support from the IFP’s side. Every bit of
discipline that’s coming back in schools, which is eventually having a spin-
off effect on crime, is supported by the IFP. Minister, we support your
Budget, and we will be voting for this Budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Speaker, it is understandable that the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement gave particular emphasis to plans for the 2010
World Cup. It is crucial that World Cup-related projects are carefully
designed to promote long-term development and social investment over a much
longer timeframe.
However, the 2010 spending must not only be geared towards ensuring a
successful event, but must also be placed in the context of a medium to
long-term overarching developmental agenda. The World Cup must not be an
end in itself, but rather a springboard to meeting broader objectives,
achieving sustainable reductions in unemployment, poverty and inequality,
and investing in basic infrastructure such as reliable transport.

The danger is, however, that government may focus all our development
efforts on the cities where the matches will be held. This will further
magnify the urban and rural divide, and will increase migration to the
cities. Whilst the ID recognises the need to meet all the requirements for
hosting the World Cup, we would also like to see equitable and even
development in other cities and rural areas.

The adjustments to the 2006-07 financial year amount to R8,8 billion, but
unfortunately, the adjustments also allow for additional funding to the
Pebble Bed Modular Reactor. The ID would rather welcome government putting
up start-up capital for small businesses.

In conclusion, we would like to call on portfolio committees to seriously
look at section 30 reports released by the Treasury, and to call to book
those departments who are underspending their budgets. Thank you very much.
Mr S N SWART: Madam Speaker and hon Minister, the ACDP believes that the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement reflects our country’s strong
macroeconomic fundamentals. Despite the cut in growth forecast, we remain
optimistic as to our economic growth prospects, particularly in view of the
2010 Soccer World Cup, and the additional massive spending on
infrastructure required for this showpiece.

We also particularly welcome additional spending on fighting crime, social
welfare, HIV/Aids and the additional investment in the built environment in
the form of housing, roads, water, sanitation and community facilities.

The additional government spending will, we trust, help raise economic
growth to the projected level of 6% by 2010, which in turn will cut poverty
and reduce unemployment.

We do, however, remain concerned that economic growth at the moment is
mainly consumer-driven, resulting in the increased current account deficit.
We are undoubtedly importing far more than we are exporting, and spending
far more than we are saving.

However, the ACDP broadly supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.
Thank you.

Ms L L MABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Without repeating what other
speakers have said, I would like to be as simple as possible so that even
the person on the street would understand what we are talking about when we
talk about the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

I’d like to start by thanking the Minister of Finance for his sterling
performance over the past ten years. I hope that in the coming years South
Africa will continue to achieve as it has achieved up to now, in order for
growth to be achieved, and in order for those who have been disadvantaged
and excluded from participation in the economy in the past to be able to
join others in the economy.

The Minister presented the statement as instructed by the obligations of
government. I must remind members that those obligations are embodied in
legislation, but also that this House, or rather the two Houses of
Parliament, must ensure that they exercise oversight over what is contained
in the statement.

Parliament, through its oversight, must ensure that the statement will
achieve its intended objectives, so that at the end of the medium term we
will not find that departments have been underspending rather than
utilising the allocated funds to relieve poverty.

I would like to quote the Minister when he indicated that he was obliged to
report, amongst other things, on economic developments and economic
challenges that face the country, but also on how to meet these challenges
through public spending priorities over the medium term.

It is of great concern to the Joint Budget Committee that most departments,
when they appeared before the committee, did not engage on the outer years’
projections. Most of the departments engaged on the current financial year.
That created a big problem for the committee because at this moment we are
in a difficult position, to make recommendations as made by the different
departments, and this is a challenge.

Therefore as a committee we are challenging the departments that in future
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statements they must focus on the outer years,
because it is crucial for us as Parliament to be able to monitor what they
have in place. This is a big challenge. On behalf of the committee I am
taking it to the different departments.

I’d also like to request the departments, as indicated earlier, to focus on
those outer years because when you look at what is projected in the outer
years, a lot of funds are earmarked, but the question is, are the
departments ready to engage in the outer years?

I’d also like to raise as a crucial issue to this Parliament that without
capacitating the Joint Budget Committee, we will not engage at all in the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statements. Instead we will rehash what the
Minister states in his Budget Speech, or what is contained in the
documents, without thoroughly engaging with what we want to happen in
future. Therefore it is a challenge to Parliament to ensure that there is
sufficient research capacity in all committees of Parliament, both select
committees and portfolio committees, to engage the departments in terms of
their projections.

It is important to know what the departments project for the future, to be
able to engage with what happened in the previous year, what happens in the
current year and what is going to happen in the future with regard to their
plans. So that is a big challenge for Parliament and it is long overdue
that Parliament must invest in research.

I want to raise some of the priorities contained in the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, namely investment in stadiums and public transport.
There is no way that we can have proper oversight to ensure that what is
budgeted for in the medium term will be achieved without having information
at the tips of our fingers.

Will we be in a position by the end of this year to evaluate whether the
plans set up for the construction of the different stadiums are in place?
Are we in a position as Parliament to monitor by the beginning of the year
whether construction of those stadiums has begun or not? Come midyear,
there should be no excuse to say that the environmental impact assessments
have not been done and therefore the stadiums could not be built.

We have challenged the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism to
speed up the process of the environmental impact assessments because those
are delaying construction of most of the major projects. This is a
challenge to the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism.

With regard to the criminal justice system we as a committee are saying - I
want to emphasise this – that if those departments do not have an
integrated approach, we will not achieve what we want to achieve. On paper
we can continue saying that we are planning together, we are working
together, when in practice we are not doing so.

I’d like to challenge these departments that, firstly, there is the
construction of capital projects that is supposed to have taken place, or
that is supposed to take place in the coming years. The Department of
Justice should be in a position to account to Parliament with regard to the
timeframes for the construction of High Courts in Limpopo and Mpumalanga.

Correctional Services must account to Parliament with regard to how far
they are with the four prisons that are supposed to be almost complete and
the other four that are to be constructed, because crime is an issue in our
country and we must arrest delays before the whole project becomes late.

Another important matter is that of visible policing. To what extent have
we employed the numbers of police as envisaged over the medium term? By how
much have the three departments reduced the backlog in cases? How far have
they gone in addressing the slow case flow?

I am saying this because it is part of what is projected over the medium
term, that there will be an allocation to ensure that there is a smooth
case flow, but without interaction amongst the three departments we will
not be able to achieve that. Instead, we will budget and provide funds, but
find that we are unable to achieve what we want to achieve as government.
[Applause.]

It is the responsibility of the ANC to reduce crime. Crime affects our
people, but I challenge the two Houses: let us monitor and have effective
oversight over all government departments. But the major responsibility
rests on Parliament itself: to provide research to the committees so that
they can have information at their fingertips.

The other spending priority is investment in roads, rail and electricity
generation. With regard to 2010, there is no way that stadiums can be built
without the necessary road and rail infrastructure, so that one can travel
easily from Durban to FNB within a day, through improved investment in rail
and road infrastructure. Without rehabilitation of our roads, without
rehabilitation of the rail system, both of which are earmarked in the
spending priorities, there is no way that people will enjoy what other
people from outside this country will be enjoying in 2010.

I want to raise the crucial issue of capacity in the different departments.
There is already more investment in education, but we have to ask what the
quality of the outcomes of that education is. What is the quality? What
kinds of people are graduating in matric? Are they prepared to go into
challenging fields in the economy? Where is mathematics? Where is science?
Where is accounting? Are those learners prepared to be trained as artisans?
These are the skills we need for 2010.

We do not want to continue to import skills. Is the department ready? Over
the past ten years spending in education has increased and it is going to
increase even more, but what is the output? We do not want to continue
having people roaming the streets who have qualifications which are
irrelevant to the economy. That is the challenge.

I know it is difficult but there is money earmarked in the outer years for
building the capacity of teachers. What kind of teachers do we have? In ten
years’ time we can’t say that we could not change the type of teachers that
we have. We can’t! What is the output in education? Does the output match
our spending? That is the challenge. [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: We support you!

Ms L L MABE: I would like to thank the members of the Portfolio Committee
on Finance, the members of the Select Committee on Finance and in
particular the members of the Joint Budget Committee. I’d like to thank
this group for its contribution to this process, but I’d also like to
challenge us as members of that committee to prepare more in the coming
statements.

I want to thank them very much because we spent a lot of time working on
what is before us, because the departments did not give us what we wanted
from them. So I want to thank those members, but I’d also like to thank
members of staff who were patient to work long hours with us. I want to
thank them and also those departments that made an effort to appear before
us. I want to thank them, but finally I want to express disappointment that
we couldn’t interact with sports ... [Time expired.] Thank you very much.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA would be very happy for that hon
member to have an extra five minutes.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please take your seat.

Mr B E PULE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am tempted to disagree with the
previous speaker because she said it is only incumbent upon the ANC to make
sure that crime goes down. I would say that it is incumbent upon every
citizen of this country to make crime go down. [Applause.]

The UCDP commends the Minister for presenting the comprehensive Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement to this House. The Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement will hopefully address the goals of South Africa’s growth
strategy that aims to modernise the economy and improve its
competitiveness; and, above all, broaden participation and enhance social
inclusion.

The following are all good intentions of this Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement: an additional R28 billion for public infrastructure; the
strengthening of the criminal justice system - with emphasis on visible
policing and improvement of court case flows; growth of provincial
equitable share by 7%; growth of local government equitable share by 11%;
about R45,7 billion capital expenditure transfers to municipalities, with
R24,7 billion destined for infrastructure to rolling out basic municipal
services; and capacity-building in municipalities as a priority.

It should, however, be noted that all these good intentions will be a
futile exercise if departmental officials continue to claim to have no
capacity and skills to deliver, whilst at the same time looting government
resources. Words and phrases like noncompliance, underspending, fruitless
and wasteful expenditures, misappropriation and roll-overs must have no
place in the mental make-up of departments, if growth is to be sustainable
as envisaged by the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

The UCDP supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Deputy Speaker, the PAC supports the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement. With one minute allocated to me, I simply want to
say that attention must be paid to an economy which is said to be growing
but not creating jobs for the people of our country.

A labour survey put unemployment at 41% and youth unemployment at 70%. If
these figures are correct, then South Africa cannot be said to be entering
its age of hope, because unemployment is one of the causes of poverty among
the majority population of this country. This is aggravated by the fact
that company directors earn 111 times more than ordinary workers.

Growth in the economy has increased profits for owners of big businesses.
Economic growth seems to rest on South Africa’s unequal structure of the
economy that favours the wealthy. Such growth really rings hollow for the
poor as it does not translate into jobs, nor more schools, clinics, decent
houses, efficient transport, free education for the poor, eradication of
poverty ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon Pheko, your one minute is gone now.

Dr S E M PHEKO: Izwe lethu! [Our land!] [Laughter.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Deputy Speaker, we eagerly await the auspicious, wise and
beneficial strategies that our hon Minister of Finance, Mr Trevor Manuel,
has and which certainly have never failed to light our path to development
delivery and growth.

The hon Minister, in his Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement this year,
revealed that South Africa was in the midst of longer and sustained
economic expansion. He said that robust economic growth, supported by
strong consumer spending and rising investor confidence, had created over 1
million jobs in the past three years. It is statements of this nature that
light up and bring confidence to our system. Our determination to deliver
to our people is also crucial.

However, the reality that many remain homeless, with no electricity, proper
sanitary facilities and potable water, dents the system. But the MF views
these challenges as a light of determination to strengthen our efforts and
overcome the hiccups that hinder delivery.

The MF praises South Africa’s goals to modernise our economy and improve
competitiveness ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms S RAJBALLY: The MF supports the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement.

Ms R J MASHIGO: Madam Deputy Speaker, Ministers and hon members, the
Reconstruction and Development Programme enabled people to identify and
address issues that affected their lives. Since 1994, the inequalities
which affect the South African people are being addressed by the ANC–led
government. Research shows us that poverty has declined since 2000 as a
result of the implementation of social grants and rising employment.

Social services delivery is a priority in our people’s lives and for the
growth of the economy. We have seen an increase in expenditure, especially
in this social cluster, as seen in the proposed revision to the three-year
baseline estimates for the 2007 Budget that include education and teacher
development; health and social welfare; housing, municipal services and
community development; as well as transfers of provincial equitable shares,
the bulk of which will be used to improve quality and access to health,
education and social services.

I will briefly explain the above-mentioned priorities, starting with
education. In the state of the nation address, the President mentioned that
the government had to make interventions, which included no-fees schools
that would target 529 schools to double mathematics and science graduate
output to 50 000 in 2008. This will, hopefully, address the skills
shortage. It will also invest in the schools infrastructure and equipment
as well as the financing of further education and training.

As far as health is concerned, I will refer to hospital revitalisation
grants which, as you all know, address many projects. To achieve this, the
department must make sure that it addresses guidelines that will provide
reporting to ensure effective monitoring. This will, in turn, reduce non-
compliance with the Division of Revenue Act, Act 5 of 2004. Again, the
department should continuously brief Parliament on progress and oversight
visits must be done by different portfolio committees to make sure that the
programmes are being truly attended to.

The spending of HIV and Aids conditional grants on the prevention, care and
treatment plan should also be noted, as there is great improvement in the
sense that many people are being reached through different programmes.
Priority must also be given to TB treatment, the reopening of nursing
colleges and the transfer of mortuaries and forensic services to the SAPS.
Consideration should also be given to the improvement of remuneration of
health professionals.

When it comes to housing, there should be improvement in the upgrading of
informal settlements and the alignment of intergovernmental and
interdepartmental funding to enable municipalities to deliver in all
housing-related issues.

When coming to social development, I will refer to the social transfers,
which are consolidated at national level through the SA Social Security
Agency. This will enable provinces to focus on social welfare and community
development. The attraction of social workers and the implementation of new
social welfare legislation is also an issue.

The Department of Home Affairs is responsible for activities of the social
cluster, from the cradle to the grave. This means that all socioeconomic
activities concerning both the individual and national growth are based on
documents that are available at the Department of Home Affairs.

Some of the crucial issues that need to be attended to in the Department of
Home Affairs are that vacancies in this department must be filled;
effective anti-corruption plans must be in place; the roll-out of the
whistle-blowing policy should reach all offices; multipurpose community
centres must be manned so that officials are able to service all people
within that area on a daily basis. And, again, the purchase of mobile units
is of grave importance as people in rural areas need IDs and must be
accessed through these mobile units.

We all have challenges, as mentioned by our chairperson, hon Mabe. I won’t
repeat them. I can only say that there are challenges. As our Minister
Trevor Manuel said, it is a mountain to be climbed in stages and joy to be
enjoyed, step by step. At the end of the day, all South Africans need
better lives. With all those words, I can say the ANC welcomes the proposed
revision and the estimates as stated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement. I thank you all. [Applause.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Deputy Speaker, once again the hon Minister of Finance has
produced results that deserve only applause. The hon Minister’s department
displayed exceptional financial management skills pivotal to the state’s
ability to deliver and encourage economic growth. Unfortunately, the same
cannot be said of some other departments’ ability to achieve the same level
of effectiveness.

Dit bly egter verblywend dat daar ‘n algemene besef by die regering
ingetree het vir die noodsaaklikheid van remediërende optrede. [However, it
remains heartening that the government has come to the general realisation
that there is a need for remedial action.].

Consideration also needs to be given to the ability of departments to make
proper projections of what their true financial needs are. Only time will
tell whether the new measures will have the necessary remedial results to
ensure effective levels of service delivery across the board. We therefore
give our full support to the priority skills and the Siyenza Manje
initiatives and trust that they will produce the required result of much-
improved service delivery, especially at local government level. The United
Party of SA supports the medium-term budget. Thank you.

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Deputy Speaker, Comrade Ministers, hon members, in the
state of the nation address to Parliament on 3 February this year,
President Mbeki said the following:

  While we must indeed celebrate the high levels of optimism that inspire
  our people who are convinced that our country has entered its age of
  hope, we must also focus on and pay particular attention to the
  implications of those high levels of optimism with regard to what we must
  do together to achieve the objective of a better life for all our people.
  We have to respond to the hopes of the people by doing everything
  possible to meet their expectations.


The Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, which we are discussing today,
strengthens the age of hope that President Mbeki spoke about. It gives all
South Africans the assurance that they will not remain in an age of hope,
but that they will move into an age in which they will see their dreams and
expectations being met.

It also enables us as the ANC and our government to continue to deliver on
the commitments which we made in the 2004 national and provincial elections
when we committed ourselves to entering into a people’s contract to create
work and fight poverty, as well as earlier this year when the ANC presented
a plan to make local government work better.

This Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement provides significant allocations
over the MTEF with particular emphasis on allocations towards strategic
investments that will leave behind a lasting legacy, particularly in the
areas of tourism promotion, sports development and public transport.

A significant allocation of R15 billion is being made for the provision of
infrastructure that will enable South Africa to host a successful and
memorable 2010 Fifa World Cup that we can all be proud of. The hosting of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup serves as a catalyst for investing in economic
infrastructure in our country.

It will be important that the legacy of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, in
relation to the allocations that are being made over the MTEF, leave behind
a well-functioning and effective public transport system, and improved
roads and sports facilities that will enable men and women, both young and
old, to reach their dreams in the sporting arena.

The amounts that are being made available for the 2010 Fifa World Cup will
require good planning and, more importantly, good implementation. In this
regard, the Department of Sport and Recreation will perform a critical role
in ensuring that these allocations deliver the best 2010 Fifa World Cup yet
staged.

During the hearings which the Joint Budget Committee held in relation to
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and the announced allocations over
the MTEF ending in the financial year 2009-10, a critical area arose which
affected most, if not all, departments. This relates to underspending due
to vacant posts and the capacity of departments to spend and deliver.

According to the Director-General of the Department of the Public Service
and Administration who appeared before the committee, savings made due to
underspending on vacant posts could fill up to 24 000 posts. Some of these
vacant posts range from senior management, to planners, to clerks, to chief
director and to deputy director-general posts.

I have raised this because we need to ask and understand whether these
vacant posts have any impact on the ability of departments not only to
spend but also to deliver effective and efficient services that will
improve the quality of life of South Africans. Departments will need to
ensure that where critical vacant posts are not able to be filled, they
take steps to ensure that the work of the departments are not adversely
affected but, more importantly, that funding over the MTEF period will be
used to deliver what it has been allocated for. Strategies will need to be
developed both to retain staff and to ensure stability of service delivery.

We welcome the fact that steps are being taken by government to strengthen
the capacity of the state to deliver on its mandates. These include the
modernisation of financial management practices as well as targeted
interventions which are focused on dysfunctional institutions and
programmes.

In addition, earlier this year the Deputy President launched the Joint
Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition, known as Jipsa. Together with
the further education training colleges and higher education institutions,
this programme will focus on producing graduates that could be employed to
meet the needs of both the public and private sectors.

The Department of Sport and Recreation indicated in its presentation that
between 13 000 and 15 000 volunteers will be required. It will be important
to ensure that sufficient funding is allocated over the MTEF to ensure that
these volunteers are well trained and ready to play their part in 2010.

The Department of Transport provided the Joint Budget Committee with
details of the projects to be undertaken in preparation for the 2010 Fifa
World Cup. These projects include the upgrading of roads, the upgrading of
taxi facilities, the introduction of transport corridors, the construction
of cycle and pedestrian ways, and airport and rail station upgrades,
amongst other things.

In addition, the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement proposes that an
amount of R5,5 billion be transferred to local government for investment in
public transport. These financial resources are being allocated to provide
an efficient and effective public transport system and to improve transport
infrastructure around the country. Proper planning and effective
implementation will be critical in delivering quality outputs. This will
include the need for well co-ordinated interdepartmental planning and
budgeting.

The housing programme will be allocated R29,6 billion over the next three
years, with spending on low-income housing reaching R11,5 billion per year
by 2009-10.

In the presentation by the Department of Housing, it was indicated that the
average delivery period of a housing programme from the planning stage to
handover and occupation takes three years. What this means is that funds
allocated over the MTEF period do not produce the intended housing units
within the same period. The Department of Housing will need to consider
steps which could be taken to reduce the average three-year delivery
period.

Earlier, as I was speaking, I referred to the need for interdepartmental
planning, co-ordination and budgeting. I want to raise housing as an
example, because in Cosmo City in Johannesburg we are seeing this taking
place. Construction work started in early 2005. As we speak here today,
houses have been built, roads have been constructed, electricity has been
installed, a taxi rank is under construction, schools are being built and
parks have been provided. [Applause.]

This clearly indicates that if departments work together, plan together and
budget together, programmes of government can be delivered in an effective
and efficient manner. If the available resources are used effectively and
efficiently, tomorrow will indeed be better than today. It requires a
united and unwavering commitment from all who work in the respective
government departments to work tirelessly to improve the lives of so many
of our people who have placed their hope and trust in our government.

We as the ANC support the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, thank you very
much. I am encouraged by the deliberations that have taken place here, this
afternoon, but also in the Portfolio Committee on Finance as well as the
Joint Budget Committee.

As stated in the MTBPS speech on the 25th, the policy statement aims to
provide Parliament and the public with the framework upon which the 2007
Budget would be based. It is very important to remind ourselves that the
statement is actually not a requirement of any piece of legislation. It is
an endeavour by government to advance transparency, openness and certainly
to strengthen the oversight role of Parliament.

There is a curiosity in the way in which this matter is dealt with. For
some reason the press has chosen to call this the mini Budget. There is
nothing mini about it. It takes a long view at a level of abstraction
allowing for policy discussion about the choices we make. If anything, it
is a maxi Budget and not a mini Budget. But as with the gates, they don’t
get very far with some of these things.
This document has facilitated in the ranking we spoke about. We are now
seen as ranking fourth out of 59 countries with regard to international
transparency in budgeting - the initiative we referred to before.

The extent of our documentation and the amount of information it provides
will not mean anything if it is not used to hold government accountable for
the services that public funding buys. I am, therefore, particularly
impressed with the work undertaken by the Joint Budget Committee, following
the tabling of the statement and the committee’s 40 page report. I think it
says it all. I want to say to the hon Mabe - I don’t see her. Oh! There she
is - Well done! I feel my work is now done. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

More important, was the way in which the hon Mabe, on behalf of the
committee, went back to the fact that we must, as Parliament, ask
departments to talk, not just about next year, but also about the medium
term. It is very important that Parliament helps to shift the culture into
a planning culture, because it is by insisting on that that you prevent the
roll-overs and the savings, because it is not about trying to get money
now, it is about trying to focus on what the money will buy. These
engagements with the Joint Budget Committee, I think, are exceedingly
important in that regard.

I would like to turn also to some of the issues raised in the microeconomic
context. I am sure hon Nene would forgive me if I don’t focus too much on
what he said, but turn to what the hon Davidson said. In policy-making you
always have choices. One of the choices that you can make is to take a very
detailed, analytical, technical view and then believe all of the
simulations, because at the end of the day your modelling only provides you
with simulations. Then you follow that as closely as you can. But you need
to understand that the power that we have over future information is
severely constrained. That is one route you can take.

The other route is to do what we have done with Asgisa, which of course is
partly aspirational. It is a set of policy outcomes you would like to
attain and test. You test it as we do with this international panel to ask
what issues require additional attention. We welcome their comments. And as
I have sat before the paper in the name of Professor Roderick, published on
the website, it’s in fact an invitation to the rest of the team to
undertake peer review. We welcome it, because it is by engaging like that,
partly in the open, that we will be able to identify what the binding
constraints are.

I don’t think there is a dispute about the fact that we need to emphasise
the tradeable sectors, but then it’s less about government and more about
the way in which the private sector comes to the party. It is not always
the incentives, hon Davidson; it is about where the private sector sees
itself.

For now, there are a number of issues that we need to consider. One of them
is that in the previous bull run what many firms, who should be baking
bread or doing other things in the manufacturing sector, opted to do was to
take their savings and invest them in the financial derivatives. Some of
them made a heck of a lot of money and some lost their shirts.

Those who made money have opted to be on that side of the economy. That
strengthened our services side but weakened manufacturing. And if you talk
to manufacturers in South Africa, they repeatedly raise the fact that China
is too big. So part of what our responsibility is, is instilling a self-
belief about what we can and should be doing in order to ensure that they
will take up the initiative, because to talk about incentives in vague and
general terms doesn’t help us.

As a country we’ve done remarkably well. I don’t know of any other country
in the world that has suspended all agricultural supply incentives. Our
farmers are doing incredibly well. Surely, there are some of them who farm
badly but in aggregate terms our farmers are doing pretty well. And that, I
think, is part of the lesson. We have created a policy room that allows us
to engage with the issues so that we could be focused and give attention to
the incentives we need, incentives that resonate with the Industrial Policy
Framework and not a series of favours doled out to friends and family. That
is the position we need to be in.
The issue of wage levels touched on in the paper has a flipside. The
flipside raised very strongly is that South African businesses extract too
high a rent from their business activities. What you are seeing is, in
fact, frequently this endeavour to live like lords and extract very high
rents. Part of the payoff to organised workers is to pay slightly higher
rates, but then to leave too many people out of the equation. That is part
of the difficulty. It is part of the growing inequality that confronts us
in South Africa and it is something that we need to apply our minds to.

Regarding the issue of the current account deficit, what is happening is
that our investments are growing faster than our savings ratios. It’s not
all negative. Let us not dress in sackcloth and ashes and beat our brows
and feel very sorry for ourselves. It is also happening at a time of huge
global imbalances, a period in the world’s economy for which a textbook has
not been written. Let’s not feel too sad about that.

The rigour of this exercise must be entrenched in the work of Parliament.
Somehow, we need to find a way of giving it a bit more time. I think what
is happening is that the outputs of the two committees are incredibly
solid. I can go away from here with this report, sit with the Treasury, go
back to the Ministers’ committee and the budget informed by Parliament, but
the problem is it’s a bit too rushed. We need to give consideration to that
and focus repeatedly on the objectives. I think we have to say to
ourselves, reinforce that which is good but also not deny ourselves the
right to claim victories where we need to.

The hon Dr Pheko talks about jobless growth. He must be talking about some
other economy, because the numbers in South Africa speak for themselves;
540 000 jobs in the year to March and, in fact, 1,1 million new jobs for
the three years to March of this year. That is not jobless growth. That is
a rate of growth in employment that is faster than the number of school
leavers, but it doesn’t sufficiently deal with the backlogs. Let us not
beat ourselves up about it. Something positive is happening in this economy
that we need to build on.

There are details also in the report of the Joint Budget Committee that we
need to similarly reinforce, including the fact that the enrolment ratios
for both primary and secondary schools, which will advance with the
acceleration of the no-fee schools process, are very solid. Greater access
to health care is evident in the rise in the number of visits to primary
health care clinics from          81,9 million in 2000 to 101,8 million in
the fiscal year 2005-06. As the hon Mabe says, those numbers speak for
themselves. They mark change, so let us take joint responsibility for the
quality of the outputs.

Improving the effectiveness and capacity of the state is central to
initiatives such as Jipsa and the hon Schneemann spoke about the number of
vacancies. Sometimes this is a bit of a mirage as well. It is necessary for
departments to identify vacancies. It is necessary for some of those
vacancies to be funded, but sometimes departments do pretty well without it
and sometimes departments that are at 100% do less well. There is a
different process rather than just looking at the numbers that we clearly
have to get through.

Issues of the Siyenza Manje and Project Consolidate dealing with the skills
gap in municipalities will certainly help us towards a single Public
Service.

The issues of taking the fight against crime forth through increased
recruitment, effective training and improved systems in the SAPS, Justice
and Correctional Services, is the emphasis we want to welcome.

The increase in the tax ratio is also being raised by some of the members.
Part of the difficulty is that we are victims of our own success. There is
nothing that we have done in the design of the tax system that should give
us anything more than 25%. It is the best estimate that we have available.
We end up in the current milieu with 28,8%. It is huge, but we are the
victims of our own success. Here we are as a country where, since 1994, tax
rates, save for VAT, which has remained at 14%, have all come down. These
are the results.

What is most important is that we take seriously all of the considerations
of the two committees and the views articulated by members here this
afternoon, as we certainly will. We must express our deepest appreciation
for the hard work of the two committees in a very short space of time and
give this House the assurance that these matters will be considered as we
finalise the Budget for 21 February 2007. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE ON MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET
                              POLICY STATEMENT

The Deputy CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, we move:


  That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

There was no debate.

Report accordingly adopted.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (First Reading debate)



Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this
opportunity. I would like to remind members of this House that the adjusted
national Estimates of Expenditure are a result of government policy, of
what has been legislated. If departments were unable to achieve certain
objectives, they will be able to redirect funds within those departments.

Section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act stipulates that at midyear
departments should have a relook at their budgets, and adjust their budgets
to ensure that spending will be in line with the priorities of government.
They are also instructed by Treasury regulations to ensure that they are
within the prescribed financial framework for spending by government
departments.

I want to raise one issue of all those prescribed by section 30 of the
Public Finance Management Act, and that is that there should be provision
for unforeseeable and unavoidable events. To give an example, the area in
the Cape region where there were floods and the areas of Taung could not be
left in the situation that they found themselves in. It was important for
government to provide for those unforeseeable and unavoidable
circumstances. There is no way that government could say that it did not
have funding to assist the people in those areas.

This is one of the prescriptions of the Public Finance Management Act which
underpin the fact that government is in a position to control its funds and
spending, indicating that in those areas there are funds for the
construction of roads and houses, as well as the provision of water to the
people who find themselves in those situations, so that at least they can
have a better life.

I would also like to indicate that there is provision for unallocated
funds, as per the Public Finance Management Act. Those unallocated funds
are a challenge to us as committees of Parliament. As the year goes by, do
we look at the spending of departments so that at the end of the financial
year they will not have savings where they were supposed to have spent? And
were they unable to spend with due reasons? We need to know what those
reasons are and accept that it is a fact.

I will give an example with regard to the Department of Home Affairs. Home
Affairs has a problem, and if it wants to restructure to address that
problem, that is a valid reason; because we must remember that the
Department of Home Affairs is one of the departments which are of crucial
importance to the life of every citizen. So, if there is no restructuring,
the problems in the Department of Home Affairs will continue in the coming
years and that will be a problem. If it restructures as a result of its
problems, we need to accept that that is a fact and the funds must not be
used for the sake of spending, but must be saved so that they may be used
once the restructuring is complete.

I would also like to indicate that the Minister presents his Budget Speech
at the beginning of the year, and there are some commitments that are not
provided for in that Budget. It is at this time that the Minister comes
back to Parliament to say: “These are the priorities, but we were unable to
provide funding during that period. Now, this is the situation.” An example
is the building of stadiums for the 2010 World Cup. Those stadiums were not
provided for, but now there is R600 million to ensure that construction
starts. So, it is part of the programme of adjusting the national Estimates
of Expenditure.

With regard to unspent funds, I would like to quote from the maroon book
that deals with the adjusted national Estimates of Expenditure, in which
the Minister of Finance says:” This is against the declared savings and
underspending of R4,4 billion that are anticipated.” If those savings are
anticipated, what do we say as members of Parliament about those
anticipated savings at the end of this budget year? Do we have information
about how those savings were effected or why they exist? Are we in
agreement that there must be savings in those particular areas or
programmes where there will be savings? Those are some of the things that
we need to interrogate.

For instance, provinces and local municipalities do not spend much on
grants. The division of revenue says that if they cannot account for how
they are going to use the grants, National Treasury must withhold those
funds. National Treasury must not disburse the funds, because disbursing
the funds would mean that funds would be used for what they were not
intended. So, we need to look at this vis-à-vis the reasons for the grants.
I believe that members of this House will fully agree that money should not
be dispatched to provinces and local municipalities when National Treasury
is not sure whether the money will be well spent.

I would also like to refer to the Department of Health and challenge the
Portfolio Committee on Health. Last year, R49 million was rolled over to
this year. That money comes from HIV/Aids funding. This year, almost R20
million has been shifted from HIV/Aids to another programme. Have we been
doing oversight as the Portfolio Committee on Health? Aids is a problem in
our communities. So, the question is: What do we say?

But also, in terms of the joint budget, have we given you information to
make you aware that the Department of Health is not going to spend? As a
joint budget committee, do we have the necessary research capacity that I
referred to earlier on in my other speech; so that we can inform portfolio
committees in advance that this department is going to underspent, so that
that portfolio committee can start to engage with the department?

It is worrying, Minister of Finance, that many departments underspent on
vacancies that are not filled. It was worrying to us as a committee when
one of the directors indicated that they could not spend on “clerical
posts” - that is not a scarce skill at all. A matriculant ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member. Your time has expired.

Ms L L MABE: Thank you. We support as the ANC. [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Adjunkspeaker, met betrekking tot die
aansuiweringsbegroting staan twee elemente uit: Eerstens, dat sekere
departemente soos Korrektiewe Dienste en Grondsake bykans         R1,9
miljard nie gaan spandeer nie vanweë swak besturende administrasie;
tweedens, dat sekere departemente R2,1 miljard sal onderspandeer, en dit
alles terwyl dienslewering in Suid-Afrika tekort skiet.

Hierdeur ly openbare beleggings skade en word die nodige infrastruktuur en
instandhouding daarvan nie geskep vir die privaatsektor om die ekonomie uit
te bou nie. Saam hiermee ervaar Suid-Afrika ook swak beheer en bestuur van
openbare geld deur sommige departemente as gevolg van kapasiteitsprobleme.

Die rede daarvoor is soos volg: Eerstens, ondeurdagte en onoordeelkundige
regstellende aanstellings wat sy tol eis in oneffektiewe beplanning, swak
finansiële en administratiewe bestuur en besluitneming, en gevolglik
sloerende uitvoering van regeringsbeleid; tweedens, is tot 40 000
staatsdiensposte vakant; derdens, die lae werksetiek en lae vlak van
opleiding van openbare amptenare wat openbare produktiwiteit onder 50% hou;
en vierdens, die korrupte aanwending of verdwyning van openbare geld.

So die DA wil weet: Hoe verdwyn 600 motors sommer net so uit die Gauteng
Departement van Vervoer se voertuigpoel? Hoe verdwyn R30 miljard sommer net
so uit die Oos-Kaap se administrasie? Waarom kry amper ’n derde van die
departemente ’n gekwalifiseerde oudit verslag die afgelope boekjaar?

Die aansuiwering vir die huidige boekjaar van R1,5 miljard tot die
Nasionale Begroting gaan hand-aan-hand met die
mediumtermynbegrotingbeplanning, maar as ons kyk na een van die brandpunte
in Suid-Afrika wat vroeër ook hier genoem is, naamlik die “Criminal Justice
System”, dan word geen ekstra geld in die huidige boekjaar vir die polisie
aangesuiwer nie, ten spyte van die polisie se logistieke tekortkominge in
al sy programstrukture, soos wat ons gister gehoor het.
Van die ekstra R80 miljard oor die volgende 3 jaar kry Justisie en die
Polisie net 4% daarvan, dit wil sê net R1,1 miljard per jaar vir die twee
departemente. Dit is ’n skande en ’n verontagsaming van die regering se
grondwetlike plig om sy landsburgers te beveilig.

Wat die polisie betref, maak die mediumtermynuitgaweraamwerk vir verlede
jaar voorsiening vir 34 000 nuwe lede en met vanjaar se nuwe geld vir nog
8 000 lede. Dit word verwelkom, maar waar is die kapasiteit om die nuwe
lede op te lei as die bestaande personeel nie eers behoorlik opgelei is
nie? Tans beskik die gemiddelde polisieman nie oor ’n matrieksertifikaat
nie en kan ook nie behoorlik verklarings uitskryf nie.

Addisionele begrotingstoewysings vir Justisie is bedoel om die departement
se administrasie op te knap en personeeltekorte op alle vlakke van die
regstelsel aan te vul. Met die huidige aansuiweringsbegroting vir vanjaar
het Justisie R150 miljoen oorgerol vanaf laasjaar vanweë tenders wat
gesloer het vir die aankoop van toerusting vir hofdiensadministrasie.
Verlede jaar het Justisie net 89% van sy lopende uitgawes spandeer.

Korrektiewe Dienste kry niks van die addisionele R80 miljard nie, want die
departement is so te sê in chaos. Die tragiese is dat Korrektiewe Dienste
R197 miljoen teruggee vir die Tesourie omdat hy nie begin het om vanjaar
vier tronke ekstra vir 12 000 gevangenisse te bou nie. En dan Minister
Balfour se verklaring daarvoor aan Minister Manuel dat sy departement nie
ingenieurs in diens het om die proses te hanteer nie – wil jy nou meer!
Aai, Minister, dis ’n lekker land hierdie!

Korrektiewe Dienste het ook R603 miljoen van sy personeelbegroting
teruggegee as gevolg van vakante poste, maar dan verwys die Tesourie daarna
in sy aansuiweringsbegroting as ’n besparing. Minister Manuel, dit is nie
’n besparing nie, dit is uiters swak staatsadministrasie en niks anders as
’n ondermyning van die effektiewe “Criminal Justice System” nie.

Aan die ander kant help dit ook nie dat die Minister meer geld gee nie. Dit
is kapasiteitsprobleme by hierdie drie departemente. Die fout lê dus by die
bestuurskorps en strukturele probleme in die departemente self, of soos
Minister Manuel dit self gestel het tydens ’n toespraak by Unisa, naamlik
“dat die vermoë om die begrotingsgeld te bestee, ontbreek”.

Minister Manuel het genoeg geld vir openbare dienslewering, maar  ongelukkig
laat die tekort aan bestuurders by departemente hom in die steek om  hierdie
fondse effektief te benut. Die DA ondersteun die  aansuiweringswet.  Dankie.
[Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN  DYK:  Hon  Deputy  Speaker,  with  regard  to  the  adjustments
appropriation budget two elements stand out: Firstly, the fact that  certain
departments like Correctional Services  and  Land  affairs  will  not  spend
about R1,9 billion because  of  poor  management  and  administration;  and,
secondly, that certain departments will underspend R2,1  billion,  and  this
is happening despite the fact that there is a lack of  service  delivery  in
South Africa.

This  will  be  detrimental  to  public   investment   and   the   necessary
infrastructure will not be created and maintained in order for  the  private
sector to expand the economy. In addition to  this,  South  Africa  is  also
experiencing poor control and management of public  funds  as  a  result  of
capacity problems in some departments.

The reason for  this  is  as  follows:  Firstly,  hasty  and  ill-considered
affirmative action appointments  resulting  in  ineffective  planning,  poor
financial   and   administrative   management   and   decision-making,   and
consequently the delayed implementation of government policy;  secondly,  up
to 40 000 posts are vacant in the Public  Service;  thirdly,  the  low  work
ethic and low training level of public servants keep productivity levels  in
the Public Service under 50%; and, fourthly, the  corrupt  appropriation  or
disappearance of public funds.

Therefore, the DA would like to know: How  can  600  motor  vehicles  simply
disappear from the vehicle pool of the Gauteng Department of Transport?  How
does R30 billion simply disappear from the Eastern Cape administration?  Why
did almost a third of the departments get a  qualified  audit  in  the  past
financial year?

The adjustments of R1,5 billion to  the  national  Budget  for  the  current
financial year go hand in hand with the medium-term budget planning, but  if
we look at one of the burning issues in South  Africa  that  has  also  been
mentioned earlier, namely the “Criminal Justice System”, then no  additional
funds will be appropriated to the Police in the current financial  year,  in
spite of the logistical shortcomings in all the programme structures of  the
Police, as we heard yesterday.

Justice and the Police will only get 4% of the additional R80  billion  over
the next 3 years, that means  only  R1,1  billion  per  annum  for  the  two
departments. This is a disgrace and shows  disregard  for  the  government’s
constitutional duty to safeguard its citizens.

With regard to the Police, last  year’s  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework
makes provision for 34 000 new members and this year’s money for  a  further
8 000 members. This is heartening, but where is the capacity  to  train  new
members when the existing staff  are  not  even  properly  trained?  At  the
moment the average policeman does not have a matric certificate  and  cannot
write statements properly.

The additional budget allocation for  Justice  is  aimed  at  improving  the
department’s administration and supplementing staff shortages at all  levels
of the judicial system. With the current  adjustments  appropriation  budget
for this year Justice rolled over R150 million from  last  year  because  of
delayed tenders to purchase  equipment  for  court  service  administration.
Justice only spent 89% of its current expenditure last year.

Correctional Services is not getting any  of  the  additional  R80  billion,
because  the  department  is  virtually  in  chaos.  It   is   tragic   that
Correctional Services has to return R197 million to Treasury because it  has
not started with the building of four extra prisons  for  12  000  prisoners
this year. And then we have  Minister  Balfour’s  explanation  for  that  to
Minister Manuel, that his department does not have engineers in  its  employ
to undertake this process - did you ever! Oh, Minister, this is a  wonderful
country!

Correctional Services  also  returned  R603  million  of  its  staff  budget
because of vacant posts, but in its  adjustments  appropriation  budget  the
Treasury refers to this as a saving. Minister Manuel, this is not a  saving,
it is extremely poor government administration and nothing  but  undermining
of an effective “Criminal Justice System”.

On the other hand, it would also not help if the Minister were to give  more
money. There are capacity problems in these three departments.  The  problem
lies with  the  management  corps  and  the  structural  challenges  in  the
departments themselves, or as  Minister  Manuel  himself  put  it  during  a
speech at Unisa, “the ability to spend the appropriation funds is lacking.”


Minister  Manuel  has  enough  money  for  public  service   delivery,   but
unfortunately the shortage of managers in the  departments  does  not  allow
him to  use  these  funds  effectively.  The  DA  supports  the  Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.][Applause.]]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Adjustments Appropriation Bill is
the vehicle for appropriating adjusted amounts of money from the National
Revenue Fund for the requirements of the state for the financial year
ending 31 March 2007.

The IFP supports the adjusted appropriations. In particular, we support the
following appropriations: the R490 million transfer to local government as
a conditional grant for use on the municipal infrastructure grant; the
R960 million as conditional grants for the provincial infrastructure grant
and the local government restructuring grant; the R624 million and
R627 million, respectively, for the pebble bed modular reactor and the
newly established InfraCo.

The problems that we have experienced with blackouts during this year must
be a clear indication that more and more must be done, particularly in
terms of the capacity for generating electricity in this country. We are in
full support of that.

There is also R847 million for Denel. The streamlining and turnaround
strategy of Denel are absolutely essential and, whereas we were hesitant in
the past, it would seem that Denel is making progress and that its future
could be of such a nature that it will be a self-funding organisation. We
must realise what an important role Denel is playing and that we simply
cannot allow Denel to slip away from us. Therefore this handover will serve
very well in the long run.

There is also R160 million for higher education institutions, R75 million
for the Government Employees Medical Scheme, and R49 million as a
conditional grant to provinces for the comprehensive HIV and Aids grant.
The IFP would like to congratulate government on the direct shift in the
HIV policy, and for that the Deputy President and the Deputy Minister
receive our praise. The IFP supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill. I
thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, declared savings and
underspending of R4,2 billion are anticipated in the Adjustments
Appropriation Bill. The question arises whether government can spend
budgets and, in particular, capital budgets effectively. It is regrettable
that we still have underspending, as is indicated in the Department of
Correctional Services and the amounts that are being handed back to
Treasury.

We are all in agreement that capacity constraints need to be addressed.
Over the past five years the emphasis of fiscal policy has shifted from
deficit reduction to growth and social development. Regarding this, it is
widely agreed that we should shift from welfare towards development in
order to address poverty and unemployment.

Underspending in the past and, in particular, with regard to capital
underspending undermines this policy shift. We would hold that one of the
main obstacles to achieving 6% growth is skills and investment in human
capital. However, having studied this, the ACDP will support the
Adjustments Appropriation Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, as the executive seeks our approval on these
estimated adjustments, the MF finds it necessary for us to express our
sentiments on issues that worry us and those that appear promising.

The MF acknowledges that there exists a variety of reasons for the various
adjustments to all sectors, whether an increase or a roll-over. However, we
express distress over the R3,4 billion roll-over that certainly, in some
cases, lends itself to incapacity to fulfil deadlines and project
management.

We often hear cries about too little funding, but there is certainly a big
question mark when the department ends up with a roll-over. Noting the
seriousness of crime and our overpopulated prisons, we are in no way
impressed, and we need to push hard if we are to rescue South Africa from
the horrific crime reality.

We eagerly await the 2010 Fifa games and respect the 172,59% increase to
the budget for Sport and Recreation in light of this. We are confident that
the plans set out to transform South Africa into a fabulous host and to
upgrade facilities to meet the challenges will be adequately applied
through this funding. The MF supports the Adjustments Appropriation Bill.
[Time expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! I appeal to hon members, before I call the next
speaker, to reduce the number of meetings in the House. We respect those
meetings. We want to believe they are related to what we are discussing,
but I’m sure it would be better to have them in your offices or outside the
House so that we give respect to the people who are addressing us. If that
is not going to happen, we might actually ask you and call you by name to
leave the House, so that those who are interested in the business of the
House will then continue with the business of the House. Thank you very
much for agreeing that that should be the route to be followed.
Mr N M NENE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members. On all the
categories of adjustments, as already outlined by all the speakers before
me, the committee is satisfied that all requirements in terms of the Public
Finance Management Act and the Treasury regulations have been satisfied.
Therefore, we support the adjustments appropriation.

Requests for unforeseeable and unavoidable expenditure amounted to R7,3
billion. Of this, the Treasury Committee approved R1,7 billion, comprising
R900 million for flood-related matters, R662 million to take care of the
changes to VAT for government entities, and R138 million allocated to
others which is spread amongst departments.

Under section 16 of the Public Finance Management Act, a total of
R110,546 million was approved by the Minister of Finance as emergency
funding, comprising the housing conditional grant of R84 million,
provincial roads of R15 million and district roads of R11,451 million.

In terms of the amounts that were announced in the 2006 Budget, the total
funding was R110,546 million, as I indicated, that was split amongst those
entities, but the ones Mr Bekker alluded to that were for several state-
owned enterprises: the pebble bed modular reactor, Denel, InfraCo, Alexkor
and the SA Rail Commuter Corporation.

On the roll-overs, which is the fifth category, in terms of Treasury
Regulation 6.4 we find that we deal with issues of unspent funds and
payments for capital assets, which may only be rolled over to finalise
projects and assets, and then we move on to the declared savings, which
have also been alluded to by members.

During the 2006-07 financial year, there was a total of R2,1 billion,
compared with R5 million in 2005–06, which is quite a concern, because if
departments declare so much in terms of savings before the end of the
financial year, it means that there are problems. The projected
underspending for the current year is R2,1 billion compared with the
projection of R2,5 billion for 2005-06.

The declared savings come from the following departments: We have the
National Treasury with R130 million, comprising some of the Integrated
Financial Management System project and the medical aid benefits for civil
servants. The Department of Labour declared R2 billion in terms of a
workshop for building at Indlela and a reduced number of learnerships. For
Correctional Services there was R603 million; and for Land Affairs R1,122
billion for delayed restitution claims. The committee supports this
adjusted budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker, thank you,
hon members. Let us just remind ourselves of the context. This House,
arising from the Budget tabled in February, appropriated spending for this
year at the level of R472,73 billion. If you take account of all of the
additions now, we take spending in this year up to R474,23 billion. It’s
the addition of about R1,5 billion of spending.

Again I would challenge members in this House to look at the trends in most
other countries, and to find adjustments appropriations as infrequently as
we do it in this country, and at levels as low as we do it in this country.
It is almost unprecedented. We have to meet the requirements of the PFMA,
especially in respect of section 30, for the adjustments estimates.

The tests are abundantly clear. The first of those would be unforeseeable
and unavoidable expenditure. It is not either unforeseeable or unavoidable,
but it has to meet both conditions and where expenditure requested meets
those conditions, we clearly spend.

Secondly, there is section 16, which is a provision that allows us to spend
here as we did in the case of Taung. Thirdly, there is the allowance to
move money between one vote and another. Fourthly, there is the utilisation
of savings, and fifthly, we allocate money that is rolled over from the
previous year, but the rollover doesn’t necessarily apply in the same
department.

We use those roll-overs to finance areas that we deem to be necessary here,
but we do so in circumstances where the requests don’t meet all of the
criteria of being both unforeseeable and unavoidable.  There is a rationale
to this. Let me just emphasise that. If you look at the schedules as
published, firstly there is the declared or projected savings by
departments. The largest contributor to that is the Department of Land
Affairs.

What we do in the Budget is we finance the policy choice. The policy choice
is land restitution. Land restitution has to follow a quasi-judicial
process. The money is there, and when the department says, “For a whole
host of reasons we can’t get through all of the legal processes, we are not
going to be able to spend this money”, they return it to us as a projected
saving. They must either follow a legal process, or they must take the land
by expropriation. Don’t ask why, and don’t tempt it.

Dr S M VAN DYK: [Inaudible.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Don’t tempt it, Van Dyk. Just don’t tempt it, Van
Dyk. Here you have a legal process that we must support in the letter and
spirit of the Constitution. Whether Van Dyk likes it or not, it’s the route
that we will take. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The hon Minister
knows as well as I do that he has to refer to an hon member as an hon
member.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, it is hon Van Dyk.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Okay, thank you. In respect of the under-savings
the largest, I am saying, of them is Land Affairs at
R1,12 billion. It is not carelessness. It’s a legal process. The department
doesn’t control the legal process. Similarly, I can talk about the
Treasury, where there is an amount of money that is dependent on a series
of other inputs for the integrated financial management system.

We are not going to spend the money this year. And so, we hand it back
early in the process, and then in addition, based on past experience, we
are also projecting some underspending of about R2 billion, which, when
seen against the spending levels of R472 billion, is a minuscule
percentage.

In respect of the roll-overs, Deputy Speaker, I say that the rollovers are
not from the same department. If you look at the schedules, the R49 million
to the Department of Health for the rollout of antiretrovirals, as part of
the comprehensive plan on HIV and Aids, is a rollover from other
departments. It is not a rollover of that department.
What is a roll-over of that department is the hospital revitalisation plan,
but there is also additional money that has gone into accelerating the
hospital revitalisation. Similarly the Department of Public Works receives
money, and this is for learnerships in terms of the Expanded Public Works
Programme. There is an amount of R32,5 million, and I know it is recorded -
in some detail – in the committee report. That R32,5 million is not their
own money, it is from a general pool of roll-overs that we have applied
because we want to accelerate the skills level in order to ensure that we
can deliver on the Expanded Public Works Programme.

One of the issues raised is the remuneration of members of the Police
Service. Let me just say to members of this House that the unit costs of
police are higher than the unit costs of both the Departments of Health and
Education. It is a fact. We should not repeat the lie that our police in
South Africa are underpaid. It cannot be correct. You can draw your
international comparisons in detail.

I know this issue is held up frequently, that the police have too few motor
vehicles. I want to stand at this lectern and say: It is without a
foundation of truth. We must ensure that there is better efficiency in the
application of the resource, but the resource is there and localised
oversight through community police forums, I think, will certainly help.

Let me finally attend to the hon member for Orania, because you have to
come from a place like that, have no world view, be narrow, caught in your
own apartheid mindset, to respond like the so-called hon Van Dyk responds
to life. He blames everything on affirmative action. There is nothing
wrong. In fact, the productivity and outputs of this government are a heck
of a lot better than they were at the time when he served in government in
the apartheid state as a representative of a minority, serving the
interests of a minority and ignoring all of our needs. Moreover we allow
him to speak, unlike what happened when he was in government, when we were
sitting in prison. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, the proceedings will initially take the
form of a question and answer session. I shall put each Vote in turn,
whereupon members will have the opportunity to ask questions ...
[Interjections.] Order, hon members, please! I have to repeat what I said
because I was interrupted by the Whips, for that matter.

The proceedings will initially take the form of a question and answer
session. I shall put each Vote in turn, whereupon members will have the
opportunity to pose questions to the relevant Ministers. Members must
please press the request-to-speak button if they wish to ask a question.
Hon members should please wait until I recognise them before putting their
question.

Vote No 1 - The Presidency - put:

Mrs S M CAMERER: Madam Deputy Speaker, in connection with the
R10 million that has been made available by the Presidency for ex-Deputy
President Zuma’s legal costs, I have the following related questions.
Firstly, exactly how much of this amount is going towards Zuma’s legal
costs in respect of the Shaik trial? How much is going towards his own
corruption trial so far and how much towards his rape trial?

Secondly, is this an open-ended commitment of the Presidency? In other
words, will more money be paid by government to cover Zuma’s legal fees if
his corruption trial is reinstated and drags on?

Thirdly, what are the grounds for paying these fees? In this connection,
the Supreme Court of Appeal’s decision this week to dismiss Shaik’s appeal
and confirm the High Court’s ruling that there was a generally corrupt
relationship between Shaik and Zuma surely makes this decision
unconscionable. Is it not setting an appalling precedent, for it can surely
not be argued that Zuma’s ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon member! Let me just make something very
clear, before we proceed on a wrong course. The questions that we are going
to be asking should be relevant to what we are dealing with now. Of course,
you don’t expect presiding officers to know all 34 of the Votes and what
they entail, but we are going to be guided by the executive. If you think
that the question is not relevant to the Vote itself, then you are not
compelled to answer that question.

To me, that question does not sound related to the Vote. However, I would
like to stop you there and get a response from the Minister in the
Presidency.

Mrs S M CAMERER: There is an item in accounts.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Camerer, please complete your questions and then I
will give an opportunity to the Minister in the Presidency.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Thank you very much. I was making the point that this is
possibly setting an appalling precedent, for it can never be argued that
Zuma’s alleged corrupt conduct was undertaken in furtherance of the
business of the state.

In fact, Leonard Ramatlakane, Western Cape safety and security MEC and top
ANC leader, rightly stated in 2004 when the Western Cape provincial
government refused to pay the legal fees of Peter Marais and David Malatsi
who, of course, were not ANC members, in their corruption trial that it
would set a wrong precedent for government to fund the defence of officials
accused of corruption.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order hon Camerer! You are definitely abusing the time
that I have given you. What we are dealing with here are questions, not
statements.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Well, I was motivating my question.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is no motivating; you just ask your questions.
Hon Ellis, please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What point of order?

Mr M J ELLIS: The point of order is that this is an opportunity for
political parties to make statements and to ask questions. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, what we are dealing with here are questions based
on the Vote, and that is where ... [Interjections.] What are you saying,
hon member?

An HON MEMBER: This is a Vote.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you please ask to be permitted to speak, and then
I will give you an opportunity to do so. Listen, the Presidency will
respond to that. I’m saying, let us refrain from making statements and ask
questions, and the hon Camerer understands what I’m saying. Will you please
take your seat because I think we understand where you are going. Let’s get
a response. I thought you needed a response from the Minister in the
Presidency.

Mrs S M CAMERER: I’m not sure, Madam Deputy Speaker, whether you’d like me
to recap ... [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: No, sit down. May I answer?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Oliphant, I’ve just asked hon members to please
respect the House. Let us respect ourselves. If anyone wants to rise on a
point of order or anything, our Rules provide for that. However, I’m not
going to allow people to scream around saying: “Sheila”, whatever. I don’t
have Sheilas here; I have hon members. Okay? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with your
ruling. But I think that this thing is bad and we should put it to rest.

I just hope that some of the opposition party people, when they raise this
issue, would find it just as appalling that Magnus Malan and Wouter Basson
had their legal fees paid out of state funds. As a former Deputy Minister
in this portfolio, let me remind hon Camerer about the enabling legislation
which was enacted in 1957, when you people were in power.

Mr Zuma qualifies for legal representation at state expense under section 3
of the State Attorneys Act – so go and read if you want. The Presidency, as
the last department with authority over the person requesting such
assistance carries the responsibility for the payment of such legal costs,
and had to ensure, in line with the requirements of the Public Finance
Management Act and relevant Treasury regulations, that there are adequate
funds to cover such costs.

The Presidency has not yet received any claim – and this will come later –
in respect of the legal costs of Mr Zuma, and consequently does not know
what the eventual quantum of such a claim would be. In the meantime – and
that’s what is important – the accounting officer in the Presidency was
under a statutory obligation – and so don’t ask him to defy the law - to
provide for sufficiently budgeted funds to cover the claims in respect of
such anticipated costs. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, funds shifted from the
compensation of employees under Programmes 1,2,4 and 5 will be used to pay
the former Deputy President’s legal fees and once-off human-resource-
related projects. A matter of serious concern is the fact that the
Presidency reported the underspending resulting from a failure to fill
vacant posts as a saving, yet it was able to use a portion of this for
these payments, while no indication is given as to when these posts will be
filled. Can the Minister please explain? By the way, we would be just as
appalled by the spending of such funds on Magnus Malan and Basson. Thank
you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’ve already
responded to the first part. With respect to the second part of the
question, it is quite clearly important.

Part of the problem has to do with obtaining security clearances in time,
because anybody working in the Presidency, from the secretary upwards, has
to get a proper security clearance given the nature of the Office of the
Presidency.

The second point has to do with ensuring that we try as best we can to find
the right kind of persons who’d fit into the jobs advertised. The third
point is that we do, from time to time, lose very good people. We’ve
recently lost the Deputy Director-General in charge of Communications,
Murphy Morobe, who decided to join the private sector. I didn’t want to
stand in his way. So that is the answer. Thanks.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am going to raise some
questions about support services to the President of R4,5 million, and
service in the Cabinet office. What is not reflected here is what I read in
the paper, namely that R4,6 million is spent on overtime. So, we expect,
when these moneys are voted for, to get ... [Interjections] ... some
results.

Today I want to celebrate one year of waiting to see the President of South
Africa. Because of the incompetence of the staff of the Presidency, they
have not, until now, done their duty for which they get money here, to
arrange for me to see the President. I think it’s a scandal, and I want to
say to the hon Minister: Here is your cake. Come and eat it. I have waited
a year. [Interjections.]

Madam Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order, hon member! [Interjections.] Hon member,
I know that we spend a lot of time at work. I’m sure we do need some social
get-togethers, but not in the House.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, if you allow me, you can have a piece
of the cake! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Van der Merwe.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Can I finish my question?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: As long as you know that you are taking time from the
IFP’s allocated time.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I know. We’ve got five minutes. I’m taking two.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You’re on the fourth minute.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No, no, no. Get another watch, Madam Speaker.
[Laughter.]

Can I now put my question? Is the ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: After your drama, yes, you may put your question.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: How does the Minister feel about asking for this
money if, after a year, you haven’t made it possible for me to see the
President? You should be ashamed.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, just on
a point of order, I think the first issue that we need to deal with is the
display of theatrics that we have seen here. I think this is a serious
House; we are dealing with a serious matter. We are dealing with the Budget
of the country, and for this to be reduced to a circus like this, I think,
can’t be parliamentary.

The second point is that this matter arose during the state of the nation
debate. The President clarified to Mr Van der Merwe that he has a
parliamentary counsellor who should be approached with regard to
appointments. I don’t know whether Mr Van der Merwe has made use of that
...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Deputy Chief Whip, please take your seat.
Mr Van der Merwe, obviously, we don’t search each and every member that
comes into the House. You took all of us by surprise. [Interjections.] I
was seated here and I was asking myself what that box was for. I asked the
Table staff to check what the relevance of that box was, as if I knew that
there was going to be some drama coming from that. I think you had a note
from the Table requesting that, because I just said that I didn’t like that
box, and I let them check what was in the box.

I think we should not reduce the stature of our House. I think a senior
person like yourself, Mr Van der Merwe, should really lead by example. I
think that act that we have just seen, which of course is going to be nice
on the television, doesn’t augur well for the House. I wish I could get
hold of a Rule that would actually be harsher than what I am saying now.

We don’t take kindly to this. I’m sorry, Minister. Will you please take
your seat.

This is reducing the House to something else. I was there. You were there.
As the Deputy Chief Whip was saying, the day you raised this question to
the President, the President actually pointed you to Mr Jeffery. In case
you don’t know where to find him, he is there.

For you to actually wait for this, a very important day in our nation, to
do this, I think speaks very little of this House. [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Can I react to that, Madam Speaker?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not adding anything!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No, I am, because your facts are not right.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which facts?

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: You said that the President pointed to Mr Jeffery,
and said I must contact him. Five or six letters have been written to
Jeffery, asking for the appointment, and if he doesn’t know, today I am
saying: John Jeffery, I want to see the President! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is an hon member, irrespective of how emotional you
are.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: He is not doing his work! I needed to bring a cake
here to expose their incompetence.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sit down before you and your cake leave the House!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: They are incompetent! [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Van der Merwe, I am not going to take this kind of
behaviour from you. I have asked you several times to sit down, and I am
now asking you and your cake to leave this House. [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please don’t waste our time. We want to continue with
the work of the House.
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not addressing me on anything!

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I have not contravened any Rule. I am
not going to leave the House.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are going to leave the House, Mr Van der Merwe.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Van der Merwe, will you please leave this House with
your cake? [Interjections.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: No. [Interjections.] I have done nothing wrong.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have asked you three times to take your seat, and you
refused to do so.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: The first time that you ask me to take my seat, check
Hansard, I’m taking my seat. [Interjections.]

Madam, I am going to leave, not because you’re asking me to leave, but
because I want to leave! [Interjections.]
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course ...

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: I don’t want to share the incompetence any longer.
I’m going to leave. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Go.

Hon members, let us be patient with Mr Koos van der Merwe and his cake as
they both leave the House. [Interjections.]

The Member thereupon withdrew.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, can’t he leave the cake? We would like to eat
it! [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! I think that concludes questions to
Vote No 1. We now put Vote No 2 – Parliament.

Vote No 2 - Parliament:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy Speaker, under Programme 1, an amount of R11,661
million was shifted from the compensation of employees to goods and
services. In the same programme, the amount shifted was not spent because
Parliament failed to fill posts in the public affairs and human resources
sections. There appears to be no explanation as to why these posts were not
filled and when they’ll be filled. Can the Speaker please explain?

There was also an issue around the situation of the Parliamentary
Millennium Project, and funds were shifted there. Can you just explain why
there was a need for additional funds for the Parliamentary Millennium
Project? Thank you.

The  SPEAKER: Deputy Speaker, on the issue of the posts with regard to
public affairs and human resources, there are processes under way as we
speak to fill those posts. So we believe those posts will be filled
shortly.

With regard to the Parliamentary Millennium Project, PMP, an amount of R3,5
million for this project has been allocated to the parliamentary baseline
for the 2006-07 financial year. An additional R3,5 million was allocated to
a project budget for 2006-07. This additional budget is to cover the New
Conversations SABC series and the Johnnic Learning collaboration, which you
should know more about; if not, we are willing to give more information
about it. Thank you.

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair, Mr Van der Merwe, in his haste, just walked
out with my documents. I can’t refer to the specifics ... [Laughter.] ...
and this leaves us with a little bit of a problem.

There’s a problem with regard to money that was underspent on computers -
that is there has been a virement there. Yet, there are Members of
Parliament who have had computers stolen out of their offices which were
never replaced, supposedly because there are no funds, yet money has been
unspent on computers et al. What is the reason for this and why have these
members then not received their replacement computers?

The SPEAKER: Hon member, regarding the specifics of why the money had not
been used, I am going to find that answer and give it to you. But, of
course, you know that the loss of computers, the process of members
complaining about that and us looking into the matter, takes time. We do
actually replace the computers.

I know that there are some cases that are still under way where there’s
communication between the Secretary and hon members. We are trying to deal
with those issues as they come. Thank you.

Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises:

Mr L W GREYLING: My, how the ANC has changed. The two biggest winners in
this year’s MTEF are the arms industry and the nuclear industry. I am sure
that this would not have been accepted 12 years ago. Despite the moral
objections against these two industries, they are also hugely capital
intensive and have not proven their economic viability.

The pebble bed modular reactor is suspected of becoming a bottomless pit
for government money. Two years ago, when this government transferred R500
million to it, I asked the Minister of Trade and Industry what guarantee
South African taxpayers had that we would not be financing this project
year in and year out.

Two years later it seems that we are still funding this project to the tune
of another R480 million, and its estimated cost just keeps rising. I will
therefore ask the Minister for Public Enterprises the same question: What
guarantee do South African taxpayers have that this will not represent
another endless stream of money going to a project whose economic viability
is in serious question?

Furthermore, is it wise to transfer such large sums of money to a project
whose environmental impact assessment has not even been approved yet? I
thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Well, I think the member was largely
making a statement and making some inaccurate inferences. I believe that
these matters have been very well considered. His history is also wrong.
His facts about the economic viability of both projects are also wrong. I
think these matters go through a thorough scrutiny by the budget committee,
and we are committed to these projects and have the support of everyone
else except for a very small party. Thank you. [Laughter.]

Vote No 16 – Health:

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Thank you, Chair. I think the hon Deputy Minister is here.
I don’t see her. Is the Deputy Minister here? Well, I’ll put the question.
Maybe the Minister of Finance can answer it.

Sir, the current expenditure and strategy on HIV prevention, Aids testing
and treatment is not having the desired result. There is little change to
lifestyle, as evidenced by the increased number of pregnant learners, and
an insufficient number of people are being tested and treated. Also, in the
presence of HIV, it has been difficult to identify resistant TB.

In utilising the additional funds dedicated for HIV, will there be a change
in strategy towards counselling and testing, making pre-test counselling
group-based rather than one on one, and testing routine with an opt-out
provision? Also, in testing for TB: will there be increased expenditure on
testing by culture, rather than by microscopy, as that is the only way to
identify the extremely resistant or other resistant forms of TB?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Chair, those questions by Dr Rabinowitz deal
largely with the policy detail. The key issue is, firstly, that we’ve
rolled over additional resources for the battle against HIV and Aids, some
of which will be spent on antiretroviral treatment. But from prevention
through to testing, through counselling and through home-based care, the
entire spectrum is covered. It is also important to recognise something
quite separate from that. I raise this because one frequently gets the
impression that when people talk about the health system, they actually
mean the HIV/Aids system.

There is tuberculosis that exists in its own name and right. There are
people who have contracted TB who are HIV-negative. There are many people
like that in the country. There are people like that in the country that
lapse with their treatment and then their tuberculosis converts to drug-
resistant TB, eventually becoming extreme drug-resistant strains of TB.
What we need to do is to isolate and ensure that the health system is
capable of dealing with all of these things.

My plea to the hon doctor is to understand that we are not dealing with a
single illness; we are dealing with a multitude of them. They need
different treatments. They need special attention, and the health system
has functioned in its entirety. That is why the amount availed is only for
part of it. But, in respect of the peculiarities of the testing and so on,
those are matters that I think the Department of Health is better able to
deal with.

Here we are looking at the allocation of resources, and I would submit that
it is adequate in the circumstances to adjust the money upwards. Thanks.
[Applause]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I put Vote No 17 – Labour. Are there
any questions? Oh, one moment. Hon Greyling, the ID’s time has expired, so
you don’t have an opportunity for further questions. Does anybody else have
a question on Labour?

Vote No 18 – Social Development:

Mr M WATERS: Chair, in light of the fact that the Department of Social
Development is the government department tasked with alleviating poverty
and assisting the vulnerable in our society and that the Supreme Court of
Appeal has stated that government’s inefficiency in administering and
paying out grants applied for amounted to “a war of attrition against the
poor”, and that R320 million of the R376 million that was approved as roll-
over funds for the Department of Social Development is allocated either
expressly or partly for legal costs originating from both the last
financial year and this financial year, could the Minister indicate how
much of the roll-over cost is earmarked to pay out outstanding litigation
costs from the last financial year and this financial year and how much of
the roll-over funds is earmarked specifically for paying out settlements
awarded to applicants in court actions successfully brought against the
department for the same period?

Out of all the court cases in which the department is currently engaged,
how many were bought against the department relating to instances in which
the department allegedly failed to pay out grant benefits to beneficiaries?
Lastly, what measures and targets are in place to reduce litigation costs
and the number of court cases that the department is currently engaged in?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Ndimvile lo mnumzana into ayithethayo,
kodwa andiphethanga nto endingamxelela, ngayo ukuba yimalini na esaseleyo
engekehlawulwa. [I have heard what this hon gentleman is saying but I do
not have anything with me that can show how much money is still
outstanding.]

Quite obviously, we have a lot of cases that are in front of us and most of
those cases are definitely based on policy more than anything else. If the
hon member could give me a chance, I will be able to give him that answer
by tomorrow morning.

Vote No 20 – Correctional Services:

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, I want to address the so-called savings made by
this department. It is a fact that reoffending rates in our country are of
the order of 90%. Most prisons are grossly overcrowded, very few inmates
are educated or work productively, and very little rehabilitation occurs.
Overcrowding happens because there is not enough prison space and
rehabilitation can’t take place because there is not enough staff.

Large numbers of staff in the department act in positions for which they
are not paid, yet this year this department failed to spend R603 million
earmarked for the compensation of staff, that is posts that were not
filled. And, they failed to spend R197 million budgeted for the new-
generation prisons because these prisons that were first announced in 2002
have still not been built.

The root cause of this is the fact that the department is chronically badly
managed. For the fifth year in a row the department received a qualified
audit and, by common consent, was judged to be the worst functioning
department. Now, it seems that they can’t even spend the money that has
been voted.

My very direct question to the Minister is: What steps is he taking to
ensure that competent staff are appointed to vacant posts? When will the
problem of the acting appointments be a thing of the past? What steps has
he taken to ensure that staff that have proved themselves to be
incompetent, such as the national commissioner, are relieved of their
responsibilities rather than being given a performance award?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, the hon Selfe is a
member of our portfolio committee. Most of these questions that he raises
here are questions that have been raised throughout the year. We deal with
them and he knows how we deal with them. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]
However, let me deal with them this way. The savings or the money that was
for the new-generation prisons was surrendered because of the high costs.
Through dealing with the National Treasury and Public Works, we agreed that
once we have the feasibility studies we would then go back to them and
renegotiate getting that money back – so I am not worried about that.

You didn’t mention the fact that Kimberly is functioning. On Tuesday, the
Public Works department will be handing over the site in Kimberly. Those
are some of the things that are happening. But then, as opposition parties,
you have the right to look only at the negative side, not at the positive
side. That is your responsibility and I accept that. [Interjections.] I
have no problem and I would not be standing here shouting at you – I am not
even shouting at you, I am actually smiling at you - if it had not been
your responsibility. [Interjections.]

With regard to the vacant posts and staff, that is a problem. It is not
only in Correctional Services but also across the board. But regarding
ourselves, it is because we are looking for professionals. That is why we
have problems attracting professional staff, which includes nurses,
psychologists and top professionals. But also ... [Interjections.] Hon Mike
Ellis, you need a psychologist ... [Interjections.] You need a
psychologist, first of all, to deal with your hair and, secondly, to deal
with your brain. [Laughter.] [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Please!

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chairperson, may I point out to the hon Minister that
there aren’t any psychologists in Correctional Services for him to visit.
[Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Can you be one of them please?
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, please ...

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, regarding the issue of
the vacant posts, the problem is the high staff turnover, but we are trying
to address that together with Public Service and Administration.

I am not going to stoop that low to comment on things that are badly run,
when people will resign and what have you. I don’t think I want to stoop to
that level. I am a Minister in that department and I will do my best to
make sure that the department is run properly. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Vote No 23 - Justice and Constitutional Development:
Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, the Justice adjustment appropriation shows a
number of roll-overs totalling R238 million, mostly relating to expenditure
to upgrade court operations. They were occasioned by the late approval of
this expenditure just before the financial year closed at the end of March.
The Auditor-General has criticised this late expenditure and commented that
it increases the risk of fiscal dumping and that normal procurement
practices may not have been complied with.

Can the Minister show the House that normal procurement practices were in
fact complied with in these cases, and that there is nothing irregular in
the way that the tenders for this equipment were awarded? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon member, this
is a question that you have put to us, which we have answered in writing
and the detail will be there. I would like to affirm that we have followed
proper procedures.

I would like to just say that, by and large, we have done well in the sense
that we have used the money properly for capacity-building, as was
primarily intended. But, most importantly, we have embarked on a very
ambitious programme of modernising our courts and providing essential
information technology infrastructure in our courts.

Vote No 27 - Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

Nkul M W SIBUYANA: Inkomu Mutshami wa xitulu, hikokwalaho ka 2010 leyi yi
taka, ndzi kombela ku tiva leswaku endzhawulo leyi eka Tourism yi ta veka
mali eka Game reserves- tindhawu ta ku londza swiharhi swa nhova- leswaku
xiyimo xa vukorhokeri xi ta antswa na leswaku vanhu lava va nga kona va ta
korhoka hi ku tshembeka na ku tiva leswaku va ta vuyeriwa xana? Hikuva eka
sweswi hi na Khapama Game Reserve la ha Holobye wa Tourism a toloveleke ku
ya kona, la ha swi tivekaka leswaku Holobye wa Swatimali u ya kona, vanhu
va kona na sweswi va nh’weti va karhi va cina hikuva va nga kumi nchumu.
Xana makorhokele ya vona ya ta antswisiwa ke? (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraph follows.)

[Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to know if the
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism will, because of the coming
2010, invest money in the Game Reserves to ensure that the quality of
service improves and that the employees perform their duties diligently
with the knowledge that they too will benefit. Presently employees at
Khapama Game Reserve, where the Ministers of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism and of Finance like to hang out, have been on strike the whole
month because of poor pay. Are their working conditions going to be
improved?]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, the question doesn’t relate
directly to the adjustments and roll-overs – all the savings of the
department - but I think that I’ll take responsibility for transmitting a
copy of the record of the hon member’s question to Minister Van Schalkwyk
and will ensure that the member is furnished with the reply. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Minister, make sure that we don’t
have a situation where, in a year’s time, we have another candle. Thank
you. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: May I apply in advance to be the one who brings
the cake. But I’ll do it by the Rules.

Vote No 28 – Housing:

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, out of the additional R472 million appropriation
to the housing department, R372 million, that is 78%, is a roll-over amount
for the N2 Gateway Project. Nobody in this House needs an introduction to
the N2 Gateway Project but, since I have the floor, I’m going to give one,
anyway.

In February 2005, Minister Sisulu announced the name of the winning
contractor and said that the project would be fast-tracked, given top
priority and that it would be a win-win situation for all. After the
completion of 705 units out of the planned 22 000 units in June this year,
it was reported that the costs for the 705 units were exceeded by R35
million, with claims from contractors that could amount to R116 million
for, amongst other things, mismanagement of the project.
Hon Minister, can you therefore inform this House as to the actual purpose
of this roll-over amount of R372 million? Is it going to be used to kick-
start the construction of phase 2 of the N2 Gateway Project or to cover the
current claims from contractors, in which case I submit it would be
fruitless expenditure?

In addition, there is also an amount of R1,13 million earmarked to fund a
media campaign on the N2 Gateway Project. Can the Minister also, therefore,
inform this House on what is to be achieved by this media campaign?

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, I thought at some point you would
chip in and indicate to the member that statements are not part of what we
are here for. We are here to actually answer questions. You allowed the
member to go on at length and introduce a matter that has nothing to do
with the question ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, on a point of order: What the hon Minister is
saying is not correct. One is entitled to make a statement and to ask a
question. Another point is, I wonder if the hon Minister ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, would you take your
seat, please.

Mr M J ELLIS: Is the hon Minister allowed to question the Chair in that
way?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, I will respond in a way
that I find fit. But I have to agree with you that you are allowed to make
a statement. However, the purpose of this is actually to ask a question.

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, I was not questioning you in any way.
I would like to think that hon Ellis perhaps might take the advice of the
Minister of Correctional Services. I was just making a statement and not
questioning you in any way.

However, I would like to be allowed to put the statement aside. I think
that the hon member has enough time in the portfolio committee to do that
and deal with the issue. I would like to say to him that the amount of
money of R372 million that we are getting for the N2 Gateway Project is to
ensure that people of the Western Cape are given decent accommodation. And
if the hon member up to now has not woken up to the fact that there is an
urgent need for housing in the Western Cape, then I think he is in the
wrong portfolio committee.

I think he is in the wrong portfolio committee and I’m glad he has exposed
himself now. This is a mega project and it has been explained to you over
and over again. Within the dollar split that we have, there is no way we
could have funded this. We’ve, therefore, requested from Treasury that we
fund this in a special way, and we have been provided with that particular
way.

You’ve asked about the media communication. We need to communicate with the
beneficiaries. This is an essential part of dealing with housing,
especially the upgrading of informal settlements. We need to ensure that we
take our people and communities with us for them to understand what we are
doing. We need to make sure that they are part and parcel of what we are
doing.

This is what we say to you in the portfolio committee every day. If you are
there, please do listen and make sure that you can put your mouth where we
need to have it, because we need to make sure, on an urgent basis, that you
meet your responsibilities and make sure that we get the land availability
agreement from the city so that we can build forthwith. Thank you.
[Applause.] [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order please! Order please!

Mr J P I BLANCHÉ: Madam, I think it is time that Ministers replying to
questions here should know that the other members of this Assembly never
sit in various committees. And if a question is asked, we need to get the
answer. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Blanché, that’s not for this
House or me to decide. Thank you.

Vote No 29 – Land Affairs:

Mnr A H NEL: Voorsitter, verlede jaar was daar ’n totale onderbesteding in
die Departement van Grondsake van R950 miljoen. Sover vanjaar is slegs 20%
in die eerste ses maande van die begrote R3,37 miljard vir die herstel van
grondregte bestee. As gevolg hiervan het die Minister van Finansies die
begrote bedrag afwaarts aangepas met R1,1 miljard.

Dit is ’n skande dat geld wat begroot is vir so ’n belangrike saak soos
grondhervorming en die herstel van grondregte nie bestee kan word nie. Soos
gewoonlik is die hoofrede volgens die departement die grondeienaars wat nie
wil onderhandel nie en die eisers wat nie onderlinge dispute kan oplos nie,
en nie, soos die Minister van Finansies aangedui het, die gevolg van ’n
regsproses nie - hy kan in sy eie boek loop kyk. Dis nie ’n rede wat hulle
aangee nie! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Terwyl sommige van bogenoemde waar is, is die grootste redes swak
administrasie en die bekende onvoldoende kapasiteit, maar wat maak die DG
van Grondsake en die Kommissaris van Grondeise? Hulle hou geheime
werkswinkels in plaas dat hulle hul werk doen. Die uiteindelike
verantwoordelikheid vir hierdie departement se versuim lê egter by die agb
Minister, en ek weet sy is jonk in die “job”, en ek het simpatie met haar,
maar die vraag is, wat gaan u doen? Gaan u ook die blaam verskuif of gaan u
aandag gee aan hierdie probleme en hulle oplos? [Tussenwerpsels.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr A H NEL: Chairperson, last year there was a total underspending of R950
million in the Department of Land Affairs. So far this year only 20% of the
budgeted R3,37 billion has been spent on land reform in the first six
months of the year. As a result, the Minister of Finance has adjusted the
budgeted amount downward with R1,1 billion.

It is a disgrace that money that has been budgeted for such an important
matter as land reform and restitution cannot be spent. As usual, the main
reason given for this by the department is the landowners who do not want
to negotiate and the claimants who cannot resolve mutual disputes, and not,
as the Minister of Finance indicated, because of legal proceedings – he can
go and consult his own book. This is not the reason that they are giving!
[Interjections.]

While some of the above-mentioned is true, the main reasons are bad
administration and the well-known insufficient capacity, but what are the
DG of Land Affairs and the Commissioner of Land Claims doing? They are
holding secretive workshops instead of doing their job. However, the
ultimate responsibility for this department’s neglect rests upon the hon
Minister, and I know that she is new to the job, and I have sympathy with
her, but the question is, what are you going to do? Are you also going to
shift the blame or are you going to address these issues and solve them?
[Interjections.]]

UMPHATHISWA  WEZOLIMO NEMICIMBI YOMHLABA: Sihlalo, obekekileyo okaNel
undichazele ukuba uza kuthetha ngelakowabo ulwimi. Nam ke ndakwenjenjalo
ukuphendula ndisebenzise olwakowethu ulwimi ukwenzela ukuba sivane kakuhle
ngokugqibeleleyo. Okokuqala ke mandithi, njengokuba ebesele etshilo
uMhlekazi, uMphathiswa wezeZimali uManuel, ndibulela kakhulu kuye ukuba aye
wayicacisa le nto, kodwa ke ndiza kuphinda ngoba kukho abangena ndlebe.
Bakhona abaziibhodi ngeendlebe. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFIARS: Chairperson, hon Nel has
indicated to me that he is going to speak his own language. I will also
respond using my own language, so that we can understand each other fully.
Firstly, let me say, as the hon Manuel, Minister of Finance, has mentioned,
I thank him very much because he has explained this issue, but I will
repeat, because there are those who do not have ears. There are those who
turn a deaf ear.]

This financial year, the department has taken a historic decision to
declare and surrender funds requested under the restitution programme in
the adjustments estimates. This is due to various reasons, such as
protracted negotiations with landowners, which delay the settlement of
claims and land purchases.

Asinakubanceda ke abantu abangafuni nguquko kweli lizwe, nabathatha ixesha
labo. [We cannot help people who do not want transformation in this
country, and those who take their time.]

Community and traditional leadership disputes, which contribute to delays
in deciding the restitution option in processing the claims, high staff
turnover resulting in capacity constraints, and development planning taking
longer than the settlement processes, are all issues that need attention.

Uyakukhumbula ke okaNel ukuba umcimbi wophuhliso uthatha ixesha elide, kuba
kaloku sine lifa lokuba abantu bakuthi bangabinawo lamakhono. Baza kuthatha
ixesha ukuba bade baqeqesheke, baze bakwazi ukwenza isicwangciso
seshishini, kunye nazo zonke ezinye izinto ezifunwayo ngabantu
abakhumshileyo. Kodwa ke siyazama ke, sisitsho ukuthi, iyakhawulezisa ke le
nkqubo. Siyenzile iminyenyevu ethile kwimithetho eluqilima karhulumente
ukwenzela ezi zicelo zikhawuleze zenziwe.

Ucweyo olu lona asoze singabinalo ngoba kaloku yimfundo leyo, kukuthyila
ingqondo, nokuphuhliswa kwabantu bakowethu. Abaphucukileyo ke bona abantu,
abaziphuhlisa bodwa ngela xesha lengcinezelo, abaludingi olu cweyo ngoko ke
mabamyeke urhulumente aqhubele phambili ngomsebenzi wakhe wokuphuhlisa
abantu. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Hon Nel will remember that development takes a long time, since our people
do not have the skills. They will take time in order to acquire the
training so that they are able to draw up business plans, and all other
necessities required by the elite people. We are trying; we would also like
to say the process is moving fast. We have relaxed some of the government’s
stringent laws in order to allow an opportunity for the fast processing of
these applications.

We will not stop holding workshops because those are lessons that open our
mind and develop our people. The elite who developed themselves during the
apartheid era do not need this workshop; therefore they must allow the
government to continue the programme of developing people. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Vote No 33 – Transport:

Mr S B FARROW: Chair, before I start, I noticed that the Minister is not
here. Can I just establish, without taking time, as to whether there is
going to be a response?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): There is a Minister who will answer
you – the Minister of Finance.

Mr S B FARROW: To the Minister of Finance, a couple weeks ago, if you were
in the House, I actually questioned the Minister about the Taxi
Recapitalisation Programme. I also indicated to him that, clearly, there
were some communication problems with Santaco – the SA National Taxi
Council - which he said he was regularly in contact with. I think the
strike that we had recently just reiterated the resistance on the ground to
a lot of this recapitalisation.

Over R1 billion has been earmarked for this programme over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework and yet the department is still rolling over funds in
implementation of this. They have clearly indicated that R150 million has
been put aside for extra appropriation to purchase the NTVs - the new taxi
vehicles - whilst at the same time expecting these taxi owners to pay VAT.
In fact, what we are doing is robbing Peter to pay Paul.

What I would like to know, Minister, is this: Is it not time to transform
this current transport service from being operator controlled commuter-
based unimodal routes to user-friendly publicly controlled and fully
integrated mass-rapid transport networks, as was outlined in the current
department’s latest draft strategy, and move away from the senseless and
inequitable one of expenditures, such as the taxi recapitalisation and the
Gautrain, towards a corridor by corridor intermodal transport initiative,
in accordance with the integrated transport plans that have been done in
accordance with the law at the various metros and municipalities? And what
money has now been put aside for those particular purposes? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I was merely going to suggest that the hon Cronin
is doing his propaganda work. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Hon Chairperson, and hon member that was not
supposed to be the answer to the question. You would appreciate that the
other issues that you have raised are indeed matters of policy that might
need to be discussed in the committee. However, with regard to the issue of
taxi recapitalisation, it is on course. As you know, the Department of
Transport is launching National Transport Month and they have started with
the scrapping in Botshabelo.

If I could just clarify, Santaco, indeed, is in discussions with the
Minister. Even the NTA, which is the organisation that called the strike,
has been in discussions with the Minister. Obviously they may be
disaffected by the implementation and the Minister has openly said that he
will continue to engage them, but that is not going to stop the process.

You will appreciate that the delay in the start of the implementation was
in the interest of ensuring that, through broader consultation, everybody
would buy in and the process would be undertaken. Therefore, as government,
we do appreciate that that was necessary. It might have caused the delay.
The roll-over that has been allocated is actually taking into consideration
the number that we are likely to have in terms of the scrapping. Therefore
that is why the resources have been made available for that purpose.

I will ensure that I report to the Minister of Transport that you have some
interest in the public transport system, viz how it must be organised, be
aligned with the IDPs, be intermodal and everything else that you have
said. I will take that to him. As for the question on the recapitalisation,
I think I have answered you adequately. I thank you very much, hon member.

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry:

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chairperson, in places where there has been vandalism of
infrastructure, I would like to know if the department is going to pay out
money in order to repair such vandalised infrastructures to enable vandals
to continue vandalising? Or is the department going to withdraw some
funding in order to punish the people who are being punished by vandals?

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, the best I could
do here is to ask my colleague, the Minister of Safety and Security, to
deal with the vandals. As far as the vandals are concerned, I do not think
that we can allocate money for vandalism. The money that is allocated for
infrastructure in this mini budget is money for infrastructure that was
damaged by floods, both in the Western Cape as well as in the Eastern Cape,
and not money for vandalism. I thank you.

Discussion on Votes and Schedule concluded.

Vote No 1 – The Presidency – put and agreed to (Democratic Alliance
dissenting).

Vote No 2 – Parliament – put and agreed to.

Vote No 3 – Foreign Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put and agreed to (United Party of South Africa
dissenting).

Vote No 5 – Provincial and Local Government – put and agreed to.

Vote No 6 – Public Works – put and agreed to.

Vote No 7 – Government Communication and Information System – put and
agreed to.

Vote No 8 - National Treasury – put and agreed to.
Vote No 9 – Public Enterprises – put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 – Public Service and Administration – put and agreed to.

Vote No 11 - Public Service Commission - put and agreed to.

Vote No 12 - SA Management Development Institute – put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Statistics South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 14 – Arts and Culture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 15 – Education – put and agreed to.

Vote No 16 – Health – put.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chair, the UPSA has objections.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you, an objection having been
raised, I now put the question. Those in favour will say Aye and those
against will say No. I think I can say that the Ayes have it. Sir, would
you like your objections to be noted?

Mr S SIMMONS: Please, ma’am.

Agreed to (United Party of South Africa dissenting.)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I would just like
to make a procedural suggestion: The hon member can, at the outset,
indicate that he wishes to have his objections noted. I don’t think we
would then have to go through the process of asking for Ayes and Noes and
so on.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you for that suggestion.

Vote No 17 – Labour – put and agreed to (United Party of South Africa
dissenting).

Vote No 18 – Social Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 19 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 20 – Correctional Services – put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 224: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asmal,A K;
  Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S; Bhengu,F; Bhengu,
  P; Bhoola, R B; Bloem, D V; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Botha,N G W; Burgess, C V;
  Carrim,YI; Cele,MA; Chalmers, J; Chohan-Khota,F I; Combrinck, J J; Cronin,
  J P; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Diale, L N;Didiza, AT; Dikgacwi, M M;
  Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D M;Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C;
  Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-Moleketi, G J;Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L;
  Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H; Gigaba, K M N;Gololo, C L; Gumede, DM;
  Gumede,MM; Hanekom, DA; Hangana, N E;Hendricks, L B; Holomisa, S P; Huang,
  S; Jacobus, L; Johnson, C B;Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
  Kasienyane, O R; Khoarai, L P;Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M;
  Khunou, N P; Komphela,B M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho,
  G; Lekota, M G P;Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I;
  Mabandla, B S; Mabe,L L; Mabena, D C; Madella,AF; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M
  M; Magau,K R; Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G
  L;Mahlawe, N M; Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C;Makgate, M
  W; Malahlela, M J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka,H P; Manana,MNS;
  Manuel, TA; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D;Mashangoane, P R;
  Mashiane, LM; Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha,T M; Mathebe, P M;
  Mathibela, N F; Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L;Matsomela, M J J; Maunye, M
  M; Mayatula, S M; Mbete, B; Mbili, M E;Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Mfundisi,
  I S; Mkhize, Z S; Mlangeni, A;Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J;
  Mofokeng, T R; Mogale,O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R;
  Mokoena, A D;Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D;
  Moonsamy, K;Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G;
  Moss,L N; Moss, M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B; Mshudulu,S
  A; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N;Ndzanga, RA;
  Nel,AC; Nene,MJ; Nene, NM; Newhoudt-Druchen,W S;Ngaleka, E; Ngcengwane, N
  D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu,L V J; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
  Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A;Nkabinde, N C; Nkem-Abonta, E; Nkuna, C;
  Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C;Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S; Nwamitwa-
  Shilubana, T L P;Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nyambi, A J; Nzimande, L P M;
  Olifant,D A A; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pandor, G N M; Pieterse,
  R D;Pule, B E; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S; Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin,M;
  Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M; Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R;Saloojee, E;
  Schippers, J; Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo,M D; Sefularo, M;
  Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande,M P; Siboza, S;
  Sigcau , S N; Sikakane,MR; Sisulu, LN; Skhosana,W M;Skweyiya, Z S T;
  Smith, V G; Solo, BM; Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto,M R; Sosibo, J E;
  Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake,M F; Tolo, L J;
  Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I;Van den
  Heever, R P Z; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Wyk, A; Vundisa, S S;Wang, Y;
  Woods, G G; Xingwana, L M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zita, L;Zulu, B Z.

  NOES - 41: Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Cupido, H B;Davidson,
  I O; Delport, J T; Doman,WP; Dudley, C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D
  H M; Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; Kohler-
  Barnard, D; Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J;
  Morgan, G R; Nel,AH; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R;
  Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Simmons, S; Smuts, M;
  Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C; Swart, P S; Swart, S N; Swathe, M M; Trent, E
  W; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M; Weber, H.

  ABSTAIN - 14: Bekker, H J; Bhengu, M J; Biyela, B P; Chang, E S; Dhlamini,
  BW; Mpontshane,AM; Rabinowitz, R; Roopnarain, U; Seaton, S A; Sibuyana,
  MW; Smith, P F; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, N E.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 21 – Defence – put and agreed to.

Vote No 22 – Independent Complaints Directorate – put and agreed to.

Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development – put and agreed to.

Vote No 24 – Safety and Security – put and agreed to (United Party of South
Africa dissenting).

Vote No 25 – Agriculture – put and agreed to.

Vote No 26 – Communications – put and agreed to.

Vote No 27 – Environmental Affairs and Tourism – put and agreed to.

Vote No 28 – Housing – put and agreed to.

Vote No 29 – Land Affairs – put.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

  AYES - 243: Abram, S; Ainslie, A R; Anthony, T G; Arendse, J D; Asmal, A
  K; Balfour, B M N; Baloyi, M R; Bekker, H J; Beukman, F; Bhamjee, Y S;
  Bhengu, F; Bhengu, M J; Bhengu, P; Bhoola, R B; Biyela, B P; Bloem, B V;
  Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Botha, N G W; Burgess, C V; Cachalia, I M; Carrim, Y
  I; Cele, MA; Chalmers, J; Chang, E S; Chohan-Khota, F I; Combrinck, J J;
  Cronin, J P; Cupido, H B; Cwele, S C; Dambuza, B N; Dhlamini, B W; Diale,
  L N; Didiza, A T; Dikgacwi, M M; Dithebe, S L; Ditshetelo, P H K; Dlali, D
  M; Doidge, G Q M; Du Toit, D C; Dudley, C; Erwin, A; Fihla, N B; Fraser-
  Moleketi, G J; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gabanakgosi, P S; Gaum, A H;
  Gigaba, K M N; Gololo, C L; Gumede, D M; Gumede, M M; Hanekom, D A;
  Hangana, N E; Hendricks, L B; Hendrickse, P A C; Holomisa, S P; Huang, S;
  Jacobus, L; Johnson, C B; Johnson, M; Jordan, Z P; Kalako, M U;
  Kasienyane, O R; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, K K; Khumalo, K M;
  Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Kota, Z A; Kotwal, Z; Landers, L T; Lekgetho,
  G; Lishivha, T E; Louw, J T; Louw, S K; Ludwabe, C I; Mabandla, B S; Mabe,
  L L; Mabena, D C; Madella, A F; Maduma, L D; Madumise, M M; Magau, K R;
  Magubane, N E; Magwanishe, G B; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Mahlawe, N M;
  Mahomed, F; Mahote, S; Maine, M S; Makasi, X C; Makgate, M W; Malahlela, M
  J; Maloney, L; Maloyi, P D N; Maluleka, H P; Manana, M N S; Manuel, T A;
  Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashangoane, P R; Mashiane, LM;
  Mashigo, R J; Mashile, B L; Masutha, T M; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
  Matlala, M H; Matsemela, M L; Matsomela, M J J; Maunye, M M; Mayatula, S
  M; Mbete, B; Mbili, M E; Mbombo, N D; Mentor, M P; Mfundisi, I S; Mkhize,
  Z S; Mlangeni, A; Mnguni, B A; Moatshe, M S; Modisenyane, L J; Mofokeng, T
  R; Mogale, O M; Mogase, I D; Mohamed, I J; Mohlaloga, M R; Mokoena, A D;
  Molefe, C T; Moleketi, P J; Moloto, K A; Montsitsi, S D; Moonsamy, K;
  Morobi, D M; Morutoa, M R; Morwamoche, K W; Mosala, B G; Moss, L N; Moss,
  M I; Motubatse-Hounkpatin, S D; Mpahlwa, M B; Mpontshane, A M; Mshudulu, S
  A; Mthethwa, E N; Mufamadi, F S; Mzondeki, M J G; Nawa, Z N; Ndzanga, R A;
  Nel, A C; Nene, M J; Nene, N M; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngaleka, E;
  Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngcobo, N W; Ngculu, L V J; Ngele, N J;
  Ngwenya, W; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkabinde, N C; Nkem-Abonta, E;
  Nkuna, C; Nogumla, R Z; Nqakula, C; Ntombela, S H; Ntuli, M M; Ntuli, R S;
  Nwamitwa-Shilubana, T L P; Nxumalo, M D; Nxumalo, S N; Nyambi, A J;
  Nzimande, L P M; Olifant, D A A; Oosthuizen, G C; Padayachie, R L; Pandor,
  G N M; Pieterse, R D; Pule, B E; Rabinowitz, R; Radebe, B A; Rajbally, S;
  Ramakaba-Lesiea, M M; Ramgobin, M; Ramodibe, D M; Ramotsamai, C P M;
  Rasmeni, S M; Reid, L R R; Roopnarain, U; Saloojee, E; Schippers, J;
  Schneemann, G D; Schoeman, E A; Seadimo,MD; Seaton, S A; Sefularo, M;
  Sekgobela, P S; September, C C; Shabangu, S; Sibande, M P; Siboza, S;
  Sibuyana, M W; Sigcau, S N; Sikakane, M R; Simmons, S; Sisulu, L N;
  Skhosana, W M; Skweyiya, Z S T; Smith, P F; Smith, V G; Solo, B M;
  Solomon, G; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Surty, M E;
  Swart, S N; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tlake,MF; Tolo, L J; Tsenoli, S L;
  Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Turok, B; Vadi, I; Van den Heever, R P Z; Van
  der Merwe, S C ;VanWyk, A; Vundisa, S S; Wang, Y; Woods, G G; Xingwana, L
  M; Xolo, E T; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zita, L; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B
  Z; Zulu, N E.


  NOES - 37: Blanché, J P I; Camerer, S M; Coetzee, R; Davidson, I O;
  Delport, J T; Doman, W P; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Gibson, D H M;
  Jankielsohn, R; Joubert, L K; Julies, I F; Kalyan, S V; Kohler-Barnard, D;
  Labuschagne, L B; Lowe, C M; Masango, S J; Minnie, K J; Morgan, G R; Nel,
  A H; Opperman, S E; Rabie, P J; Sayedali-Shah, M R; Schmidt, H C; Selfe,
  J; Semple, J A; Seremane, W J; Smuts, M; Stephens, J J M; Steyn, A C;
  Swart, P S; Swathe,MM; Trent, EW;Van derWalt, D;Van Dyk, S M; Waters, M;
  Weber, H.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Minerals and Energy – put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Science and Technology – put and agreed to.

Vote No 32 – Trade and Industry – put and agreed to.

Vote No 33 – Transport – put and agreed to.

Vote No 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry – put and agreed to.

Schedule agreed to.

                       ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)


                     REVENUE LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr N M NENE: Madam Chairperson, hon members, when the Minister of Finance
tabled the Budget in February this year, he announced a number of tax
amendments ranging from reduction in tax rates to more substantive
adjustments that require this legislative process to give effect to. When
he tabled this Bill a week ago, the Minister said, and I quote:

  This Bill mainly contains fiscal stimulus measures designed to accelerate
  economic growth as well as ongoing measures to broaden the tax base so
  that all our citizens pay their fair share.

[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon members, please allow Mr
Nene to be heard.

Mr N M NENE: I don’t blame members, Madam Chairperson. At this time of the
day we all get rowdy. The major amendments ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, is the hon member suggesting that he wouldn’t
like to make a speech, because we would be very happy about that?
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I doubt that very much.

Mr N M NENE: I wouldn’t do anything that would make the hon Ellis happy. If
it makes him happy, then I actually will not do it.

Firstly, regarding research and development incentives, this is in line
with the national research and development strategy adopted by South Africa
in 2002, which set the target for research and development spending at 1%
of GDP, increasing it over time to 2%.

The main objective is to encourage research and development in order to
make local business more innovative and competitive, especially in the
field of engineering, medical and health sciences, agriculture, and
mathematical and chemical sciences.

This increases the deductible amount from 100% to 150%, and allows for a
depreciation allowance for research-and-development-related capital
expenditure to be written off over three years, as opposed to four years,
with a new formula of 50:30:30 instead of 40:20:20:20.

With regard to employee bursaries, this is to support the skills drive in
the country in order to address the mismatch between employer needs and
employee skills, which has been identified as a major constraint in our
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa.

SMME relief reduces the onerous burden of withholding tax on clients of
SMMEs and introduces a standard flat rate of 34% for personal service
entities that can also be reduced on receipt of a Sars directive - another
attempt to promote small business development in pursuit of the people’s
dream of sharing in the country’s wealth.

With regard to co-operatives, in line with the recently promulgated Co-
operatives Act of 2005, appropriate relief is accorded to these co-
operatives, as we know that they serve as an important vehicle to bridge
the gap between the first and the second economies.

The Income Tax Act is amended so that co-operatives can qualify for small
business relief, such as the graduated tax regime of 0% to 10% and
ultimately 29%, and also 100% depreciation and many others.

The Bill also covers a lot more amendments, and my colleagues will be
speaking on some of these in more detail. The ones I have not spoken about
include the following: the upstream oil and gas incentives; the mining
rehabilitation closure fund; the retirement funds; public benefit
organisations; recreational clubs; taxation of government entities;
traditional communities; tax treatment of government grants; tax
recapitalisation allowance exemption; the general anti-avoidance rule,
which will be covered by the other members; and then the Fifa World Cup
guarantees relating to taxation.

The process of drafting this legislation, even though technical, is one of
the most consultative, informed by the People’s Charter which states that
the people shall govern, meaning that they shall elect a government, but
further that they shall also participate in determining how they shall be
governed.

These consultative processes have seen National Treasury and the SA Revenue
Service releasing discussion documents, and have consultative forums with
stakeholders. Public comment is taken into account even before Parliament
affords the stakeholders the platform to express their views where the
final product gets the stamp of interim approval, and ultimately comes to
this House for final consideration and approval.

The portfolio committee, having considered all submissions and responses,
has endorsed this Bill and now presents it to this House for approval. The
ANC supports the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2006. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Madam Deputy Chair, the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill is an
omnibus piece of legislation arising out of policy changes announced by the
Minister of Finance at the time of the Budget and from the need to close
certain tax loopholes or revise pieces of tax legislation to allow for
incentives, relief, refinements, etc.

The amendments that are perhaps of greatest current public interest are
those which give effect to arrangements and guarantees granted to Fifa as
part of South Africa’s bid to host the 2010 World Cup. These amendments
include giving effect to the concept of a tax-free bubble in respect of any
profitable goods sold or services rendered within certain designated sites
during the course of the World Cup.

Other amendments relate to other taxes, duties and levies that Fifa, its
subsidiaries and associates, as well as other specified categories of
organisations would normally attract as a result of their activities in
South Africa over the period. We clearly welcome and support these
amendments and see them as a further step exhibiting our ability to host a
highly successful event.

What is also welcomed are the refinements to the taxes relating to public-
benefit organisations which address certain anomalies in respect of trading
and housing activities, as well as extending the list of activities
eligible for tax-deductible donations to conservation and environmental and
animal welfare public voluntary organisations, PVOs. Welcome changes are
also made in respect of the liberalisation of the investment regime of PVOs
as well as the capital gains on the disposal of PVO assets.

Less welcome to recreational clubs will be the realignment of the tax
regime applicable to clubs to that of PVOs. Currently, clubs are exempt
from income tax. However, many of them carry on sizeable trading activities
to raise funds in addition to membership contributions. The amendments now
provide for the partial taxation of such clubs to take account of these
profit-making activities.

The new legislation around the general anti-avoidance rule is one which has
attracted much debate by the tax profession. While tax evasion is illegal
and must be frowned upon, it is clearly legitimate for taxpayers to
minimise their tax obligations.

Now, while it is acknowledged that the substance of the amendments before
us has changed considerably since their initial introduction as a result of
industry comment, a major reservation still exists in relation to those
aspects of the change which relate to the increased power of the
commissioner, the bypassing of the large body of South Africa common law
relating to avoidance, and the importation of, in particular, United States
avoidance terminology, which is supported by United States case law but
which has no applicability to ourselves. Of particular reference are the
measures related to commercial substance in respect of impermissible tax-
avoidance arrangements.

It is hoped that the commissioner will tread lightly in this respect and
that further consultation with the industry will take place in order that
an acceptable way forward is reached. Notwithstanding our reservations in
this regard, we support the Bill. Thank you.

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Chair, there are three aspect of the Revenue Laws
Amendment Bill that I would like to highlight, which are particularly
pleasing and worthy of support.

Firstly, the Bill provides that the newly created regional electricity
distributors, the so-called Reds, will continue to be tax exempt until at
least 2014 as a transitional provision to ensure that consolidation of the
electricity distribution industry may continue without hindrance of tax
complexities. Of course, once restructuring is complete, electricity
distribution will, in terms of the existing tax rules, be fully taxed.

Secondly, as part of South Africa’s commitment to host the 2010 Soccer
World Cup, it is self-evident that Fifa should be given special tax
treatment for a variety of goods and services. The creation of a tax
bubble, or a tax-free bubble, provided for in this Bill is extended to
income tax and VAT only.

The IFP welcomes the fact that no other taxes are being waived and that the
tax-free bubble will only apply to Fifa-designated sites and for specific
periods only. These proposals give effect to the government’s guarantees
extended to Fifa during the bidding process and to the right to host the
tournament, and they are supported.

Thirdly, the Bill clarifies the general anti-avoidance rule, the so-called
GAAR, by proposing a new rule to deal with impermissible avoidance
arrangements. The IFP hopes that the new rule will prove to be a consistent
and effective deterrent to deal with sophisticated forms of tax avoidance,
something our country can ill afford. In addition, the new GAAR takes
cognisance of international developments, bringing South Africa up to date
and in line with such developments.

I will make the House happy by saving them one minute. The IFP will support
the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Thank you very much for that. I
believe the hon Harding is not in the House either, so he’s saving another
minute. I now call the hon Mbili.

Mr M E MBILI: Madam Chair, hon members, colleagues and comrades, today we
mark yet another milestone in our history. This debate is informed by the
desire on the part of the ANC-led government to improve the efficiency of
the tax regime and, in the process, stimulate the economy.

I will attempt to highlight a few key proposals in the Bill, the first
being relief for small business co-operatives. But, before I do so, I need
to use this opportunity to take my hat off to the Zamani co-operatives in
Shobashobane on the lower south coast of KwaZulu-Natal, which is where I
come from.

As we are all gathered here, we should remember very vividly the event of
25 December 1995. This is a time when we are supposed to sit down and
relax. Most of us take Christmas as a chance to spend quality time with our
family. On that day we were called upon to rush to that area to do nothing
else but collect the bodies of dead people.

I am happy today to announce that in that area of Shobashobane people have
tried, under very trying circumstances, to put their past behind them, ugly
as it may be. They believe in the slogan that “Yesterday was bad; yesterday
was ugly; but today we have hope, we have a future, and tomorrow will be
better than today.”

In trying to bridge the gap between the first and second economies, it is
very important to note that co-operatives are now eligible for small tax
incentives. Before this amendment, co-operatives were taxed at 29%.
Depending on their income threshold, co-operatives are now eligible for tax
rates of 0%, 10% or 29%. This can only be good news for the historically
disadvantaged people that were systematically excluded from the mainstream
economy caused by the repressive laws of apartheid.

I believe that we should all applaud the ANC-led government, particularly
the Treasury, on their resolve to handle this economic exclusion very well.

Siyazi bakwethu ukuthi lapha ngaphandle bekuthi uma umuntu wakithi
enesitolo avele adayise ushukela nempuphu, agcine lapho. Ngikwazi kahle
lokho ngoba ngiphuma kuleso simo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Hon members, we all know that in this country whenever a person owns a
shop he could afford to sell only sugar and mealie meal, and it ends there.
I know this very well because I come from the same situation.]

This government, in trying to address that imbalance, came up with the
innovative strategy of co-operatives. I say this because the Zamani co-
operative today is up and running. It is run by young, enthusiastic and
focused men of that rural area. Today they are manufacturing toilet paper.
Recently, they secured a tender. I am not going to tell you the amount
because I must protect them. They have just secured a tender to supply the
department of health in KwaZulu-Natal – the Port Shepstone Hospital - with
toilet paper. That is an innovation and that is what we are taking about.
[Applause.]

This co-operative intervention – a strategy of the ANC-led government - has
worked, because it has given people the hope that there is a future in this
country. I could quote, if time allowed me, the many ways it has done this.

Secondly, I want to touch on the incentive for employee scholarships and
bursaries. All scholarships and bursaries for employees will be tax exempt,
regardless of whether or not there are elements of salary sacrifice. The
denial of employer deductions for scholarship and bursary payments, acting
as a salary sacrifice, will be removed. Owing to the current high cost of
education in our country, an inflationary adjustment was made to the R2 000
relief limit of scholarships granted to relatives of employees. The new
limit is now R3 000.

This is yet more good news for the future of our country, because it will
afford an opportunity of a lifetime to those South Africans who for some or
other reason cannot access the doors of learning and training. We should
all support the progressive initiatives taken by our government, such as
Asgisa, to bring about the skills much needed to stimulate our economy.
Therefore the employee scholarship and bursary incentive should be welcomed
by all South Africans.

Lastly, I need to touch on retirement fund withdrawals. Previously,
retirement annuity funds were not allowed to pay any amount prior to
members reaching the age of 55, for the purpose of ensuring that the money
was preserved until retirement. This argument was informed by the need to
encourage members of retirement funds to invest enough money to take care
of their needs during the later years of their lives. But there was fear on
the part of those who earned too little to invest, hence their reluctance
to invest. One can only hope that this incentive will encourage more
investors.

Governor Tito Mboweni has registered his concern about the low level of
savings in this country, which has a detrimental effect on the inflation
and interest rates. He argues that this is not good for the future of the
economy and the country. Now, members of retirement annuity funds may
withdraw certain amounts from their funds, as determined by the Minister of
Finance.

Lastly, as part of the bid to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup, the South
African government issued various guarantees to Fifa. These guarantees
envisage that the profits of goods and services provided at Fifa sites are
not subject to South African tax. Certain imports designated for Fifa
purposes will be free from import tax. Fifa and its subsidiaries and
participating national associations, excluding Safa, are generally exempt
from liabilities in respect of all South African tax.

Again, this is part of our government’s endeavour to host the best-
organised Fifa World Cup ever in 2010. I think we should give applause for
that. [Applause.] This is because we, the rest of South Africa and football-
loving countries all over the world, welcome the commitment by President
Mbeki and his government to invest approximately R15 billion to build
stadiums and related infrastructure to make sure that we successfully host
the World Cup event in a manner that has never been seen before.

We note with great concern the prophets of doom that are worried that
investments regarding the 2010 World Cup will become white elephants after
the World Cup. I have a word for them: South Africa is a soccer-loving
nation. Soccer for many young South Africans is a fantasy. This can only
boost their ego and encourage them to resist the temptation to do bad
things like drugs. I thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, a number of Acts are amended in this Bill, all
of which are supported by the MF. It is, however, crucial that these
amendments are made public beyond the normal Gazette to ensure the public’s
knowledge of these changes and procedures that may be applicable to them.
It is, however, the tax provisions that most are interested in. We are
pleased that the Bill serves to clarify the tax threshold and issues
pertaining to capital tax gains. Further input tax deduction claims arenas
certainly bring a smile to many.

We are most pleased that the Bill has inculcated concerns about taxes
pertaining to recreational clubs of the 2010 Fifa World Cup. It is best to
estimate costs of this nature at this early stage so that the necessary
entities may be aware so that they act in accordance with requirements in
this regard.
The further management of mining rehabilitation funds provided for is found
beneficial to the long-term efficiency of the sector.

I want to endorse the sentiments of the previous speaker - we don’t just
want to be any country that hosts the 2010 event. We simply want to be the
best.

The MF will support the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill. Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill of 2006
introduces amendments to numerous tax, insurance, revenue, transfer and
estate duty Acts.

This reform continues to ensure greater equity, it broadens the tax base
and lowers the tax compliance burden. It also enhances tax collection
efficiency and makes provision for the implementation of the tax proposals
contained in the 2006 Budget. This entails 33 major and minor tax deduction
and technical amendments to different sorts of tax legislation.

Daar is egter kommer ten opsigte van die wetgewing wat belastingverligting
betref vir navorsing en ontwikkeling, as net een van die vele wysigings op
die voorgestelde wetgewing. Alhoewel navorsingsaktiwiteite risiko-gebonde
is met ‘n hoë koste-element en resultate nie altyd verseker is nie, moet
ons besef dat navorsing ’n groot bydrae lewer om produktiwiteit te verhoog
deur middel van tegnologiese bevorderings.

Navorsing stimuleer ook ekonomiese groei en bevorder die geskooldheid van
die werkerskorps. Die resultaat van navorsing impliseer ook dat die skaars
hulpbronne meer effektief ontgin en benut word. Wetenskaplike
navorsingsbevindings kan ook ’n land op die agenda van internasionale
wetenskaplike mededinging plaas.

In dié verband kan ons verwys na die mediese navorsing wat gelei het tot
die eerste hartoorplanting in Suid-Afrika, Krygkor se wapennavorsing,
Pelindaba se atoomenergienavorsing, die WNNR se rol in tegnologiese
ontwikkeling en Onderstepoort se veeartsenydienste.

Kundiges beweer egter dat volgens tegnologiese omwentelings die ekonomie en
samelewing ná ’n 100 jaar op net 10% van die vorige eeu se tegnologiese
gebruiklikhede funksioneer, terwyl die ander 90% op nuwe wetenskaplike
uitvindings gebaseer is. Daarom is wetenskaplike navorsing van kardinale
belang.

Om die private sektor nou aan te spoor om navorsing te bevorder is die DA
van mening dat die wet gewysig behoort te word sodat alle uitgawes sonder
voorwaardes wat aangegaan word vir die skepping van fasiliteite vir
doeleindes van geregistreerde navorsing onvoorwaardelik aan die
belastingtoegewing onderworpe behoort te wees.
Navorsing self genereer aanvanklik geen inkomste nie en verteenwoordig
grootliks net ’n uitgawekomponent. Die doel van die belastingaansporing is
dus juis om navorsing meer toeganklik te maak.

Verder is die DA ook van mening dat marknavorsing net soos wetenskaplike
navorsing moet kwalifiseer vir belastingverligting. Die DA stem nie saam
met die Inkomstediens se argument dat marknavorsing net sekere of
spesifieke marksegmente tot voordeel strek nie. Marknavorsing skep nuwe
bemarkings- en produksiemoontlikhede vir verdere werkskepping.

Dit is juis marknavorsing wat tot die verbetering van die gehalte van
produkte aanleiding gee, beter produkte lewer teen laer pryse, nuwe
tegnologie absorbeer en, baie belangrik, die resultate van marknavorsing
lei oor die algemeen tot verdere aansporing vir wetenskaplike navorsing,
wat wel onderworpe is aan die belastingtoegewings. Die DA sal dus graag wil
sien dat marknavorsing ook volgende jaar deur die Minister tot die
wetgewing aangesuiwer word.

Die DA steun die wetsontwerp. Dankie. (Translation of  Afrikaans  paragraphs
follows.)

[There is, however, concern about the legislation with regard to tax  relief
for research and development, as just one of  the  many  amendments  to  the
proposed legislation. Though research activities are risk bound with a  high
cost element and results are not always guaranteed,  we  must  realise  that
research makes a big contribution  to  increase  productivity  by  means  of
technological advancement.

Research also stimulates economic  growth  and  promotes  a  skilled  worker
corps. Research results also imply that scarce resources are mined and  used
more effectively. The  findings  of  scientific  research  can  also  put  a
country on the agenda of international scientific competitiveness.

In this regard, we can refer to the medical research that led to  the  first
heart transplant in South Africa,  Armscor’s  weapon  research,  Pelindaba’s
nuclear energy research, the role of the CSIR in  technological  development
and Onderstepoort’s veterinary science services.

However, experts claim  that  according  to  technological  revolutions  the
economy and society, after 100 years, functions on only 10% of the  previous
century’s technological practices, while the other  90%  are  based  on  new
scientific  inventions.  Therefore,  scientific   research   is   of   vital
importance.

In order to encourage the private sector to promote research, the DA  is  of
the opinion that  the  Act  should  be  amended  in  such  a  way  that  all
expenditure  without  guarantees  that  is  incurred  for  the  creation  of
facilities  aimed  at   registered   research   should   be   subjected   to
unconditional tax concessions.

Research in itself initially generates no income and  mainly  represents  an
expenditure component. Therefore the purpose of the tax  incentives  is,  in
fact, to make research more accessible.

Furthermore, the DA is also of  the  opinion  that  market  research  should
qualify for tax relief, in the same way scientific  research  does.  The  DA
does not agree  with  the  argument  of  the  Revenue  Service  that  market
research only benefits certain or specific market segments. Market  research
creates  new  marketing  and  production  possibilities  for   further   job
creation.

It is, in fact, market  research  that  leads  to  the  improvement  of  the
quality of products, the delivery of better products at  lower  prices,  and
the absorbtion of new technology  and,  very  importantly,  the  results  of
market research in general  lead  to  further  encouragement  of  scientific
research that is  actually  subjected  to  tax  concessions.  The  DA  would
therefore like to see the Minister ensure that the  legislation  is  amended
to include market research next year.

The DA supports the Bill. Thank you.]

Mr Y S BHAMJEE: Chairperson, I take this opportunity to express my deep and
warm appreciation for the support and comfort expressed by members of the
National Assembly, members of the National Council of Provinces, the hon
Minister of Finance, the Commissioner of Sars, the chairperson, colleagues
and comrades of the Portfolio Committee on Finance and the general staff of
Parliament when my gentle beloved wife, Sabera, was murdered in her surgery
on 2 June 2006. My daughters and I were deeply touched by your gestures and
will always cherish your solidarity. There is still no closure. Her loss is
painful indeed, but life must go on!

So I stand before this House in support of the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill.
The essence of this Bill is located in the Minister’s Budget speech
delivered to this House in February 2006. The contents dealing with
taxation have been divided into two pieces of legislation and tabled for
adoption at different intervals.

The aspects of the speech that could be legislated more or less immediately
were tabled and adopted by this House during June and July this year as the
Taxation Laws Amendment Act. In the main this legislation dealt with
personal taxation, the interest income exemption levels, sin taxes and so
on.

The themes that required research and consultation are now before the House
as the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill. The objective, as the Minister
indicated when he tabled the Bill, is to stimulate fiscal measures, “to
accelerate economic growth as well as ongoing measures to broaden the tax
base so that all our citizens pay their fair share”.

Noting that this is a money Bill, Parliament does not have any power to
effect amendments. To secure responses and comments from the affected role-
players, the National Treasury and Sars made this draft Bill with its
explanatory memorandum available on their website.

Stakeholders submitted their responses to the Bill directly to Sars while
others appeared before the Portfolio Committee on Finance, and yet others
took the opportunity to appear before both during the draft stages of this
Bill. Thus it may be said that the Treasury and Sars consulted with a wide
range of responses. This resulted in some changes being effected and they
are reflected in the Bill before us.

The Revenue Laws Amendment Bill focuses on offering incentives to ensure
compliance with the intention that all taxpayers pay their fair share. This
approach has impacted positively on revenue collection and is endorsed even
by those whose responses were shelved or rejected.

While the chairperson of the portfolio committee touched on some of their
points, I think a repetition in this regard would be good. The following
themes were dealt with in the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill: the 2010 Fifa
World Cup, the general anti-avoidance rule, reportable arrangements,
research and development incentives, oil and gas incentives, recreation
clubs, public benefit organisations, taxation of foreign income, personal
service entities, taxation on retirement funding, further income tax
amendments, estate duty and value added tax.

Owing to time constraints my input will focus on two responses to briefly
demonstrate the vigorous nature of the consultation process embarked upon
by the Treasury and Sars and by the portfolio committee on the draft
proposals of the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill.

Regarding public benefit organisations - PBOs, as they are commonly
referred to - religious and nonprofit institutions generally fall under
this category. These public benefit organisations in the main motivated
that their rate of taxation “should be 29% and not 34% as secondary tax on
companies is relevant to companies that distribute profits and declare
dividends. Dividends are not declared by PBOs and there should be no reason
for comparing for-profit companies to PBOs.”

After deliberations at the portfolio committee hearings it was resolved
that, “all PBOs will be subjected to a flat 29% rate in terms of taxable
business activities. The 29% rate will apply to a PBO regardless of whether
that PBO operates as a company, trust or association. This 29% rate will
also apply to taxable club activities.”

The second point I wish to focus on is the general anti-avoidance rule,
commonly referred to as GAAR. Simply put, it generally addresses two sorts
of taxpayers. Firstly, it aims to empower those who unwittingly fall foul
of the law to comply with the correct procedures. Secondly, it attempts to
address taxpayers and practitioners who avoid paying the actual tax due,
who make use of or exploit certain weaknesses in legislation and
procedures.

Business Unity SA, representing a wide range of business interests,
provided responses to the provisions of the general anti-avoidance rule. It
argued against GAAR and at one level BUSA suggested that “if the tax
authority was concerned with the tax avoidance schemes Sars should advocate
disclosure requirements, forcing taxpayers to explain the scheme in their
return submissions”. BUSA also argued that the anti-avoidance rule is not
required as the tax system is working efficiently, pointing to the huge
increases in revenue collection.

Business Unity SA’s views were not accepted. The Treasury and Sars
responded by stating that the review of section 103 of the Income Tax Act
is now repealed and replaced by the general anti-avoidance rule, as
announced in the Budget Review in 2005 and the discussion paper distributed
on 3 November 2005 with the objective of tabling it in this session.

Having received a number of responses and empowered by international
experiences on tax avoidance schemes, the Treasury and Sars endorsed the
anti-avoidance rule, concluding:
  Improvements in revenue collections are driven by economic factors, an
  enhanced compliance culture and Sars enforcement action.


  There is a fundamental responsibility to the taxpayers and practitioners
  that made this possible to provide a level playing field where everyone is
  paying their fair share. The proposed GAAR is intended to underpin the
  progress that has been made and ensure that it is not undermined by a new
  generation of schemes employed by aggressive taxpayers and practitioners.
  The estimate revenue loss of R10,7 billion over a period of five years
  from known transactions in respect of just six types of tax avoidance
  arrangement, presented to the Portfolio Committee on Finance on 16 March
  2006, serves as a warning of the magnitude of the problem confronting us.

It should be noted that the Treasury and Sars has made an important
contribution to the success of our bid for the Soccer World Cup by ensuring
that the paper work dealing with our commitments on tax exemptions and
partial exemptions as per the requirements of Fifa were timeously done.
The success of this bid has given us the opportunity to fast-track
developmental projects, to witness the construction and upgrading of 10
stadia as well as to improve the surrounding infrastructure, public
transport and other social amenities that would make South Africa
attractive as a destination for tourists and for potential investors and
thereby boost our local economy. We must grasp the nettle.

In conclusion it must be stated that the professional and user-friendly
face of Sars is attracting more people daily to be tax compliant and
thereby committing them to discharge their obligation to transformation
towards improving the general quality of life of all South Africans. The
ANC supports the Bill.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. In expressing
appreciation especially to members of the Portfolio Committee on Finance,
let me just assure the hon Bhamjee of our ongoing support, because he has
lived through a very difficult period this year. Generally, parties are
supporting.

Let me just deal with a few issues that have been raised. The first relates
to the general anti-avoidance rule. Of course, it is a very difficult rule
and in the course of the discussion between the portfolio committee, Sars
and the Treasury, there has been some   softening.

But, I think, we need to understand that tax avoidance schemes are, by
their very nature, those that move across the globe with great speed.
Frequently, they are generated in a large economy like that of the United
States, transmitted by the tax advisers, and then find a home across the
world. If, then, the approach to law and the measures tends towards the
Americanisms, that is partly because of the origin and the management of
this.

I want to give the hon Davidson and all members of this House the assurance
that there is very close collaboration between, certainly, the Finance
Ministry and the Revenue Service – and our counterparts all over the world.
Whilst we are not formally members of the OECD, on issues of tax we
participate quite actively to ensure that we don’t become a haven for
practices that are outlawed elsewhere. It is very important that we
recognise that.

In respect of the 2010 issues – and let me, through the House, talk to the
Deputy Minister of Finance – we are all excited about 2010, but I think we
have to hold a line. This is because Fifa gets big eyes and tries to win
things that they haven’t won in other jurisdictions. So we have to hold a
tight line. So, Deputy Minister, you and other members of the local
organising committee are going to have that role, but it’s a role we
understand. It’s just important that we are able to say to all of South
Africa that a tight line will be held on these kinds of issues.

The third set of issues I would like to touch on relates to the approach we
have taken on incentives in the Revenue Laws Amendment Bill. We try to
apply a test as rigorously as possible, because we work from the premise
that companies don’t want to part with too much by way of taxation. That’s
a fair assumption to make in this environment.

Therefore what we try to look for is that which will have general benefit –
hopefully, national benefit - beyond the scope of the company in instances
in which an incentive is applied. So when we look at research and
development, it’s that that we’d look at. When we look at the issue raised
by the hon Van Dyk about market research, it is that that we look at. If
you allow one company to deduct its market research so that it makes better
soap powder, what do you do to other companies?

So I think that you’re looking for that which would provide a basis for
equity in the treatment of the incentive. It’s quite important that we try
to do this. It does mean that in the awarding of incentives, the tax
administration tends towards more conservatism. I think that there is a
very important safeguard in the R&D, and that is a requirement not by the
Ministry of Finance but by the Ministry of Science and Technology to report
to Parliament annually.

Now, what tends to happen within the complexities of Parliament is that
that report may go to the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology,
and the Portfolio Committee on Finance would not be aware of it. Part of
what we need to do is to ensure that we can bring all of this together and
track it, so that we will be advised by that report on the appropriateness
of the incentive going forward. You know, we are sailing in uncharted
waters.

But we have to look at those kinds of measures to try to bring it together,
so hopefully, Deputy Minister Hanekom, you and Minister Mangena and the
department will see this as a service not just to the scientific community
but also to the Revenue Service as we go forward.

Let me, in conclusion, just reflect on a curiosity that I have. Whilst
these are money Bills, Parliament in the narrow sense of the word does not
amend them. I think what members of the portfolio committee would be aware
of are all the measures in the way in which it is treated: the placement
earlier on the website, the testing of the ideas with the portfolio
committee before it’s made public, an opportunity for members of the
committee and, through their hearings, outsiders who have an interest in
this matter as well to influence the final drafting. There is, in fact, a
process whereby the proposals we bring into the parliamentary process are
amended along the line.

So there is a curiosity in the treatment thereof. It’s just important that
we recognise that we need open channels of communication – direct
communication – and the willingness to listen to each other to ensure that
we can proceed in the way that we have in which all parties support the
Revenue Laws Amendment Bill, 2006. I thank the House for the support.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Revenue Laws Amendment Bill read a first time.

Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill read a second time.


                         REVENUE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:46.

                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses—to be submitted to President for assent
      (1)   Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 7 November 2006:


           (a)   Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Regulation of
               Certain Activities in Country of Armed Conflict Bill [B
               42B—2005] (National Assembly sec—75).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


      (1)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
           Public Accounts and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
           Industry for consideration:


           (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified
               during an investigation into procurement at the Companies
               and Intellectual Property Registration Office
               (CIPRO)—September 2006 [RP 245-2006].


      (2)   The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Defence for consideration and report. The Reports of the Auditor-
          General are referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
          for consideration:
          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope
               for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General
               on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 214-2005].


          (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Castle of Good Hope
               for 2005-2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General
               on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 219-2005].


      (3)   The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
          Public Accounts and the Portfolio Committee on Defence:


          (a)    Letter from the Minister of Defence, dated 29 September
               2006, to the Speaker of the National Assembly, in terms of
               section 65(2)(a) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
               (Act No 1 of 1999), explaining the delay in the tabling of
               the Annual Report of the Castle of Good Hope for 2004-2005.


      (4)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The Report of
          the Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor Limited for
               2005-2006, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
               on the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.


      (5)   The following paper must be considered by the House in
          accordance with the resolution adopted on 21 June 2006 and is
          referred to the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs for
          information:


          (a)    Final Report: South African Observer Mission to the 2006
               President and Legislative Elections in the Democratic
               Republic of Congo on 20 June 2006.


      (6)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Labour and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
          Government for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public
          Accounts for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Local Government
               Sector Education and Training Authority (LG-Seta) for 2005-
               2006, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
               Financial Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 79-2006].


      (7)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Trade and Industry for consideration and report. The Report of
          the Auditor-General is referred to the Standing Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprises
               Development Agency for 2005-2006, including the Report of
               the Auditor-General for the fifteen month period ended on 31
               March2006.
      (8)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
          General is referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts
          for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Ombud
               for Financial Services Providers for 2005-2006, including
               the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
               Statements for 2005-2006.


      (9)   The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
          Administration for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the Government
               Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) for 2005-2006, including the
               Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
               Statements for 2005-2006 [RP 211-2006].


      (10)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
          Defence for consideration and report. The Report of the
          Independent Auditors is referred to the Standing Committee on
          Public Accounts for consideration:


          (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Denel Proprietary
               Limited for 2005-2006, including the Report of the
               Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2005-
               2006.
      (11)  The following paper is referred to Standing Committee on the
          Auditor-General for consideration:


          (a)    Special Report of the Auditor-General on his term of
               office, 1999 to 2006—In support of Democracy [RP 224-2006].


      (12)  The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
           Finance for consideration and report:


          (a)    Consolidated Financial Information for year ended 31 March
               2006 [RP 241-2006], tabled in terms of section 8(1)(a) of
               the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


      (a)   Report of the Auditor-General on the findings identified during
          a performance audit of official departmental accommodation at the
          Department of Correctional Services—September 2006 [RP 254-2006].

2.    The Minister of Labour
      (a)   Instrument for the Amendment of the Constitution of the
          International Labour Organisation (ILO), tabled in terms of
          section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum to the Instrument for the Amendment of
          the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation (ILO).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      This tabling replaces item 2 under ‘‘Tablings’’ on page 2439 of the
      Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 2 November 2006:
      (a)   Agreement between the Republic of Botswana, the Republic of
          Mozambique, the Republic of South Africa and the Republic of
          Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the Limpopo Watercourse
          Commission, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
          Constitution, 1996.


      (b)   Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Republic of
          Botswana, the Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of South
          Africa and the Republic of Zimbabwe on the Establishment of the
          Limpopo Watercourse Commission.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy on the
     Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2006] (National Assembly
     – sec 76), dated 8 November 2006:
     The Portfolio Committee on Minerals and Energy, having considered the
     subject of the Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20 – 2006]
     (National Assembly –sec 76), referred to it, and classified by the
     Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
     amendments [B 20A – 2006].

2.    One-Hundred-and-Eleventh Report of Standing Committee on Public
     Accounts on Independent Development Trust, dated 25 October 2006:

     1.     INTRODUCTION
         The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
         Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
         Financial Statements of the Independent Development Trust for the
         year ended 31 March 2006 tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
         reports as follows:


     2.     AUDIT OPINION
         The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
         Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
         equally unqualified.


     3.     CONCLUSION
        The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
        Independent Development Trust is necessary for the financial year
        under review given the information so far.
        The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
        Report of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.
3.    One-Hundred-and-Twelfth Report of Standing Committee on Public
     Accounts on Insurance Seta, dated 25 October 2006:


     1.     INTRODUCTION
        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
        Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements of the Insurance SETA for the year ended 31
        March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
        follows:


     2.     AUDIT OPINION
        The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
        Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
        equally unqualified.


     3.     CONCLUSION
        The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
        Accounting Authority of the Insurance SETA is necessary for the
        financial year under review given the information so far.


        The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
        Report of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

4.    One-Hundred-and-Thirteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on International Trade Administration Commission of South Africa
   (ITAC), dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the ITAC for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in
      Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
      The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the ITAC
      would be necessary for the financial year under review.
      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
of the Auditor-General.

Report to be considered.

5.    One-Hundred-and-Fourteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Khula Enterprise Finance Limited, dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
      Financial Statements of Khula Enterprise Finance Limited (Khula) for
      the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
      reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION
      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by
      Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
      equally unqualified.

   3. CONCLUSION
      The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with Khula
      Enterprises is necessary for the financial year under review given the
      information so far. The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual
      Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

6.    One-Hundred-and-Fifteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Mining Qualification Authority (MQA), dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Mining Qualification Authority for the year ended 31
      March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
      follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
      The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
      Accounting Authority of the Mining Qualification Authority is
      necessary for the financial year under review given the information so
      far.


      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

7.    One-Hundred-and-Sixteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on National Empowerment Fund, dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       National Empowerment Fund is necessary for the financial year under
       review.
       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

8.    One-Hundred-and-Seventeenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on National Nuclear Regulator, dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the National Nuclear Regulator for the year ended 31
       March 2006 tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       Accounting Authority of the National Nuclear Regulator is necessary
       for the financial year under review given the information so far.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

9.    One-Hundred-and-Eighteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Primary Agriculture, Education & TrainingAuthority (PAETA),
   dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Primary Agriculture Education and Training
       Authority (PAETA) for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in
       Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       Accounting Authority of PAETA is necessary for the financial year
       under review given the information so far.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.
Report to be considered.

10.   One-Hundred-and-Nineteenth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on South African Quality Institute, dated 25 October 2006:
   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the South African Quality Institute for the year ended
       31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       South African Quality Institute is necessary for the financial year
       under review given the information so far.
       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

11.   One-Hundred-and-Twentieth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on South African National Accreditation System (SANAS),dated
   25October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the South African National Accreditation
       System (SANAS) for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament
       and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       SANAS is necessary for the financial year under review given the
       information so far.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

12.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on South African Reserve Bank (SARB), dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor General on the Financial
       Statements of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       South African Reserve Bank (SARB) is necessary for the financial year
       under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.
Report to be considered.

13.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on South African Special Risk Insurers Association (SASRIA)
   Limited, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of SASRIA Limited for the year ended 31 March
       2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       Accounting Authority of SASRIA Limited is necessary for the financial
       year under review given the information so far.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.
Report to be considered.

14.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Safety and Security (SASSETA), dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the SASSETA for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in
       Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       Accounting Authority of the SASSETA is necessary for the financial
       year under review given the information so far.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.
Report to be considered.

15.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Service Sector Education & Training Authority (Service SETA),
   dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Service SETA for the year ended 31 March 2006,
       tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
       Accounting Authority of the Service SETA is necessary for the
       financial year under review given the information so far.
       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

16.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Air Traffic and Navigation Services, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and Navigation Services for
       the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to
       it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions shall be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the Air
       Traffic and Navigation Services is necessary for the financial year
       under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

17.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on ARTSCAPE, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Artscape for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled
       in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Artscape is
       necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

18.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Blind South Africa, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of Blind South Africa for the year ended 31 March 2006,
       tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of Blind South
       Africa is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

19.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Business and Arts South Africa, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the Business and Arts South Africa for the
       year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
       reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       IndependentAuditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Business and
       Arts South Africa is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.


Report to be considered.

20.   One-Hundred-and-Twenty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Council for Higher Education, dated 25 October2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Council for Higher Education for the year ended 31
       March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.
   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Council for
       Higher Education is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

21.   One-Hundred-and-Thirtieth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Education Labour Relations Council, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Education Labour Relations Council for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Education
       Labour Relations Council is necessary for the financial year under
       review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.


Report to be considered.

22.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on International Marketing Council (IMC), dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the International Marketing Council for the year ended
       31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the
       International Marketing Council is necessary for the financial year
       under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

23.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on National Housing Finance Corporation Ltd, dated 25 October
   2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the National Housing Finance Corporation for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the National
       Housing FinanceCorporation is necessary for the financial year under
       review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

24.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on National Museum Bloemfontein, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the National Museum Bloemfontein for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the National
       Museum Bloemfontein is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

25.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on NURCHA Financing Construction, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the NURCHA Financing Construction for the
       year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
       reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the NURCHA
       Financing Construction is necessary for the financial year under
       review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

26.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on SERVCON Housing Solutions, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the SEVCON Housing Solutions for the year
       ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
       as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the SEVCON
       Housing Solutions is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.


       Report to be considered.

27.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on the Market Theatre, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Market Theatre for the year ended 31 March 2006,
       tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Market
       Theatre is necessary for the financial year under review.
       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

28.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on the Presidency, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Presidency for the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled
       in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Presidency
       is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.
29.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on the Thubelisha Homes, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the Thubelisha Homes for the year ended 31
       March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Thubelisha
       Homes is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

30.   One-Hundred-and-Thirty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
        The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
        Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority for the
        year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
        reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
        The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
        Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
        equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
        The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
        further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Trans-
        Caledon Tunnel Authority is necessary for the financial year under
        review.


        The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
        of the Independent Auditors.
Report to be considered.

31.   One-Hundred-and-Fortieth Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Voortrekker Museum, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Voortrekker Museum for the year ended 31 March
       2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Voortrekker
       Museum is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

32.   One-Hundred-and-Forty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on War Museums of the Boer Republic, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the War Museums of the Boer Republic for the
       year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
       reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the War Museums
       of the Boer Republic is necessary for the financial year under
       review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

33.   One-Hundred-and-Forty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on the Water Research Commission, dated 25 October 2006:


   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
       Statements of the Water Research Commission for the year ended 31
       March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
       follows:
   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the Water
       Research Commission is necessary for the financial year under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Auditor General.

Report to be considered.

34.   One-Hundred-and-Forty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public
   Accounts on Umalusi Council for Quality Assurance, dated 25 October 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
       The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
       Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
       Financial Statements of the uMalusi Council for Quality Assurance for
       the year ended 31 March 2006, tabled in Parliament and referred to
       it, reports as follows:


   2. AUDIT OPINION
       The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
       Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit opinions will be
       equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
       The Committee is of the view that given the information thus far, no
       further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the uMalusi
       Council for Quality Assurance is necessary for the financial year
       under review.


       The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
       of the Independent Auditors.

Report to be considered.

