---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 28 March 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-03-28
---

TUESDAY, 28 MARCH 2006
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met in the Moshaweng Local Municipality Hall, Kgalagadi
District, at 14:11.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NO MOTIONS

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): I would like to
remind you that this is a full sitting of the House of the National Council
of Provinces, and we request that people do not walk in and out.

Hon members, I wish to welcome you all to this sitting today. And I have
been informed that the Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices
of motion or motions without notice today.

                          DIVISION OF REVENUE BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Deputy Chairperson, Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces, colleagues, MECs, hon members, people of the
Northern Cape and fellow South Africans, it would be indeed remiss of us
not to express our sincere appreciation for the co-operation we have
received from all those who participated in the thorough but speedy process
of the 2006 Division of Revenue Bill.

In particular, I would like to note that we are indeed eternally grateful
to the select committee – which was chaired by hon member Ralane – for the
sterling work it has done. While the fast-tracking of the Bill might have
limited the time that the NCOP had for processing the Bill, as we all know,
that process was in the interest of democracy and definitely made it
possible for members to participate fully in what I can describe as a
highly successful local government election on 1 March 2006.

It is historic that the House adopts the 2006 Division of Revenue Bill in
the Northern Cape, particularly in Kuruman. Firstly, this is a beautiful
part of the country, with rich cultural and historical aspects, and from a
heritage point of view. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, one now
fully comprehends the concerns raised by hon George Goeieman when he argued
that the provincial equitable share formula should take account of the
vastness of the Northern Cape and the resultant added costs of conducting
business in this province. [Applause.]

Let me allay the fears of the hon member. The Division of Revenue Bill that
is tabled and is to be adopted by this House takes into account, as the
Finance and Fiscal Commission put it, “the cost disabilities associated
with the vastness of this province” albeit in a limited way at this stage.

The Constitution enjoins our three spheres of government to co-operate. The
Division of Revenue Bill is one of the most concrete expressions of co-
operative relations between our three spheres of government. It is an
outcome of extensive consultative processes amongst technocrats, between
the political leadership of the three spheres of government and, generally,
all those who participate.

That none of our organs of state has had to seek recourse in the courts of
the land on matters pertaining to the resource allocation processes is,
indeed, remarkable. That after only 11 years of democracy South Africa is
able to publish three-year allocations for each sphere with breakdowns of
each grant by province and municipality is a big plus for improved forward
planning because indicative allocations published in each year are not
changed on an ad hoc basis - there is certainty and predictability of the
fiscal flows.

This creates a stability required to attain accelerated and shared growth.
None of the organs of state has an excuse not to put together medium-term
infrastructure investment plans that will lay the basis for sustained
delivery of services to our people and put the economy on an even and
higher growth path.

However, allow me to caution that certainty regarding fiscal flows alone is
not sufficient to ensure that services are delivered to our people. It will
not guarantee that no children learn under trees; it will not deliver clean
water and cholera-free drinking water to our people; it will not build
houses and roads.

In order to deliver services to our people, the resources that are
allocated through this Bill must be spent; and to spend the resources we
need good plans and project management.
While we have done well on many aspects, we need to do more to ensure
effective and efficient spending. This House has an exceedingly important
role to play in overseeing the implementation of budgets.

From our side, as the National Treasury, we shall continue to furnish this
House with more and better quality information in order to strengthen your
oversight role. This Bill, with the wealth of information it contains such
as the outputs set out in the framework for conditional grants, is but one
of the tools we put before this House for exercising oversight over
departments and provinces, including the National Treasury.

Let me now turn to the highlights concerning the deliberations of the
select committee on the Bill that this House is about to adopt today.
Although the Minister of Finance and I were not present during the
hearings, we received thorough briefings. From what we were told, hopefully
correctly, the discussions were quite vibrant. Some of the issues that were
raised by those who made presentations to the committee point to the
following pertinent matters about our budgeting, financial management and
performance monitoring systems.

Firstly, and perhaps more importantly, the deliberations highlighted that
the debate on the appropriate funding mechanism for national priorities
that are implemented through provincial and local government programmes,
the choices between equitable share versus conditional grant, is still very
much alive and will take a while to resolve.

Secondly, the discussions brought to sharp focus matters of value for money
and quality of spending. I am told members of the select committee asked
the Department of Housing what it was doing to ensure that those who rip
off our people by building poor quality houses are stopped and brought to
book. These are legitimate questions indeed that need to be asked by
members from time to time.

Thirdly, I am told that clause 16 nearly did not make it to the final
version of the Division of Revenue Bill. From the briefing that I received
it appears that, amongst other issues, the discussion on this particular
clause, for instance, raised a question of whether we can take away from
municipalities their constitutionally derived power to approve their
budgets.

Lastly, and on a lighter note, I was also advised that if I want to know
what the NCOP can do to you if you even try to take it for granted, I
should check with the Department of Agriculture. I am told they were
apparently sent packing because they had sent an inappropriate delegation.

The division of revenue set out in this year’s Bill gives effect to the
priorities articulated by our President in his state of the nation address
on 3 February 2006. The resources provided in this Bill will enable each
sphere of government to step up its infrastructure spending in the period
ahead as part of its contribution to the accelerated shared growth
initiative, known as Asgisa.

Out of R106,2 billion additional resources, national departments will share
about R30,5 billion; provinces will share R43 billion; municipalities R32,7
billion. Further details on the specific programmes and projects to be
implemented in each province and municipality can be found in the budget
statements for the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

The allocation in this year’s Bill reflect one of the major changes in this
year’s budget framework: the shifting of funding for social security grants
into a newly-established agency. The agency is taking up a major
responsibility. The committee received a full briefing on the agency during
the hearings on this Bill. With the shifting of the social security grant
to the agency, provincial departments, hopefully, will be able to give
focused attention to rebuilding and accelerating expansion of welfare
services.

Schedule 1 of the Bill provides a summary of the allocation of funds to the
three spheres of government. Out of R418,2 billion budgeted for 2006-07
financial year, national department functions amount to R215 billion. These
include debt service costs amounting to R52,1 billion and a contingency
reserve amounting to R2,5 billion. Provinces receive R176,7 billion and
R26,5 billion is allocated to local government. The local government
portion includes a replacement for the regional services councils levies
which will be abolished at the end of June 2006, as announced by the
Minister of Finance.

The 2006 MTEF allocations to provinces provide for a further strengthening
of pro-poor social services. A substantial share of the additional
resources is expected to go to education to fund a phased-in implementation
of no-fee schools programme and further expansion of early childhood
development programme to poor communities.
The further education and training grant allocation of R1,9 billion over
the next three years should go a long way to ensure that our FET colleges
are equipped with state-of-the-art technology so that they can produce
graduates who are capable of taking up key jobs in the industry immediately
after graduating from these colleges. Provincial budgets will reinforce the
strengthening of the health sector so that South Africans who do not have
medical insurance can also enjoy good quality health services.

Once again, the housing programme is stepped up. Twenty-three billion rand
will be spent on building houses over the next three years. The 2006 Bill
retains the provisions for the accreditation of large municipalities to
administer the housing function. This should contribute to accelerating the
delivery of housing.

Let me now turn to local government allocations. Over the next three years
municipalities will receive R97,3 billion and that includes R4,7 billion in
allocations in kind or an additional R32,7 billion over the 2005 baseline.
This includes R24 billion to compensate municipalities for their loss in
the RSC levies. As a result, the local government share of nationally
raised revenue increases from 4,6% in the current financial year to 6,3% in
2006-07, and to 7% in the outer year of the 2006 Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework.

The substantial increase in the local share is mainly targeted towards the
provision of free basic services, eradication of the bucket sanitation
system and job creation through the extension of municipal infrastructure
to areas that are presently not serviced. In total R36,3 billion over the
MTEF period will be available for water, electricity, refuse removal and
environmental health as part of the government’s commitment to providing
free basic services to poor communities.

In addition, an amount of R584 million is made available to assist poor
municipalities to remunerate their councillors appropriately. This will
reduce the burden of these poor municipalities and allow them to direct
their scarce resources towards service delivery. The 2006 MTEF also sets
aside R31,3 billion for the provision of municipal infrastructure.

The public transport infrastructure and systems grant and the new local
neighbourhood development partnership grant are allocated R2,9 billion and
R2,5 billion respectively in the 2006 MTEF. The municipal infrastructure
grant remains the key instrument to support the infrastructure budgets of
municipalities, to support the extension of services to poor households,
maintain and upgrade municipal infrastructure and also to support urban and
rural development. The MIG, as it is known, amounts to R21,5 billion over
the 2006 MTEF, reflecting an increase of R800 over the period.

Finally, allocation for capacity building and restructuring totalling R1,9
billion over the MTEF is also accommodated. The funding for capacity
building and restructuring declined, as we all know, from R750 million in
2007-08 to R400 million in 2008-09, as the restructuring grant programme
comes to an end and the funding is phased out into the local government
equitable share.

In conclusion, whilst we believe that most of the provinces strive to
improve administration over budget planning, execution and implementation,
there remains significant weaknesses, as you all know, which specifically
require corrective steps and corrective measures. The slow spending on
infrastructure, particularly in education and health, remains a matter of
major concern.

While there is great improvement in service delivery capacity of provinces,
a lot needs to be done to ensure that the pace of delivery is stepped up
and the quality of delivery further improved. Provinces have a key role to
play in economic growth, especially within the context of Asgisa. However,
it is equally important that this role should not overshadow their social
service delivery responsibilities. As we know, in South Africa these remain
the backbone of the transformation of our society.

As for provinces, a key balance between economic growth and the delivery of
pro-poor services becomes very critical, as these social services
themselves are key drivers to economic growth. Just as roads, power
stations, ports and other infrastructure are important in driving economic
growth, it is equally important that our education system be bolstered to
deliver the requisite skills needed to build all of these things. It is
also important that allocative efficiency be attained through the alignment
of allocation to the ability to spend, particularly in as far as the
preparation of the budget is concerned.

Government continues to increase allocations to reduce the backlogs
regarding the social and economic infrastructure. Provinces will have to
take steps to improve infrastructure, planning and delivery and are
therefore encouraged to continue to participate in infrastructure delivery
and the improvement programme managed by National Treasury.

Let me conclude by once again thanking this House for its forbearance in
agreeing to fast-track the 2006 Division of Revenue Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Thank you, hon
Deputy Minister, for participating in this debate today.

Mr T RALANE: Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Chairperson of the NCOP - I do
not see the Speaker of the Northern Cape here – Premier, MECs present here,
special delegates, members, ladies and gentlemen, the 94th anniversary of
the ANC on January 8 saw an organisation at a pitch of power, influence and
prestige higher than ever before in its history. It has established itself
without doubt as the effective leader of the struggle of the poor and
oppressed people, and of the struggle for liberation. The importance of its
role in shaping the destiny of our country is acknowledged by friend and
foe.

The recent overwhelming majority won by the ANC in the local election is an
acknowledgement of the premier role of the movement of the people. This
stresses that much of its appeal lies in its historical reputation, as the
oldest African nationalist movement. I quote:

   For the older generation, it is comparable to a church that one is born
   into; the organisation that has carried on while others have come and
   gone.

There were organisations in South Africa before and after 1912 which failed
to survive the test of time. Yes, for some the ANC may be like a church
that one is born into. Today it holds the loyalty of increasing numbers of
people, not purely for reasons of sentiment or tradition but because it is
a revolutionary movement with progressive policies, which have won and are
winning ever-increasing numbers of recruits for its crusade for
reconstruction and development.

It does not befuddle the people with pretty stories about happiness in the
next world but offers salvation, justice and security for all in this world
on the basis of sustained struggle for the achievement of the aims
incorporated in its programme, the Freedom Charter. It has survived and
grown in strength because it has been pragmatic and flexible, and is
capable of adaptation to changed circumstances without departing from its
fundamental principles.

The Division of Revenue Bill before the House today is the most important
piece of legislation that the Select Committee on Finance handles annually.
Through this legislation, the ANC-led government divides equitably
nationally raised revenue amongst the three spheres of government.
Allocations we see in the Bill will consolidate the ongoing work done by
our government in the fight to eradicate poverty, underdevelopment and
joblessness; and in growing the economy.

Key spending policy priority areas are: investing in people and ensuring
that skills development complements employment creation; targeted welfare
services; accelerated housing delivery; ensuring capacity-building of
municipalities; and investment by both public and private sectors to
improve the quality of life in poor neighbourhoods; economic infrastructure
upgrades that will include new power generation, rehabilitation and
expansion of roads and rail transport networks; improved water resource
management; modernisation of communications; investment in science and
technology and employment creation; promotion of small business
development; crime reduction; improving the performance of courts and
security services; defence modernisation and military skills development as
well as focus on capacity-building for municipalities.

The sweet victory of the ANC in the local government elections poses
painful challenges to us as members, public representatives and as
committees to strengthen our capacity to do effective oversight regarding
the funds allocated in the Bill that we are debating today. We urge all
committees to be vigilant in carrying out their oversight role. We must
critically interrogate both nonfinancial and financial information provided
by the departments.

We must not compromise on the quality of spending and the impact of that
spending on the communities. We urge the House to vote in favour of the
Division of Revenue Bill, as amended.

Ms D ROBINSON: Hon Deputy Chair, Premiers, Ministers and all protocol
observed, “dumelang!” [I greet you!] The annual promulgation of the
Division of Revenue Act is a constitutional requirement and is necessary to
determine the equitable division of the nationally raised revenue among the
three spheres of government and among the provinces.

I believe there is a danger that we might dismiss the Division of Revenue
Act as a mere routine annual process when, in fact, it goes to the very
heart of our democracy. It is this Act that gives substance to the federal
structure of our democracy, that provides a measure of protection against
centralism, and that funds our constitutional mandate of providing houses,
education, health care and basic services to our people.

This year the provincial equitable share accounted for R150 billion out of
R472 billion of government spending. The division of the equitable share is
done through a formula that takes into account the educational
responsibility of the provinces - 51%; the health care burden - 26%; a
basic share based on share of population - 14%; an equally divided
institutional component - 5%; a poverty component of 3% which introduces a
redistributionary bias to the formula; and an economic output component of
1% based on regional GDP data.

The DA believes that, in principle, this approach to the division of
revenue among the provinces is absolutely correct. It attempts to find the
right balance between growth and redistribution necessary to take our
country forward. I have recently raised some concerns about the population
and poverty component of the formulae and I will do so again.

It is a well-documented fact that the Western Cape is enjoying a massive
influx of people from other parts of the country, particularly the Eastern
Cape. It is also a well-documented fact that our cities all over are
growing. This growth is fuelled by rapid urbanisation as people seek
opportunities in the cities. The poverty component of the equitable share
formula is based on the 2000 Income and Expenditure Survey, as well as on
census data from 2001.

The basic share component of the formula is based on the census data as
well as the general household survey data from 2003 and 2004. I believe
that there is a strong case to be made for a review of the funding for
different provinces based on recent demographic changes across our country,
and the recent cross-boundary demarcations. Unfortunately, the next
national census is only scheduled for 2011. If the division of revenue is
still being promulgated using 10-year-old data, then by the time 2011 comes
around I believe we would have introduced a significant distortion of
public finances.

I would like to comment on the broader economic environment and the budget
for 2006-07. Inflation is predictable within the inflation targeting range
of the CPIX of 4,3%. This, despite the adverse conditions engendered by the
persistently high prices which were at almost 5% last year. The rand
weakened slightly from its highest level last year, and it is generally
believed to be at a sustainable level. In many respect economic conditions
are benign.

All these have helped the Minister of Finance rake in an extra R41 billion
above what was expected, resulting in a budget deficit of about 0,5%. This
embarrassment of riches raises some awkward questions about what to do with
the money? By even the most conservative standards a 0,4% budget deficit is
considered austere for a developing and growing economy.

The ANC government has decided to dedicate a sizable portion of our tax
revenue to promoting the developmental state. In many ways, new investment
in infrastructure will enable businesses to flourish and, hopefully, crowd
in economic activity. But this developmental strategy also has costs.
Government spending, as a percentage of the GDP, has crept up from 23,3% in
2002-03 to as much as 26,8% at present. Will government continue to take an
even larger slice of the pie, nudging the private sector gently out of the
way, by promising to spend almost R400 billion extra on infrastructure
development? The private sector knows not to expect too much by way of
improved tax competitiveness.

The debate about whether or not South Africa’s corporate tax burden is
excessive has many technical and economic subtleties that I will not go
into here. Nonetheless, we must applaud the elimination of the RSC levies
which provided a R7 billion boost to the private sector, as well as the R13
billion-odd tax relief that was afforded to South Africans this year.

We also welcome the adjustment to the tax code aimed at assisting small and
medium-sized businesses. At the same time, given the size of South Africa’s
revenue overruns and the awful extent of joblessness, there is a strong
case to be made for firing up job creation by way of further reductions in
the corporate tax rate and other taxes, such as the skills development levy
that may be impeding job creation.

Surely this need to create jobs and eliminate economic hardship is the
single most important struggle that we face in contemporary South Africa.
Ke a leboga. [I thank you.]

Mr D J BOTHA (Limpopo): Chairperson, the Limpopo budget of       R23,008
billion is being debated in the Limpopo Legislature this week, where
departments will set out their plans for the 2006-07 financial year. The
equitable share comprises the bulk of the provincial allocation of 89,6%,
the conditional grants comprise 8,7%, whilst the own revenue accounts for
1,71%. The provincial own revenue is mainly from motor vehicle licences and
amounts to R145 million; it’s from interest dividends and rent on land
which amount to R84 million; and it’s from the sale of goods and services
amounting to R106 million.

The provincial budget declines by 17,7% in the 2006-07 financial year. The
decline is due to the shifting of the social security grants from the
provincial department of health and social development to the SA Social
Security Agency, which takes full responsibility with effect from April
2006. All measures have been taken to ensure that this takeover will be
smooth and that all will receive their grants in time.
According to the 2002 census, 64,81% of the provincial households were
electrified. During this current year, more than 897 000 households
received free basic water and 524 households have access to water at RDP
standards. Furthermore, more than 127 000 households received free basic
electricity. During this year alone and as at the end of December 2005, an
additional 2 878 houses have been completed while 15 200 houses were under
construction. We just have to monitor quantity versus quality regarding
these projects.

Municipalities in Limpopo will receive R1,56 billion, which comes to 8,43%
of the total equitable share allocated to all municipalities. Excluding the
transfers to replace the RSC levies, the equitable share component grows by
7,7% per year in real terms over the MTEF period. Total allocations to
local government, including conditional grants, amount to R26,5 billion for
the financial year commencing on 1 April 2006. The municipalities in
Limpopo will receive a total of R3,1 billion, which is 11,7% of the total
allocation to municipalities in South Africa. New councillors must be
trained in time to approve their budgets before the start of the financial
year on 1 July 2006.

The social sector accounts for R16,75 billion, that is, 74% of the
equitable share. Out of the R16,975 billion equitable share, education
accounts for R11,066 billion; health accounts for R5,448 billion, social
development accounts for R432 million, and safety and security accounts for
R29 million.
Education is power and that is why Limpopo invests close to 50% in
education. Included in this R11,066 billion are conditional grants
amounting to R588 million – of which R292 million is for provincial
infrastructure, R202 million for the National School Nutrition Programme,
R43 million for the sector for further education and training and R22
million for early childhood development.

Health gets an allocation of R5,448 billion or 23% of the total provincial
budget, which includes the conditional grant of R509 million. The breakdown
in terms of service provisioning is R176 million for HIV/Aids, R102 million
for the provincial infrastructure and R72 million for training and
development of health professionals. Social development gets an allocation
of R432 million, or 1,8% of the budget. The budget intends to cater for the
delivery of social welfare services, which is critical for the
sustainability of communities.

A total of R29 million, which is 0,1% of the budget, is allocated to
safety, security and liaison, mainly to co-ordinate the implementation of
the provincial crime prevention strategy and the youth at risk projects.
The economic sector is allocated 18,3% or R4,196 billion. Out of this
amount, economic development and environment and tourism will account for
R675 million, whereas roads and transport will account for R1,780 billion.
Agriculture is allocated R1,029 billion; public works R589 million; and
sports, arts and culture R123 million.
A total of R675 million, or 2,9%, is allocated for economic development and
this will be used to establish co-operatives. As we are also faced with the
critical challenge of managing our environment, R7 million will be used for
environmental impact management services, while R11 million will be used to
promote the sustainable utilisation of the biodiversity resources of our
province.

A total of R1,780 billion, or 7,7%, is allocated to roads and transport.
This includes an amount of R100 million from the infrastructure reserve and
a R282 million infrastructure conditional grant. Public works allocation is
2,5% of the budget, or R589 million. The budget will cater mainly for
maintenance of government offices and the implementation of the Expanded
Public Works Programme, which undoubtedly serves as one of the vehicles to
reduce poverty. This budget aims to create jobs and in doing so reduce
poverty.

The department will assist other departments in the implementation of
capital or infrastructure projects, eg the building of schools, hospitals
and clinics, provisioning of water and electricity, as well as the
maintenance of government offices. An amount of R24 million has been
allocated to make the above possible.

With regard to agriculture, 4,4% of the budget, or the sum of     R1,029
billion, is allocated to the department and will cater for smallholding
irrigation schemes, as follows: four projects in Bohlabela, one project in
Mopani, nine projects in Capricorn and 10 in Sekhukhune. These projects
will have a positive impact on the 2 800 beneficiaries under the
Comprehensive Agriculture Support Programme and land reform poverty
alleviation projects. The allocation for this comes to R171 million.
Sports, arts and culture is allocated 0,5%, or R123 million, of which R15
million is a conditional grant from Sport and Recreation South Africa.

The main purpose of the Bill is to fight poverty. Therefore members of the
provincial legislature and the NCOP are earnestly requested to play a more
active role in monitoring spending by provincial departments and also
whether there are discrepancies regarding delivery as well. Moreover, MPLs
and the NCOP should exercise extraordinary vigilance in order to monitor
the spending patterns concerning equitable and conditional grants of
provincial departments. Limpopo supports the Bill.

Mr P GOVENDER (KwaZulu-Natal): Mr Chairman, Deputy Minister, colleagues,
observers, good afternoon to you all and thank you very much for having us
here in the Northern Cape. We appreciate your hospitality and I am sure all
of us feel very comfortable.

I am not going to read the Division of Revenue Bill, neither am I going to
quote you a whole host of figures. At the end of a long day I am sure you
do not need that. Suffice it to say that KwaZulu-Natal supports the
Division of Revenue Bill but raises two areas of concern.

The first concern relates to the impact of the provisions of clause 38 of
the Bill, which refer to the implementation of the Cross-boundary
Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Act of 2005. Our concern
centres around the determination of the spending of the equitable share of
revenue in so far as it may affect KwaZulu-Natal negatively.

You might be aware that we have inherited the vast area of Mzimkhulu. In
order for us to deliver to this community to serve our people, we require
adequate funding, and funding must come to the province timeously. That is
where our major concern lies.

The second area of concern submitted by KwaZulu-Natal relates to the
strategic projects of the province such as the Dube trade port that should
be considered on a similar basis as other projects like the Gautrain Rapid
Rail Link, which is specifically provided for in the Bill, in clause 10.

Chair, I do not see why one of our colleagues finds the Dube trade port
project amusing because it is a project that is going to benefit the
country as a whole and not just KwaZulu-Natal.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, can you take your seat.
Do you want to address the Chair, hon Ralane?

Mr T RALANE: Chair, is the member ready to take a question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, what is your point?

Mr T RALANE: You see, Chair, the point is that we dealt with this matter
with some delegates from KwaZulu-Natal. Now, the problem that we have here
is that, apparently, KwaZulu-Natal changes delegates from time to time.
Therefore somebody would then bring something else in the debate here, that
is something that has been resolved during the deliberations ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): No, hon Ralane, I learnt a lesson
during the last debate of this nature. I want to remind the House that the
hon Minister of Finance said we could not turn this House into an academic
institution. It is a political House and I will only confirm an order if
there is a fundamental deviation from the standing Rules of the House. But,
if a member feels that Gautrain is good for the Free State, I think that is
up to himself. [Laughter.] All of us must then debate that. So, I do not
see anything wrong with that. Hon member, please proceed with your speech.
[Applause.]

Mr P GOVENDER (KwaZulu-Natal): Thank you, Chair. I was not opening this up
for debate. Probably, I should have brought a begging bowl with me. We are
just saying: consider this in your next division of revenue.  We need
assistance and all we are saying is that you should give us that assistance
when you are contemplating your equitable share in your next division of
revenue.

At the same time I would just like to say that when the next division of
revenue is contemplated, take into account the terrain of KwaZulu-Natal
because the province itself is not an easy province in the geographical
sense.

We support this Bill. We know that much thought and much consideration has
gone into the Bill. As I said, I am not going to quote you figures, I am
not going to look at all of that, but I am saying: Please take these issues
into account when the next division of revenue is contemplated. I thank you
very much. [Applause.]

Mr S GQOBANA (Eastern Cape): Chair, we move from the premise that the
province had submitted its input during the stage at which we were
deliberating on this Bill. We have just joined other provinces in accepting
the Bill, informed by the objects of the Bill as reflected in clauses 2(b),
2(c) and 2(e), particularly when you read them in conjunction with clause
2(3)(b), which says that when a province allocates funding to various
provincial departments it should take into account the capacity that exists
in that particular department, and that in the event that such capacity is
not there, 1% of that allocation must be set aside to ensure that the
capacity prevails in a particular department.

I want to concur with the Deputy Minister that in the Eastern Cape as well
we do have some challenges with respect to health and education, as the
chairperson of the select committee might also be aware. However, we do
have a challenge with respect to the legislature infrastructure and that is
being approached through a separate route aimed at engaging the National
Treasury. It is not something that is within this process that we are
dealing with today but I felt that I must smuggle it in in the event that
...

I think the challenge placed before all individual members of the various
legislatures, including the NCOP, is what the chairperson of the select
committee has put to us today. It is in line with the recent comments or
statements by the national Minister of Finance about the vigorous nature of
our oversight over departments, particularly on financial and nonfinancial
issues.

I think, as the Eastern Cape, we are taking this challenge very seriously,
as it is now becoming clearer. As you look on a month-to-month basis
concerning what these allocations are moving in various departments, at one
stage you do sense some underspending regarding the infrastructure and so
on. I think that a situation where any province, including the Eastern
Cape, should under spend on the entire infrastructure should not be
allowed. So, we thank you very much. [Applause.]

Rre J O TLHAGALE: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, motlotlegi Motlatsa-Tona wa
Matlotlo, motlotlegi Mokhuduthamaga wa Peomolao ya Kapa Bokone le
ditokololo tse di tlotlegang tsa Peomolao ya Kapa Bokone, ditokololo tsa
NCOP tse di tlotlegang le batlotlegi botlhe ba ba fano, maikaelelo a
Molaotlhomo wa Kabo ya Matlotlo o re o sekasekang ke go abela mafapha a a
farologaneng matlotlo a mafapha ao a tla direlang setšhaba ka ona.
Matlotlo kgotsa ditšhelete tse di dirisiwang go direla setšhaba le tsona di
laolwa ke molao o mongwe wa matlotlo o o lebaneng tiriso ya ditšhelete.

Mo mabakeng a mangwe go utlwisa botlhoko fa puso ya bosetšhaba e abile madi
a a lekaneng mme a sa dirisetswa boikaelelo jo madi ao a bo abetoweng. Mo
mmasepaleng wa rona wa Moshaweng, bontlhanngwe jwa kago e re kokoanetseng
mo go yona bo setse bo eme lobaka lo lo leele bo sa felela ka ntlha ya
mathata mangwe a a rileng a a e dikaganyeditseng. [Nako e fedile.]
[Legofi.] Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Finance, hon MEC
of the Northern Cape Legislature and hon members of the Northern Cape
Legislature, hon NCOP members and honourable guests present here, the aim
of the Appropriation Bill that we are discussing is to allocate funds that
will be used for the nation to the different departments. The Appropriation
Act also provides for the administration of the money that is being used
for the nation.

On the other hand, it is hurtful when the national government has allocated
funds and those funds are not used for the purpose they were intended for.
Here, in Moshawaneng Municipality, the part of the building in which we
have assembled has been incomplete for a long period because of some
problems in this regard. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Hon Chairperson, Deputy Minister, Premier of the Northern
Cape, my colleagues, special delegates from different provinces, in the
absence of representatives from my province and in my capacity as a
permanent delegate of North West, it gives me pleasure to take part in this
debate in this House on the division of revenue which, in essence,
constitutes the foundation of this House. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, can we maintain order
in the House, please. I am going to mention members by name and I do not
think that that augurs well. I will do that and I think some members know
that I can do it. Please proceed, hon member.

Mr Z C KOLWENI: Chairperson, thank you for your protection. According to
statistics in South Africa, the North West province registered economic
growth of 4,9% last year. Whilst the current Budget makes it possible for
our province to work towards a targeted growth of 6,6%, there are some
challenges which we need to meet as a province, such as gold-mining and
agriculture.

The Budget for this year indeed raises the hopes of our people because it
has to work for them and do those things they perceive as critical to their
well-being, be it new schools, rehabilitation of roads, clinics, clean
water and so forth.

In our constitutional state democracy, in order to gain the confidence of
our people, we must subscribe to good governance that does not have room
for fraud and corruption. We are obliged to a system of government in which
every citizen is a player, so to say. It is a participatory democracy.

I also want to mention some highlights concerning the allocations that have
been made that make us happy in the province. They are allocations such as
the provision for the improvement of sanitation in areas where we know we
still have to deal with the bucket system, which still has to be phased
out.

There is also some good news concerning the fact that government employees
are going to benefit from the medical scheme. There is also an allocation
that talks to the provision of no-fee schools. This is a very important
policy, which will ensure that the province develops and will make the
nation benefit, especially regarding children who are not able to pay some
fees. There is also an allocation for the improvement of social workers’
salaries that is also aimed at improving the status of our service in the
province, from which our people will benefit in terms of getting
professional services.

It would be an offence if I do not mention the role that we have to play
and the responsibilities that we have on our shoulders as members of
provincial legislatures and Members of Parliament of the NCOP. Members of
the NCOP as well as our counterparts in the provinces are duty-bound to
play a more active role in monitoring spending by provincial departments.
If a discrepancy exists in the provincial financial reporting, it is likely
that that discrepancy will be revealed on delivery as well. Further, we are
urged to exercise extraordinary vigilance in order to monitor the spending
patterns of equitable and conditional grants to provincial departments.

The North West province unreservedly supports the Division of Revenue Bill.
Thank you.

Mr P DIKGETSI (Northern Cape): Deputy Chairperson, Chairperson of the NCOP,
hon Premier of the Northern Cape province, Deputy Minister of Finance, hon
members of the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin by taking this
opportunity to commend the NCOP for taking its work to the people. By
bringing the NCOP into the most rural and disadvantaged areas such as
Kgalagadi demonstrates the commitment to entrenching participatory
democracy as enshrined in our Constitution. It is even befitting because
this year we celebrate 10 years since the adoption of the Constitution in
1996.

Through the Budget we tabled in February this year, government has given
hope to many South Africans that, indeed, we are in a better position to
tackle the challenges of unemployment and poverty. As noted, correctly, by
the Minister of Finance during the tabling of the national Budget this
year, the Budget gives practical effect to our programme of social cohesion
and, in particular, prioritising the needs of the poor.

As a province, we are also encouraged by the fact that gains made through
good macroeconomic management and fiscal discipline, more services can be
extended to the poorest of the poor. We are confident and hopeful that our
government is in a good financial position to address the prevailing
socioeconomic challenges as well as give expression to the commitment,
spirit and letter of our ten-year-old Constitution.

Notable amongst our reasons for confidence and positive spirit is the fact
that our provincial economy is performing very well. Amongst other things,
we are able to report that, in 2004, the provincial economy grew by 3%.
This represents a promising improvement on the 2% average growth between
1994 and 2004.

Regarding these improvements in economic growth, we are pleased to report
that, according to recent Statistics SA figures, unemployment in the
province declined from 26,4% in September 2003 to 24,7% in September 2005.
This demonstrates the fact that the interventions by our government are
beginning to bear fruit, as enshrined in the people’s contract to fight
poverty and create work. Nonetheless, our efforts to ensure accelerated and
sustainable economic growth levels continue, as enshrined in the various
growth and development plans.

One of the challenges that require immediate attention is the striking
inequalities that are so glaring in areas such as the Kgalagadi district.
Despite the huge economic activity taking place in this area concerning
mining in particular, our people continue to live in poverty and without
benefits. To this end, we continue our calls to big businesses operating in
these areas to invest and plough back into these communities.

Furthermore, we are encouraged by the fact that our province has been
identified as a hub for mining and mineral beneficiation as part of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, or Asgisa,
processes. Apart from the diamond-cutting and polishing factory, which is
to be established in Kimberley, our provincial government, together with
its partners in business, is working towards establishing a manganese
smelter to ensure beneficiation of the mining of manganese in the Kathu-
Postmasburg area.

We remain mindful of the fact that much more needs to be done in order to
improve the quality of lives of our people. In this regard, we welcome and
commend the fact that over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, the
equitable share for the Northern Cape increased by R106,4 million in 2006-
07 to R487,7 million in the last year of the MTEF.

Conditional grants increased by R149,8 million to a total of R419,8 million
over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period while provincial revenue
increased by R65,5 million over the same period. These increases put us in
a better position to address some of the challenges facing our province.

Through the increased equitable share, we will be able to further expand
and extend service delivery to some of the areas that continue to face
challenges in this regard. Most importantly, this would allow us to reduce
backlogs in school equipment and expand a new curriculum in education for
Grades 10 to 12. This also provides us with an opportunity for enhancing
human resources in health by recruiting personnel with requisite
professional skills, and improve services in the rural areas.

We are mindful of the fact that accelerated economic growth must be
supported by the requisite infrastructure in both communication and
technology. It is for this reason that we welcome increased allocations to
infrastructure development. Through the infrastructure grant, we have been
given an opportunity, amongst other things, to improve our road
infrastructure in order to facilitate effective transportation of goods and
products to their market destinations.

In addition, we are encouraged by the fact that, due to our performance,
our province received an additional allocation during the 2005 adjustments
estimates for the hospital revitalisation programme. Amongst other things,
major projects for the hospital revitalisation programme include a
construction of the psychiatric hospital in Kimberley, a hospital in
Barkley West, and construction of Upington Hospital and De Aar Hospital.
Further, the department of housing and local government will deliver
approximately 3 000 houses in the 2006-07 financial year.

In order to give effect to the objects of infrastructure development, our
provincial government will continue to focus on the Expanded Public Works
Programme as part of our programme to extend and build new infrastructure,
as well as strengthen participation and inclusion of those trapped in the
second economy.

The developments around investment and infrastructure development are
expected to contribute significantly to the creation of job opportunities
in the various regions of our province. Through demands for goods and
services generated by increased economic activities, our province is set to
achieve and maintain economic growth between 4% to 6%, as enshrined in the
provincial growth and development strategy.

Although we note with great enthusiasm the progress made and opportunities
emanating from the division of revenue, it is important that we also
reflect on the prevailing challenges. Amongst other things, the equitable
share formula currently being used to allocate financial resources poses a
number of profound challenges for the Northern Cape in particular.

We agree, Deputy Minister, that the 2006 data does take into account the
cost of delivering services as per the Financial and Fiscal Commission
recommendations. However, we feel that we need to engage further on this
matter as it is our belief that there is a number of factors that still
confront us as the Northern Cape, and issues such as distance, remoteness
and gravel roads are indeed impacting on our ability to reach every part of
the province.

Further, this scenario is also exacerbated by the fact that the rural
nature of our province creates challenges related to recruitment and
retention of skilled personnel, especially in the health and education
sectors. These factors make service delivery more expensive in the Northern
Cape. Nonetheless, we have no doubt that an appropriate solution to this
situation may be arrived at in the near future and hence our support for
this Bill.

Many of you know that the Northern Cape has inherited some areas in the
Kgalagadi district and in Phokwane Municipality, as a result of the
eradication of cross-boundary municipalities. This means that more work
needs to be done to ensure that budgets of the provinces affected by the
eradication of cross-boundary municipalities are aligned with the
implementation protocols signed by the Premiers.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to express my heartfelt
condolences to the family of the late mayor of Ga-Segonyana municipality,
Mr Emmanuel Kgopodithate. His contribution to the struggle waged by our
people against the unjust system as well as the commitment and zeal he
demonstrated regarding the development and improvement of the lives of our
people will be sorely missed. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister of Finance, hon
Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, hon guests and
our friends here in the Northern Cape, the hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr
J Mahlangu, stated yesterday that a budget is a tool for service delivery.
This afternoon, all of us here have to consider this Division of Revenue
Bill, that is, whether it will enhance service delivery for poverty
eradication or poverty alleviation, job creation and accelerated shared
economic growth in South Africa spearheaded by our hon Deputy President as
Asgisa.

As South Africans we are, or have to be, part of the budget system. I am
not going to mention the figures because I think we have been fed with a
lot of figures so far. But, we know that budgeting has to start from the
people at grass-roots level and that it should be a bottom-up and not a top-
down method.

We have to make use of our further education and training colleges to train
our people on the budget system. Otherwise, we may find that we give people
information which may not really be of help to them, whereas if they had
given us all the information according to their felt needs we would be able
to conduct a better budget system.

These FET colleges, which have been given R1,96 billion, have to assist by
training our people to prepare business plans and to go through the budget
system. People at local level have to identify their own felt needs such as
hunger, unemployment and lack of craft skills to help themselves.

Having done that, it is essential for communities to forward and discuss
their needs with their leaders at community level. There are community
development workers and community health workers who should be contacted by
the people to assist them with their needs so as to facilitate the process
of budgeting.

Budgeting for poverty alleviation and economic growth on a small-scale
starts in every household with a patch of a garden for feeding a family.
Excess vegetables may be dried or sold to neighbours and thus small-scale
savings may be achieved. We start small and grow big.

Consumerism has contributed a lot to the revenue we are discussing at the
moment. But, that has to be changed because revenue has to be accumulated
through production. I think the hon Deputy Minister of the Trade and
Industry is going to help us a lot as South Africans to be motivated
producers.

Our revenue cake has been baked by all South Africans, because we all
contribute to tax and VAT. Today, we recommend the cutting of the cake
according to the people’s needs, particularly in impoverished areas.

For economic growth, consideration has to be given to projects such as the
Gautrain, but we will also have to think about the 2010 activities that
will be taking place. We also have to consider the Dube trade port in which
KwaZulu-Natal has already put down a sum of R1 billion and we are asking
for R1 billion from our National Treasury. Developmental projects such as
goat, ostrich and chicken farming and dam building have to be considered as
these assist women who are in need, and the youth as well.

The Division of Revenue Bill will facilitate service delivery in all
spheres of government through competent and trustworthy servants of the
people. Our task, as members of the NCOP, is to do oversight work with all
the hon members and people on the ground to give people hope as envisaged
by our hon President.

Corruption and nepotism have to be minimised in order for all people to
share this budget...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I am afraid your time
has expired.

Ms A N T MCHUNU (Western Cape): The IFP supports this Budget. [Applause.]

Mr G STRACHAN: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, hon Premier of the
Northern Cape, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Western
Cape, allow me to express our appreciation to the NCOP for this opportunity
and to say that we have a lot to learn from the NCOP about the extent to
which it carries out its public participation processes, going to the
lengths that it has today. I also want, on behalf of the Western Cape
Legislature, to thank Mr Ralane and the portfolio committee for the work
which they did with our standing committee and the legislature.

The Western Cape Provincial Legislature supports the Division of Revenue
Bill without reservation. The standing committee, after a briefing by the
provincial treasury, raised a number of technical issues. The hon Ralane
will be pleased to note that I am not going to raise these technical issues
now, although we will say that we reserve the right to raise them in
future. And we make no apology for the fact that we are briefed by the
Treasury and assisted to gain an understanding of some of the technical
questions.

In the Western Cape, three issues crop up historically in relation to the
Division of Revenue Act. They are raised consistently by the DA and their
ideological bedfellows, the ACDP. [Laughter.] It is interesting that the
hon Ms Robinson agrees with the principle of the equitable share. It has
not always been the case. For many years the DA did not agree with the
equitable share. [Interjections.]

They always said that another formula should be used. In fact, even today
some of them still say that. They suggested that a formula should be based
on relative contribution to the economy of each province and the slightly
above-average provincial growth rate. This obviously ignores the fact that,
as we all know, we are one country with one history and it is a history
characterised by growth inequality, which has to be and will be addressed
by the national government. [Applause.]

The hon member Ms Robinson put this slightly different spin on the matter
and referred to a federal structure of our democracy. Perhaps the hon
member has read a different Constitution to the one that I have read.
[Laughter.] But my understanding is that it is a Constitution based on co-
operative governance and spheres of government.

This brings me to the second issue, which is much talked about by the DA -
that is the issue of inward migration. And the hon Robinson has not been as
subtle in this regard as she was with the equitable share. She said that
that does not take into account inward migration to the province from the
Eastern Cape. We can debate the accuracy of the data provided by Statistics
SA. We should also debate the issue that she has raised about the data,
which is historically used in planning going forward.

However, what we won’t accept is an issue that the DA and the ACDP raise
consistently. The data issue is one thing, but it is another thing to use
inward migration from the Eastern Cape as migration of Africans to the
Western Cape, which allows the DA to have slogans such as: “Take back your
city” or “Fight ANC racism”. [Interjections.]

In fact, in the most recent debate that hon member’s colleague, hon
Brynard, who represents the DA, said there were no electricity cuts under
apartheid, and Hansard will bear me out on this. We agree with him,
although I do not really know. But it did not matter for 90% of the
population because they had no electricity at all. [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order, members! Hon Robinson, on
what point are you rising?

Ms D ROBINSON: I am just questioning the relevance of that member’s speech
regarding the debate on the division of revenue.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order! Hon Strachan, please continue
with your speech.

Mr G STRACHAN (Western Cape): Thank you. It would be useful if the hon
member and her colleagues spent more time in the standing committee. The
third issue is that the Western Cape is treated unfairly because it has
three teaching hospitals and because individuals from other provinces come
to the Western Cape where there are better services. As we know, this is
such a stale and outdated argument because the conditional grants given
under the hospital revitalisation programme have gone a long way to
addressing the problem.

Of course, there are challenges with respect to the conditional grants. The
Finance and Fiscal Commission pointed out some of the challenges, including
the Western Cape. We are mindful of them and we have to have an ongoing
check and oversight to ensure that those grants are used precisely for what
they are specified for.

These arguments - and I have outlined only three of them - are bogus
arguments. They are often advanced by the DA in a province where it feels
that it would like to have...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, I am afraid your time
has expired. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Mr E M SOGONI: Hon House Chairperson, hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
Premier of Northern Cape - I can’t see her - hon Deputy Minister of
Finance, the leadership of all legislatures and people of Northern Cape, I
must really thank the hon member, Strachan, who spoke before me. I think he
really put paid to a lot of debates that were raised by the DA.

The Bill before us shows a commitment by the democratic government to
bettering the lives of the people in rural areas of the Northern Cape, and
those in informal settlements of Gauteng, Umlazi in Durban, Limpopo and all
over the country. The Minister of Finance said that money is not a problem
in South Africa; the challenge is ensuring that these monies are utilised
as allocated, and not saved in the banks as that is not the function of
government.

Incidentally, Gauteng is passing its appropriation budget today so that it
can become a better place to live in. The budget they are passing today
will go a long way in ensuring that unemployment is halved by 2014. Gauteng
has undertaken to grow its economy by 8% by 2010. The Premier said that the
budget had been drawn up in the context of Asgisa.

My contribution today will address two areas and some of them are areas
that the Deputy Minister referred to, that is the objective of the
conditional grants, and clauses 16 and 49 of the Division of Revenue Bill.
Clause 16 deals with accountability and clause 49 deals with cross-border
allocations during transition.

The whole intention of these grants is to supplement provincial and
municipal grants. They are not intended to replace equitable shares of any
department. Through conditional grants, the government also addresses
certain priorities such as backlogs in infrastructure. I would like to
refer to some of these grants.

The first one concerns the Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme,
which is commonly known as Casp. This grant is intended to promote and
facilitate participation by all households in rural areas who may be
experiencing financial difficulties, and it is about participating in small-
scale farming. Our experience in oversight is that provinces have not
succeeded in spending all these funds received last year. In fact, the Casp
grant is a modest one. Some provinces have applied for roll-overs and those
have been granted.

The other grants are those that concern education. They have already been
mentioned but I will go into some detail. The Further Education and
Training College Sector Recapitalisation Grant is the new grant intended to
improve capacity, in order to improve skills development and training in
FET colleges. The staff of the FET colleges will benefit as they will be
reskilled to address the skills shortage required by the economy.

The Select Committee on Education and Recreation will have to watch the
above-mentioned grant closely, as there might be teething problems when the
grant is being phased in, and there could be challenges regarding spending
in provincial education departments.

There is also another education grant which focuses on HIV/Aids. Its
objective is to skill educators to deal with challenges concerning infected
and affected teachers and students at schools. Again, from our experience,
it has become clear that co-operation is needed between the provincial
departments of education and provincial department of social development,
who are better equipped to assist with these grants. There are already
teachers who are trained but have no resources or support systems which can
assist them to apply their skills. Obviously, the provinces’ capacities to
respond differ, but they could share experiences in order to improve the
usefulness of these grants.

Another important grant concerning education is the nutrition grant. Some
provinces are doing much better. However, others, especially
...[Interjections.] There is a province, Comrade Kopane, that has informed
us that they feed students three times a week. The requirement of this
grant is that students must be fed 156 days a year – which is almost equal
to the number of school days. Many delays experienced have also deprived
the needy kids of this nutritional requirement. These delays resulted from
the timing regarding putting of tenders. The officials wait until
implementation time. Planning is a problem for many of our officials in the
departments.

There is also another grant that is administered by Health. The HIV grant
is intended for intervening in the fight against HIV/Aids that is ripping
off our country. Again, there have been problems in relation to spending in
these grants. The Northern Cape MEC mentioned the Hospital Rehabilitation
Grant. Northern Cape has done well regarding this grant. However, there are
still challenges in many provinces.

As the finance committee, we advise that the provincial departments of
health and education, on one side, and Public Works on the other side,
should, in the next quarterly expenditure programme, bring service level
agreements to the finance committee. This exercise would go a long way
towards resolving some of the problems that contribute to low spending in
infrastructure.

Government has agreed to devolve the housing grant to local government
because it is the best place to accelerate delivery of houses. In the state
of the nation address, the President announced measures taken to capacitate
local government, including the intervention by the Development Bank of
South Africa and Project Consolidate. Local government currently cannot
deliver on this obligation, unless this intervention is realised soon.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr E M SOGONI: Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D SINGH (Salga): Hon Chairperson, hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon
Deputy Chairperson, hon Premier, Speaker of the Northern Cape province, hon
members, special delegates, ladies and gentlemen, the division of revenue
should, in terms of the South African Constitution, seek to strengthen the
ability of provinces and municipalities to provide basic services and
perform the functions allocated to them, thereby promoting the improvement
of the living environment and livelihoods of all the constituents by means
of providing for developmental and other needs.
The President, in his state of the nation address, said and I quote:


  While we must indeed celebrate the high levels of optimism that inspire
  our people, who are convinced that our country has entered its age of
  hope, we must also focus on and pay particular attention to the
  implications of those high levels of optimism with regard to what we must
  do together to achieve the objective of a better life for all our people.
  We must ensure that the machinery of government, especially the local
  government sphere, discharges its responsibilities effectively and
  efficiently, honouring the precepts of Batho Pele.

These high levels of optimism and expectation have once again been
demonstrated by the way in which our people voted in the 1 March 2006 local
government elections.

The Minister of Finance reported a positive economic growth of about 5%
last year, and expressed the anticipation of continued growth of about 5%
per year over the period ahead. The 2006 Budget, through Asgisa, begins to
demonstrate the government’s move to respond to the hopes of the people by
doing everything possible to meet their expectations.

It is most appreciated that the government, through its Budget, continues
its efforts to accelerate the pace of employment creation by focusing on
economic policy; introducing a number of monetary thresholds and
adjustments; simplifying tax arrangements for small businesses;
consolidating its achievements regarding skills and education; and
improving the capacity and effectiveness of the state with regard to
municipal development planning, combating crime and promoting service-
orientated Public Service administration.

Section 14 of the Bill seeks to ensure that delivery of housing services is
enhanced through the accreditation of municipalities with capacity. On the
other hand, Section 16 is meant to address the spending of the
infrastructure grant, which currently seems to be negatively affected by
the many unnecessary delays and conditions attached to the transfer of
funds by the transferring officers.

While Salga welcomes and supports fully the provisions of this section, the
NCOP should strengthen its oversight responsibility and ensure that the
duties or obligations stipulated on these sections are carried out
effectively within the prescribed requirements and timeframes.

Clause 24 (1)(b), which requires the National Treasury to approve the
monitoring of expenditure and nonfinancial performance information of the
municipal infrastructure grant funds, is supported because Salga believes
that the National Treasury will assist in eradicating the current MIG
transfer practices, which result in delays in the roll-out of projects and
huge underspending on capital budgets by municipalities.

Regarding the equitable share, local government receives R8,3 billion in
2006-07; R10,5 billion in 2007-08; and R13,9 billion in 2008-09, which is
an upward revision of the baseline by R1,6 billion over the next three
years. It is noted with appreciation that the revised equitable share also
makes provision for a revised remuneration framework for councillors, and
the environment health care services.

Government will also provide R7 billion in 2006-07; R8 billion in 2007-08
and R9 billion in 2008-09 to compensate local government for removal of the
regional services council levies. The National Treasury, during our
engagement, correctly pointed out that there had been an element of
underestimation and overestimation of the income of these levies by certain
municipalities, and that led to difficulties in putting together the
allocations, as reflected in the Bill. However, Salga would like to believe
that the National Treasury, in arriving at the transfer allocations to
districts, took into consideration that the RSC levies were the major
source of revenue for this category of municipalities.

Salga notes as positive that the transfer to local government concerning
infrastructure, which amounts to R8,2 billion and will run up to R9,8
billion in the MTEF years, includes, over and above municipal services
infrastructure, the funding for public transport infrastructure.

The largest portion of the infrastructure transfers goes to MIG, the
funding structure which was established to supplement municipals’ own
revenue in delivering basic service infrastructure and stimulating local
economic development and job creation over the medium term.

Chairperson, Salga believes that the role of national and provincial
government is to support and monitor the outcomes of municipal
infrastructure investment. The efforts of these spheres of government
should focus on improving the capacity, efficiency, effectiveness,
sustainability and accountability of the local government sphere, and on
making the integrated development plans the primary mechanisms for
intergovernmental co-ordination.

Good municipal governance is built upon effective interface between
councillors and officials, strong links between financial and technical
support functions and an appropriate organisational structure. It is
appreciated that national government continues to commit funds to capacity-
building and restructuring initiatives.

The newly-introduced neighbourhood development partnership grant to provide
municipalities with technical assistance to develop appropriate project
proposals for property developments in townships and new residential
neighbourhoods is most welcome.

Completion of the process of reviewing the local government fiscal
framework is crucial. The process focuses on the replacement of the
regional services council levies, the introduction of new property rating
and the assessment of the impact of the restructuring of the electricity
redistribution industry on municipal finances. This includes the alignment
of functional and fiscal division of powers and functions between category
B and category C municipalities.

Viewed as positive is the National Treasury, which has already released a
document on the work in progress with regard to finding a suitable
replacement for the regional councils levy fees and finding additional
revenue source for local government.

One of the revenue sources, namely VAT and zero-rating of municipal
property rates, will be applied from 1 July 2006 and it is estimated that
it will result in just under R1 billion benefit for category A and category
B municipalities.

In conclusion, Salga supports the 2006 Division of Revenue Bill. Let me
reiterate that the basis on which these inputs have been made is to
indicate that there is significant progress with regard to achieving the
mandate of local government. However, in consolidating the co-ordination
and integration between government’s spheres, it should be made clear that,
irrespective of how government operates, the impact of its work is
understood as being that of an entity called government.

On behalf of Salga, we would also like to take this opportunity to convey
our condolences to the family of our former colleague, Mayor Kgopodithate
of Ga-Segonyana municipality, who left us on 25 March this week. We thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson, hon members, clearly it was
quite a vibrant debate and I would like to thank all the members who
participated in it. But, hon members, allow me also just to raise a few
issues. Maybe the starting point is the statement that was made on this
podium that went as follows: “Increased government infrastructure spending
means no tax relief for business.” That statement was made as though
there’s something wrong in that.

I’ll assume that hon Robinson detected an anomaly in this government’s
endeavour to increase infrastructure spending, because she said increased
infrastructure spending means there is no tax relief for business. Let’s
understand what this infrastructure spending is meant to do, as contained
in the Budget document and also in the speeches of a number of members.

This increase in infrastructure spending ensures that there are schools for
children; this increased infrastructure spending means that there’s clean
water – things that we take for granted because some of us have never had
to face a situation where you drink water out of the river. Increased
infrastructure spending means access to medical facilities. Those of us who
grew up in communities where there was always access to these facilities
might take that for granted, but that is what it means.

Quite obviously, in addressing this situation, all of us as South Africans
ought to make a contribution. We can’t have a situation where some parties
have given themselves the mandate to speak on behalf of business, because
business in South Africa understands that, in order to sustain this
democracy and to ensure that we improve the wellbeing of all citizens, a
contribution ought to be made – and a reasonable contribution.

We all understand if we read the Budget document and the speech of the
Minister that the taxes have been on the decline through and through. The
tax reform has basically been premised on ensuring that there’s equity,
that we all contribute equally and increase the base, and that we alleviate
the tax burden on those members of society that are at the bottom end of
the income scale. If anyone says that that is not justice, then I will ask:
What is justice then?

However, it is also up to us who have the capacity to earn more to do
something. Hence, we have to contribute more – and that includes the
members of this House. [Applause.] We accept this because by doing it we
increase the possibility that this government will ensure, yes, indeed,
that there is a better life for all citizens, irrespective of whether they
are in rural areas or informal settlements in our own country. By doing
this we increase the possibility that the dream of attaining a better world
will basically move from the realms of imagination into concrete reality.
We can only achieve that through this infrastructure spending.

But, there is a bigger picture to infrastructure spending. Businesses that
are not short-sighted understand that you don’t just look at increased
government spending, but you look at what government is spending on.
Investment spending is good for economic growth and this government has
increased infrastructure spending because by doing that, it increases
investment spending. Once you increase investment spending, it means you
don’t just build schools and all that but you also increase the basic
infrastructure that would crowd in private sector investment – and we have
seen that happening.

Once the private sector also invests because of increased infrastructure
spending, this economy grows; and once this economy grows, it means there
are, to a larger extent, bigger profits because more people would be
earning and would be able to buy those goods and services produced by the
very same private sector. So, an enlightened business person says: “A
growing economy means a bigger profit for me”, but citizens of South Africa
say that bigger profit means bigger revenue and then more resources to
spend on the vulnerable.

That’s a simple model of the ANC. [Applause.] That is how we are going to
transform this society. We are not going to transform this society by any
unsustainable means but by basically following a very rational and simple
economic model of increasing the growth of this economy while spending, not
just anyhow, but by ensuring that the benefits are also felt by the most
vulnerable.

If the DA is worried about those business people and all that, they must
basically articulate that more clearly because, at the end of the day, no
head rests peacefully when a neighbour is hungry. That, you must always
remember. [Applause.]

The other issue that I will use my time to deal with is around the
preparations for 2010. We all know that South Africa has been given the
honour and responsibility to host the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

It is the major event that not only will put South Africa but the whole of
the African continent on the map. We will ensure that this biggest sporting
activity to be conducted in this country of ours, in this continent that is
called Africa, will be conducted in a manner that is going to match any
other venue anywhere in the world. Hence, South Africa has the
responsibility, not only for ourselves as South Africa, but for the whole
continent, to ensure that there is, indeed, a successful hosting of the
Soccer World Cup in 2010.

We must host in a way that will show the efficiency, capacity and
professionalism of Africa; and that will show the infrastructure that is
equal to any other infrastructure in the world. [Applause.] It is on that
basis that we said it is important for this government, as contained in the
Budget, to set aside resources to ensure that this infrastructure, which is
called a stadium, is built across the board.

In doing that, we must also understand that it is important for us to
ensure that there’s a collaborative and a co-operative effort between the
different spheres of government in putting together this infrastructure.
Because there are always choices in terms of revenue, we must also approach
this very difficult thing with a sensitivity of ensuring that we don’t air
our opinions - no matter how short-sighted those opinions are - through the
media because, in so doing, we dampen the spirit and the hope that the
world has of South Africa.

It is on that point that South Africa took a decision to say that, at the
end of the day, it’s important also to build a venue – a multipurpose venue
in Green Point, Cape Town. That venue must be utilised not just for soccer
but also to increase the capacity of Cape Town to host other sporting
events, because at this point we all know that soccer fans are irritants in
communities. In Newlands, for instance, as soccer fans our vuvuzelas seem
to be disturbing the peace of some people who stay there. [Interjections.]

We are saying soccer has always had a problem finding an appropriate venue
in Cape Town. We are not making this thing up and, hence, it has become a
difficulty. It is on that basis that this decision was taken to say that
when you talk about equity, equal access and equal facilities in South
Africa, that goes to sport too.

Soccer must not be at the mercy of rugby or any other sporting fraternity.
[Applause.] Therefore we hope that the new Mayor of Cape Town, Her Worship
Zille, would seriously think and consider her response going forward
because, at the end of the day, we cannot be narrow and myopic in terms of
approaching matters of national interests. [Applause.]

We can’t just play to the gallery of seeking to portray a situation where
we say these resources could have been utilised elsewhere – we all know
that. But, at the end of the day, we must count the benefits, in the long
run, of what such a facility would do to Cape Town. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Order, members! Hon members, I just
want to remind you that this is the NCOP’s sitting. I don’t think we have
to whistle in this House.

That concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is
that the Bill be agreed to. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast their provinces, votes.
Are all delegation heads present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): In accordance with Rule 71, hon
members who are going to vote ... [Interjections.] I think provinces should
listen and listen carefully. In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first
allow provinces the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if they
so wish.

HON MEMBERS: None.

USIHLALO WENDLU (Mnu T S Setona): Sizoqhubeka-ke sibheke ekuvoteni.
Sizovotela lo mbuzo osubekwe phambi kwale Ndlu. Ngizokwenza lokho
ngokulandelana kwezifundazwe. Abaholi bamathimba ezifundazwe kufanele
bakhombise uSihlalo ukuthi ngabe bakhona bonke lapha eNdlini nanokuthi
bavota ngokuvuma noma bayaphikisa noma abavoti kwasampela. Sizoqala
ngeMpumalanga Koloni. Mpumalanga Koloni? (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): We are going to proceed to voting.
We are going to vote on the question before House. I am going to do that in
alphabetical order per province. Leaders of provincial delegations must
indicate to the Chairperson if they are present and indicate if they are
voting in favour, abstain or vote against the Bill. We are going to start
with the Eastern Cape. Eastern Cape?]

Ms B N DLULANE: Oos-Kaap Steun. [Eastern Cape supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Vrystaat steun. [Free State supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: IGauteng iyawuxhasa. [Gauteng supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: IkwaZulu-Natali ithi elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports it
fully.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Mr D BOTHA: Limpopo steun. [Limpopo supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Enyakatho Kapa siyawuvuma. [Northern Cape supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West ke a rona. [North West supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr G STRACHAN: INtshonalanga Kapa iyawuvuma. [Western Cape supports it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Zonke izifundazwe zivotele ukuthi
ziyawuvuma lo Mthethosivivinywa. [All the provinces voted in favour of the
Bill.]

I therefore declare the Bill agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

USIHLALO  WENDLU  (Mnu  T  S  Setona):   Manje   ngifuna   ukubonga   iPhini
likaNgqongqoshe ngokuthi lisinike ithuba lokuba nathi lapha  eNyakatho  Kapa
namhlanje.  Yize  kukude  nasesikhumulweni  sezindiza  kodwa   ukuhloniphile
ukuthi wakhethwa abantu. NgokukaSomqulu weNkululeko,  ukubeke  kwaba  sobala
ukuthi yebo abantu bayabusa kuleli zwe. Ngakho-ke  siyabonga  kakhulu  Phini
likaNgqongoshe. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I would like to thank the Deputy
Minister for sacrificing his time to be with us here in the Northern
Province. Although it is far away from the airport, he respected that he
was elected by the masses. In the Bill of Rights, it clearly states that
“the people shall govern” in this country. Therefore, thank you very much,
Deputy Minister.]

     ADDITIONAL ADJUSTMENTS APPROPRIATION BILL (2005-06 FINANCIAL YEAR)

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, MEC, all protocol observed,
the Public Finance Management Act, Act 1 of 1999, makes provision for a
national adjustments budget. In terms of this Act, the Minister of Finance
may table an adjustments budget in the National Assembly. The Adjustments
Appropriation Bill of 2006 appropriates adjusted amounts of money for the
requirements of national departments, for the financial year ending 31
March 2006.

The objective of this Bill is to appropriate an additional amount of money
for the requirements of the Department of Public Enterprises and the
Department of Transport. An amount of R2 billion is appropriated out of the
National Revenue Fund for the Department of Public Enterprises, for the
financial year ending 31 March 2006. The money will be transferred to Denel
for the recapitalisation of the entity and to assist restructure and
refocus the business.

In addition, an amount of R2,7 billion is appropriated out of the National
Revenue Fund for the Department of Transport, for the financial year ending
31 March 2006. The money will be transferred to the Road Accident Fund in
order to proceed with the scheduled payments to successful claimants and to
settle an outstanding payment to the SA Revenue Service.

I would like to add that we could all probably play a role in helping the
Road Accident Fund cut down the number of road accidents we have in this
country. I also appeal to our law enforcement people on the roads to
enforce proper travelling behaviour, and to take action regarding the
licensing of vehicles that shouldn’t be licensed.

Lastly, I would also like to warn the unscrupulous lawyers out there who
take millions and millions from the Road Accident Fund and keep the major
percentage of that money to themselves, while the claimants get 10% to 15%.

The Select Committee on Finance appeals to the NCOP to support this money
Bill. Ke a leboga. [I thank you.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you, hon member. That
concludes the debate. I shall now put the question. The question is that
the Bill be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63 I shall first allow
political parties the opportunity to make their declarations of vote if
they so wish. None. We shall now proceed to voting on the question. Those
in favour will say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Those against will say “No”.

HON MEMBERS: No!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All members voted in favour. I
therefore declare the Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the
Constitution. [Applause.]

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I want to thank all the
members who have attended this session, particularly the special delegates
from various provinces and also the members of Salga. I also want to make
the announcement that tomorrow morning all the groups are going on site
visits. They should be here at 8:30 because we will be leaving at 9 o’clock
for the site visits.

The Council adjourned at 16:09.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           THURSDAY, 23 MARCH 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Translation of Bill submitted


     (1)    The Minister of Finance
         (a)     Begrotingswetsontwerp [W 2 – 2006] (National Assembly –
             sec 77)


         This is the official translation into Afrikaans of the
         Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77).


National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bill


     (1)    Bill amended and passed by National Assembly on 23 March 2006
        and returned for concurrence:
          a) Older Persons Bill [B 68D – 2003] (National Council of
             Provinces – sec 76)


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Social
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:


          a) International Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in
             Customs Matters adopted in Brussels on 27 June 2003: Your
             Customs Johannesburg Convention dated 13 July 2004, tabled in
             terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on International Convention on Mutual
             Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters.

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Land Affairs for 2006 to
             2009.


          b) Strategic Plan of the National Agricultural Marketing Council
             for 2006 to 2011.


          c) Strategic Plan of the Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd for 2006/07.


    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
             2006 to 2009.

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration:

          a) Government Notice No 44 published in Government Gazette No
             28411 dated 18 January 2006: Exemptions from Supply Chain
             Management Regulations in terms of the Local Government:
             Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003).


          b) Government Notice No R.1105 published in Government Gazette No
             28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees in
             terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
             for 2006/07 to 2008/09.


   c) Memorandum by the Minister of Public Works setting out Particulars of
      the Building Programme for 2006-2007 [RP 25-2006]
   .
    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Labour and Public Enterprises for consideration:

        (a)      Amendment to Eskom’s pricing structure, tabled in terms of
             section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
             Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting
             documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Joint Committee on
        Ethics and Members’ Interests for consideration:
          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Declarations of Interest
             by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Government Employees [RP 19-
             2006].


    (8)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          a) Strategic Business Plan for the Department of Defence [RP 33-
             2006].


TABLINGS



National Council of Provinces



 1. The Chairperson

    (a)     Notice of Investigation in Richmond Municipality, in terms of
        section 106 (1)(b) of the Local Government: Municipality Systems
        Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).

        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration.


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Appropriation Bill
    Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 76),
    dated 23 March 2006:

        The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
        the Appropriation Bill Division of Revenue Bill [B 3 - 2006]
        (National Assembly - sec 76), referred to it, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 3A-2006].

 2.   Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Additional
    AdjustmentsAppropriation Bill  (2005/06 Financial Year) [B 4  - 2006]
    (National Assembly - sec 77), dated 23 March 2006:

        The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the subject of
        the Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
        Year) [B 4 - 2006] (National Assembly - sec 77), referred to it,
        and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 77 Bill,
        reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


3.    Report by the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign  Affairs  on  a
  Study Tour to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in Geneva,  Switzerland:
  7 to 14 October 2005, dated 8 March 2006:

A.    TERMS OF REFERENCE

The Committee agreed on 10 August 2005 to undertake a study tour to Geneva
to visit the World Trade Organisation. It is practice for the Department of
Trade and Industry to invite delegates of the Committee and that of the
Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry to attend the WTO Ministerial
Conferences. The last Ministerial Conference attended by Parliament was
held in Cancun. The next one was scheduled to take place in December 2005
in Hong Kong.

B.    BACKGROUND

The objective of  the  trip  was  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  the
functioning  of  the  WTO;  meeting   with   WTO   directors   and   country
representatives on issues relating to  administering  WTO  trade  agreements
and WTO as a Forum  for  trade  negotiations  and  disputes  and  monitoring
national trade policies.

C.    LOGISTICAL ARRANGEMENTS

The delegation consisted of the following persons:

Ms N D Ntwanambi (Chairperson)
Ms S Mabe
Mr J Sibiya
Ms A N T Mchunu
Ms S Chen
Ms G Abdullatief (Committee Secretary)

The DTI office based at the South African Embassy in Geneva assisted in
arranging the meetings and drafting the programme based on the delegation’s
terms of reference.

D.    FINDINGS

   1. Overview of the WTO

   The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the only global international
   organisation dealing with the rules of trade between nations. At its
   heart are the WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by the bulk of the
   world’s trading nations and ratified in their parliaments. The goal is to
   help producers of goods and services, exporters, and importers conduct
   their business.

   The WTO was established in  1995  and  is  a  successor  to  the  General
   Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). Every two years the  WTO  holds  a
   major summit called a ministerial meeting. The next  ministerial  meeting
   will be held in Hong Kong in December 2005. Previous meetings took  place
   in Cancún (Mexico) in 2003, Doha (Qatar) in 2001  and  Seattle  (USA)  in
   1999.


   2. Structure and Membership of the WTO


   The WTO currently has 148 member countries, with 32 observer governments.
   Its top-level decision-making body is the Ministerial Conference, which
   meets at least once every two years. Below this is the General Council
   (normally ambassadors and heads of delegation in Geneva, but sometimes
   officials sent from members’ capitals), which meets several times a year
   in the Geneva headquarters. The General Council also meets as the Trade
   Policy Review Body and the Dispute Settlement Body.

   At the next level, the Goods Council, Services Council  and  Intellectual
   Property  (TRIPS)  Council  report  to  the  General  Council.   Numerous
   specialised committees, working groups and working parties deal with  the
   individual  agreements  and  other  areas  such   as   the   environment,
   development, membership applications and regional trade agreements.

   3. General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)

   The GATT was formed in 1948 as a ‘provisional’ instrument initially
   intended to pave the way to an International Trade Organisation (ITO).
   However, the Havana Charter, which would have established the ITO, was
   never ratified and the GATT remained the only multilateral instrument
   governing international trade. An informal organisation was built around
   the GATT to discuss trade-related issues and negotiate further
   liberalisation.

   Taking place in ‘rounds’, these negotiations at first concentrated on
   lowering tariffs before moving on to additional issues such as subsidies,
   anti-dumping and non-tariff measures. The eighth trade round, called the
   Uruguay Round, ran from 1986-94 and was the most extensive of all,
   covering trade in goods, services, and intellectual property and
   establishing the WTO as a permanent organisation.
   GATT and the WTO have helped to create a strong  and  prosperous  trading
   system contributing to unprecedented growth.  The  system  was  developed
   through a series of trade negotiations, or rounds, held under  GATT.  The
   first rounds dealt mainly with tariff reductions but  later  negotiations
   included other areas such as anti-dumping and  non-tariff  measures.  The
   last round, the1986-94 Uruguay Round led  to  the  WTO’s  creation.  Some
   negotiations continued after the end of the Uruguay Round.

   In 2000, new talks started on agriculture and services. These have now
   been incorporated into a broader agenda launched at the fourth WTO
   Ministerial Conference in Doha, Qatar, in November 2001. The work
   programme, the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), adds negotiations and other
   work on non-agricultural tariffs, trade and environment, WTO rules such
   as anti-dumping and subsidies, investment, competition policy, trade
   facilitation, transparency in government procurement, intellectual
   property, and a range of issues raised by developing countries as
   difficulties they face in implementing the present WTO agreements.

   GATT is now the WTO’s principal rulebook for trade in goods. The Uruguay
   Round also created new rules for dealing with trade in services, relevant
   aspects of intellectual property, dispute settlement, and trade policy
   reviews. The complete set runs to some 30,000 pages consisting of about
   30 agreements and separate commitments (called schedules) made by
   individual members in specific areas such as lower customs duty rates and
   services market-opening.


   From 1947 to 1994, GATT was the forum for negotiating lower customs duty
   rates and other trade barriers; the text of the General Agreement spelt
   out important rules, particularly non-discrimination. Since 1995, the
   updated GATT has become the WTO’s umbrella agreement for trade in goods.
   It has annexes dealing with specific sectors such as agriculture and
   textiles, and with specific issues such as state trading, product
   standards, subsidies and actions taken against dumping.

   Banks, insurance firms, telecommunications companies, tour operators,
   hotel chains and transport companies looking to do business abroad can
   now enjoy the same principles of freer and fairer trade that originally
   only applied to trade in goods. These principles appear in the new
   General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). WTO members have also made
   individual commitments under GATS stating which of their services sectors
   they are willing to open to foreign competition, and how open those
   markets are.

   The WTO’s intellectual property agreement amounts to rules for trade and
   investment in ideas and creativity. The rules state how copyrights,
   patents, trademarks, geographical names used to identify products,
   industrial designs, integrated circuit layout-designs and undisclosed
   information such as trade secrets — “intellectual property” — should be
   protected when trade is involved.
    
   4. Policy review  

   The Trade Policy Review Mechanism’s purpose is to improve transparency,
   to create a greater understanding of the policies that countries are
   adopting, and to assess their impact. Many members also see the reviews
   as constructive feedback on their policies.


   All WTO members must undergo periodic scrutiny, each review containing
   reports by the country concerned and the WTO Secretariat.

   Over three quarters of WTO members are developing or least-developed
   countries. All WTO agreements contain special provision for them,
   including longer time periods to implement agreements and commitments,
   measures to increase their trading opportunities and support to help them
   build the infrastructure for WTO work, handle disputes, and implement
   technical standards.

   The 2001 Ministerial Conference in Doha set out tasks, including
   negotiations, for a wide range of issues concerning developing countries.
   Some people call the new negotiations the Doha Development Round. Before
   that, in 1997, a high-level meeting on trade initiatives and technical
   assistance for least-developed countries resulted in an “integrated
   framework” involving six intergovernmental agencies, to help least-
   developed countries increase their ability to trade, and some additional
   preferential market access agreements.

   A WTO committee on trade and development, assisted by a sub-committee on
   least-developed countries, looks at developing countries’ special needs.
   Its responsibility includes implementation of the agreements, technical
   cooperation, and the increased participation of developing countries in
   the global trading system.

   The November 2001 declaration of the Fourth Ministerial Conference in
   Doha, Qatar, provides the mandate for negotiations on a range of subjects
   and other work, including issues concerning the implementation of the
   present agreements.


   The negotiations include those on agriculture, Non Agricultural Market
   Access (NAMA), trade and environment, trade facilitation, services and
   Special and Differential Treatment for developing countries addressing,
   for example, the difficulties they face in implementing WTO agreements.

   The Fifth Ministerial Conference in Cancún, Mexico, in September 2003,
   was intended as a stock-taking meeting where members would agree on how
   to complete the rest of the negotiations. But the meeting was soured by
   discord on agricultural issues, including cotton, and ended in deadlock
   on the “Singapore issues”. Real progress on the Singapore issues and
   agriculture was not evident until the early hours of 1 August 2004 with a
   set of decisions in the General Council (sometimes called the July 2004
   package). The original 1 January 2005 deadline was missed. After that,
   members unofficially aimed to finish the negotiations by the end of 2006.


   The negotiations take place in the Trade Negotiations Committee and its
   subsidiaries. Other work under the work programme takes place in other
   WTO councils and committees. Ministers also approved a linked decision on
   implementation — problems developing countries face in implementing the
   current WTO agreements.

   5. The Agriculture Agreement


   The WTO’s Agriculture Agreement was negotiated in the 1986–94 Uruguay
   Round. It includes specific commitments by WTO member governments to
   improve market access and reduce trade-distorting subsidies in
   agriculture. These commitments are being implemented over a six-year
   period (10 years for developing countries) that began in 1995.

   Participants have agreed to initiate negotiations for continuing the
   reform process one year before the end of the implementation period, i.e.
   by the end of 1999. These talks have now been incorporated into the
   broader negotiating agenda set at the 2001 Ministerial Conference in
   Doha, Qatar.

   Because of its crucial importance to almost all members, agriculture is
   often seen as the key to the entire package of negotiations. From time to
   time delays in agriculture have held up progress in other subjects as
   negotiators waited for an outcome in agriculture.

   The agriculture negotiations are difficult because of the wide range of
   views and interests among member governments, the large number of active
   participants, and the complexity of many issues. The aim is to contribute
   to further liberalisation of agricultural trade, allowing countries to
   compete on quality and price rather than on the size of their subsidies.
   That is particularly the case for many developing countries whose
   economies depend on an increasingly diverse range of primary and
   processed agricultural products, exported to an increasing variety of
   markets, including to other developing countries.


   At the heart of the talks are the “three pillars”:


    • Market access: cutting tariffs, expanding tariff-quotas and various
      flexibilities for these.
        
    • Exports subsidies (officially “export competition”): eliminating these
      and disciplining export credit, food aid and state trading enterprises
      to eliminate hidden export subsidies.
        
    • Domestic support: cutting supports that distort trade (by stimulating
      over-production and artificially raising or lowering prices) and
      disciplining forms of support that could distort trade.
   The talks also cover a number of other issues, including special
   treatment for developing countries and “non-trade concerns”
   (agriculture’s role in providing food security, rural development,
   environmental protection, etc).  


   6. Accession


   For a country to accede to the WTO, a working party is formed which
   examines all aspects of the prospective member’s trade and economic
   policies that have a bearing on WTO agreements, to ensure their
   compatibility with the obligations of membership. There are also detailed
   negotiations over the market access guarantees the acceding country can
   offer. Once the terms of accessions have been finalised, they are
   presented to the WTO General Council or the Ministerial Conference.


   If a two-thirds majority of WTO members vote in favour, the applicant is
   free to sign the protocol and to accede to the organisation. In some
   cases, the country’s own parliament or legislature has to ratify the
   agreement before membership is complete.

   7. Dispute settlement 

   As well as acting as a forum for trade negotiations, the WTO provides an
   arbitration service for countries embroiled in trade disputes. The WTO’s
   procedure for resolving trade quarrels under the Dispute Settlement
   Understanding is vital for enforcing the rules and therefore for ensuring
   that trade flows smoothly. Countries bring disputes to the WTO if they
   think their rights under the agreements are being infringed. Judgments by
   specially-appointed independent experts are based on interpretations of
   the agreements and individual countries’ commitments.

   The system encourages countries to settle their differences through
   consultation. Failing that, they can follow a carefully mapped out, stage-
   by-stage procedure that includes the possibility of a ruling by a panel
   of experts, and the chance to appeal the ruling on legal grounds.
   Confidence in the system is borne out by the number of cases brought to
   the WTO — around 300 cases in eight years compared to the 300 disputes
   dealt with during the entire life of GATT (1947–94).

   E. RECOMMENDATIONS

        a) The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs should
           request the Minister of Trade and Industry and or relevant
           officials to brief its members on the outcomes of the WTO
           Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong that took place in December
           2005.


        b) The Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs should
           request the relevant officials from the Department of Trade and
           Industry to brief its members on how the WTO as an international
           body is beneficial to the people at grassroots level.

        c) Further to point (b) above, the Committee to consider how the
           WTO could be popularized to people in the provinces, so that
           they could understand how it would be a benefit to South Africa
           and ultimately to them as a people.

F:  APPENDIX

The delegation wishes to thank the following persons who availed themselves
to meet with the group:

Mr Rob Davies, Deputy Minister: Trade and Industry (DTI).
Mr Faizel Ismail, SA representative to the WTO: South African Mission.
Mr Xavier Carim, DTI Official: South African Mission.
Ambassador Sun, China.
Ambassador Hugeney: Brazil.
Ms Solveig Crompton, DTI Official: South African Mission.
Ms Mpho Leseka, DTI Official: South African Mission.
Mr Peter Pedersen, Councillor: WTO Secretariat.
Mr Pierre Latrille, Councillor: WTO Secretariat.
Mr Adrian Otten, Head, Intellectual Property Division: WTO Secretariat.
Mr Hamish Smith, Economic Affairs Officer: WTO Secretariat.
Mr Hans Peter Werner, Secretary for Trade and Economic Development: WTO
Secretariat.


                            FRIDAY, 24 MARCH 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


        a) Government Notice No 115 published in Government Gazette No
           28469 dated 3 February 2006: Determination of the daily
           allowance in respect of meals and incidental costs for purposes
           of the Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

2.    The Minister of Public Works
     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2006-2010.


3.    The Minister of Health


     a) Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
        Tunisia and the Republic of South Africa on Public Health and
        Medical Sciences, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.



                           TUESDAY, 28 MARCH 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bill passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent


     (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 28 March 2006:


          a) Additional Adjustments Appropriation Bill (2005/06 Financial
             Year) [B 4 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77).


TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 177 published in Government Gazette No 28550
        dated 24 February 2006: Fixing of rate per kilometer in respect of
        motor vehicles for the purposes of section 8(1)(b)(ii) and (iii) of
        the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


2.    The Minister of Correctional Services


     a) Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2005-2006 [RP 27-
        2006].


