---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 November 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-11-09
---

THURSDAY, 09 NOVEMBER 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.



QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY




DEPUTY PRESIDENT:


 Involvement of government departments in the review of INDS, and the impact
                    of Jipsa on people with disabilities

17.   Ms P Bhengu (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

     (a)To what extent are government departments aware of and involved in
     the review of the Integrated National Disability Strategy (INDS) and
     (b) what impact does the Joint Initiative on Priority Skills
     Acquisition (Jipsa) have on people with disabilities?
                                              N2161E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, the answer to the question is that
national government departments are aware of the Integrated National
Disability Strategy. Currently, the Office on the Status of People with
Disabilities is involved with these structures concerning the review of the
document.

Secondly, again the Office on the Status of People with Disabilities has
regular consultative meetings and working sessions with governmental
structures. Thirdly, all of these departments are working together
concerning the development and implementation framework, and an updated
version of the strategy.

In relation to Jipsa, as you know, Jipsa is an inclusive initiative which
neither discriminates against race, gender nor people with disabilities. It
is linked to economic empowerment programmes contained in the disability
strategy. The Department of Labour, which is a key member of Jipsa, has in
place the 4% target within the skills development strategy for persons
living with disability. This will facilitate the employment of 2% of people
living with disability through the job access strategy. However, I must be
the first one to say that this is yet to be achieved. So there is cause to
be concerned there.

Bringing disabled people into key positions still remains a challenge that
we must all be seized with. Historically, we know that they were the most
discriminated against and that they were not given a chance even to study,
and, in some cases, they were even discriminated against by their families
and communities. It is therefore imperative that, as the Presidency and
government in general, we should also continue to work with the DPSA.
Again, both the government and the nation are underperforming in this area
and more urgent measures are needed.

Ms P BHENGU: Hon Speaker, Deputy President, the DPSA, that is Disabled
People South Africa has noted that people with disabilities in South Africa
are faced with multiple barriers to economic and skills empowerment.
Disabled people continue to be discriminated against in the labour market
and find themselves in a state of underdevelopment due to the past and
present discrimination in accessing opportunities.

Skills training is one of the methods of breaking the cycle of
discrimination and of empowering vulnerable groups, since most employers do
not employ disabled people. Where they do, they often do not make necessary
arrangements to facilitate employment. So what will the government do to
ensure that the required target of 2% set out is met by each and every
department?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I need you, hon member, to assist me and all of us in
government to do this work in a much better way. I don’t want to think on
my feet on this issue because I know efforts have been made. Clearly, the
efforts that have been made have not given us the right results. So, I
don’t want to give you an answer for the sake of giving you an answer. I
would like to invite you and members of the DPSA so that we can strategise
afresh on this issue. Thank you.

Ms H WEBER: Madam Speaker, Madam Deputy President, the Integrated National
Disability Strategy document is a good document, focusing on the prevention
and diagnosis of disabilities as well as education and assistive devices
for people with disabilities. It was published way back in 1997. It was
meant to promote a better life for all people with disabilities. But here
we are, nine years later, it is still a good document while the government
has failed to implement it. What is the Deputy President going to do about
this very document? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I am going to ask you to help me.

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, my question is
related to hon Bhengu’s question but I would like to take my question a
step further. In the Department of Public Service and Administration we
also have the SA Management Development Institute, Samdi, a separate
department that deals with training. How could we bring Samdi on board so
that those that are disabled, especially in the departments, can become
more skilled and we would be able to retain them and fill most of the
vacancies that can’t be filled, that is the very critical posts that need
to be filled?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I don’t want to pontificate on this
issue. It’s serious enough and it is difficult. As government, as this
House, as other stakeholders, including Samdi – which fortunately right now
is undergoing some review and is strengthening - we just need to go back to
the drawing board. We need to go back to this good document and look at how
and where we are failing to implement it in its spirit and letter. At some
point, we would then need to come back to this House with some kind of an
enhanced implementation strategy. That strategy would be inclusive of all
stakeholders, parties and would have tighter monitoring mechanisms so that
we can improve implementation.

So, I will take it upon myself, together with my colleague, the Minister in
the Presidency, who, as you know, is also the responsible Minister. I will
also engage other Ministers such as the Minister for the Public Service and
Administration. We will put our heads together. We will involve yourselves
as the House, the NGOs and so on so that we can strengthen our
implementation. I should appeal to you to leave me for now so that I can
think about this matter. I am a bit embarrassed about the state we are in.
[Applause.]
Mr V C GORE: Madam Speaker, I want to say thank you to the hon Deputy
President for her very honest and informative answers and for her very
truthful way of accepting that the government has not done enough in this
regard. Hon Deputy President, as you are aware, South Africa has made great
strides on overcoming racial and gender integration. The ID acknowledges
that there is still much to be done in this area. However, there can be no
disagreement that people with disabilities and their families remain, to a
large extent, excluded from mainstream society and from the rainbow nation
concept. The INDS was a very important document in setting up a policy
statement and identifying the barriers that exist concerning people with
disabilities. However, the INDS was written almost 10 years ago and it is
essential that this policy document must evolve into legislation and
regulations to promote the rights of people with disabilities.

Hon Deputy President, is the government contemplating developing the INDS
into legislation? If so what are the details? If not, would the hon Deputy
President consider driving a process to do so? In relation to the very kind
offer to include organisations such as DPSA in your consultative process, I
would like to humbly remind you, hon Deputy President, that there are other
organisations out there that represent the interests of people with
disabilities.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I don’t think that we would resist
turning the strategy into legislation if we were able to demonstrate that
that will give us the results that we want. I think the most important
thing here is to get the right results. So those are some of the things
that we actually need to look into. But I also take your points
notwithstanding that you may still think that the strategy is good. There
is merit maybe in just looking at it in order to ensure whether there isn’t
anything that you can strengthen, including considering whether it could
become legislation. I think we should be open to that. But, as I am saying,
I just need a bit of time so that I can also assemble a team to actually
work with us on this.

     Policies and programmes formulated for the implementation of the UN
                         Millennium Goals Agreement

19.   Ms P Tshwete (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether, with reference to the UN Millennium Goals Agreement to
      eradicate poverty and destitution, and which South Africa is signatory
      to, there are any policies formulated and programmes put in place to
      mainstream these goals and monitor implementation within the
      operational framework of national government departments; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             N2162E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, the hon member, Bhele – Mrs Tshwete,
will recall that shortly after the Millennium Declaration was signed in
2000, practitioners grappled with the issue of practical implementation of
the Millennium Development Goals, MDGs, regarding whether new programmes
had to be put in place in the various countries in order to realise the
MDGs. The United Nations organisation encouraged member states not merely
to adopt MDGs and indicators, but to tailor and customise them so that they
reflect national development priorities, as established in a process that
would also require broad-based involvement and an inclusive debate in
different countries. Realistic time lines for achievement had to be put in
place and also the MDGs needed to be adapted to different realities of
different countries.

The Millennium Development Goals report must take into account the national
development priorities, thus the targets needed to conceptualise the
country’s specific situation. For example, adaptation, not merely adoption
of the goals needed to be given attention to. That is according to the UN
report.

In our case, in South Africa, we have been able to integrate the MDGs in
our national priorities as well as the government’s programme of action. In
fact, our targets as the country are even more ambitious than those
reflected in the MDGs. For instance, in sanitation, as you know, we have an
ambitious plan to eradicate the bucket system by 2007, universal access to
potable water in 2008, universal access to decent sanitation in general in
2010 and universal access to electricity in 2012. All of our goals are
tailor-made to ensure that by 2014, we would be able to half unemployment
as well as poverty, which is a year before the MDG target as set by the UN.

Our MDGR that we submitted to the UN last year in September, clearly spells
out that, in some respect, we are ahead of the goals that have been set and
therefore South Africa stands a good chance to achieve all the goals as
set. But, clearly, in a do-nothing scenario, we will not achieve what we
can achieve. Therefore, we cannot be complacent in the work that we have
already started and the goals that we have set for ourselves as a country.
Thank you.

Nksz P TSHWETE: Enkosi kakhulu Sekela Mongameli ngengcaciso yakho
ecacileyo. Ndinombuzwana nje ebendifuna ukuwubuza malunga neendawo
ezityunjiweyo. Ingaba sele bekhona na abantu abasele bexhamla emaphandleni
okanye iindawo esele zixhamla kula malinge okanye amaphulo akwiindawo
ezityunjiweyo zasemaphandleni? Enkosi.

USEKELA MONGAMELI: Ewe Bhele, bakhona abantu abaxhamla kwiindawo
ezityunjiweyo, qha ke undizumile ngalo mbuzo wakho, ngoba ndifuna xa
ndiwuphendula ndityebise impendulo. Ngoko ke andinazo zonke inkcukhaca apha
esandleni sam. Ndingakubhalela ndikunike iinkcukhaca zenkqubo
yasemaphandleni apho abantu bengamahlwempu khona, kunye neekqubo ezikhoyo
apho abantu bathi bancedakale khona. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms P TSHWETE: Thank you very much, Deputy President, for your clear
explanation.  I have a short question for you with regard to the identified
areas. Are there any people or places in the rural, that are already
benefiting from these efforts or programmes in the identified rural areas?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, Bhele, there are people from the identified
areas who are already benefiting. However, your question came unexpectedly
because I wanted to ensure that when I respond to your question, I respond
as broadly as possible. I therefore do not have all the details readily
available at this moment.  Necessarily, I can write and give you full
details with regard to the progress that has been made in the rural areas
where there are poor people, as well as the programmes that are in place
from which people have benefited.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Dudley, do you not intend to ask a question on this one?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Sorry, I asked to speak on the previous question, but Mr
Cupido is ready to ask a follow-up question on this one.

The SPEAKER: OK. Let’s proceed then to Mr Davidson.

Mr I O DAVIDSON: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you to the Deputy
President for her extreme honesty in terms of today and yesterday. She was
honest about what appeared in the newspaper, regarding the question of
government falling short by about 2 million jobs in respect of the
Millennium Development Goals target of halving unemployment in South Africa
by 2014.

It is in relation to those statistics that I want to ask: Should we not be
more honest about both our presentation and interpretation of those
statistics? I refer specifically to the 544 000 jobs which have been
supposedly created over the past year, of which 147 000 are in the
agricultural sector. This is a sector that contributes less than 3% to GDP,
which shed 138 000 jobs last year and indeed contracted by 33% in the last
two quarters of this financial year. The statistics don’t actually jell
and, indeed, if you look at the 147 000 jobs that it created, it shows that
there are subsistence farmers in the Eastern Cape and that is not bringing
people out of poverty and eradicating destitution. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Firstly, I must say that the reason why I thought we
should share this information, in relation to what could happen in 2014 if
we don’t jack up, is that it’s not because it is unachievable, but just to
sound the alarm so that we all work even harder. That is, in a way, the
worst case scenario. If we work much harder and push some of the sectors
much harder, we will definitely be able to achieve the targets that we need
to achieve. But as I am saying, it requires us to do much more than what we
are doing now.

Secondly, that was in reference to the formal sector. There is more that we
could still do and achieve if we are able to perform much better in the
second economy and to improve the viability of the jobs that we create in
the formal sector. Part of this was to say that those of us who work in the
informal sector and in the second economy can play a very crucial role here
to balance things out. Therefore, we need to roll up our sleeves and make
that difference.

On being dishonest about statistics, I don’t think that there is any
intention from us to be dishonest. I am not carrying the figures with me so
I can’t look at where you come from. But, what I need to emphasise is that
the reason why we emphasise growing sectors, manufacturing and even looking
at new sectors, is because we recognise that sectors such as agriculture
cannot play the role that they have always played in our economy. We are,
in a way, taking into account what you are raising about agriculture. We
cannot depend on agriculture to the extent that we have always depended.

Having said that, I don’t want us to be understood as wanting to
deprioritise agriculture, because that will be shooting ourselves in the
foot. Anything that you can do to fight to protect the sector and to
promote it is acceptable. We have areas of excellence in the agricultural
sector. Support for education of workers, for instance, has to be much
better. Access to productive land has to be a bit better as well as the
ever-illusive breakthrough in the World Trade Organisation. If we can get a
breakthrough there, again, there would be competition.

Use of technology in downstream industries has to be much better. I think,
as government, where we can support and incentivise, we will do so. In our
engagement with the industry, we always engage in a manner that indicates
that we want to collaborate rather than deprioritise the sector. I think
that is a very important message to send to the sector.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Madam Speaker and hon Deputy President, development
assistance from Germany to South Africa within the context of meeting the
Millennium Development Goals holds significant implications for the
economic development of the country, particularly with regard to skills
transfer within the technical and infrastructure ambits. I would like to
know whether similar arrangements for assistance, within the parameters of
the Millennium Development Goals, have been or will be effected between
other European countries and South Africa, and if you are prepared to
expand a bit more on this.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: In principle, yes, we are engaging anybody and
everybody who cares to listen regarding these issues. We have held a
meeting, which was co-ordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs, where
we engaged with all embassies in South Africa and we had a special session
to engage with the EU ambassadors. The approach that we are taking with
them is that we should be able to tap into their considerable resources
that they have in that union. We have not reached a point where I can say,
in detail, what it is that we are going to be able to achieve through the
discussions that we are having.

One country which has come forward and has put a concrete proposal on the
table is the Netherlands, concerning the area of training. They have also
given us a very generous offer whereby we should be able to pick and choose
the areas in which we would like to collaborate with them on training. The
target is to train in the order of 100 young people per annum either in the
academic stream or in acquiring practical experience. Concretely, around
agriculture, as you know, there is a city which has some comparative
advantages – Dordrecht. This city has a relationship with another Dordrecht
in the Eastern Cape, concerning cheesemaking. That is what Dordrecht is
known for.

It was heart-warming to visit that little town and find that there is a
cheese factory which is making cheese and other dairy products. The farmers
in the community, small and big, are able to come to the factory and
deliver their milk, which is then processed. They are able to make money
and people from the community are also shareholders. If you are a farmer
who has one cow, you are able to milk your one cow, take your one bucket
and make your little money. It is continuous and in that way sustainable.
For us, this is a very good model of co-operation and co-ordination. We
therefore agreed with the embassy in the Netherlands that we will hand-pick
people from that community and send them to Dordrecht, in the Netherlands,
so that we can enhance their cheese-making skills.

    Progress made with Asgisa, and its effect on economic growth and job
                                  creation

20.   Mr C M Lowe (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether she will make a statement on the (a) progress made with the
      implementation of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for
      South Africa (Asgisa), (b) suitability of Asgisa as a policy response
      to South Africa’s growth needs and (c) effect of Asgisa on (i)
      economic growth and (ii) job creation thus far?
                                              N2148E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Madam Speaker, in response to the question asked by
hon member Lowe, as the member should be aware, we have been reporting on
the progress that we are making on the Accelerated and Shared Growth
Initiative for South Africa from time to time, but we have not as yet
provided a comprehensive report on all aspects. We should be able to do
that in a year’s time, and that would be at the beginning of next year,
because we more or less started with the implementation at the beginning of
last year, after we had made announcements following the state of the
nation address.
When we make that report, Parliament will agree with us that the Asgisa
intervention is a worthwhile intervention. The fact that we have now
enhanced our co-ordination within the clusters and between the clusters is
actually increasingly making us realise the value and overlaps that we have
in government which, maybe, we did not exploit to the same degree.

Indeed, we are also able to work collaboratively with provinces as well as
with local government. Even though we began with the implementation of
Asgisa at the beginning of this year, I am glad to be able to say that when
we do our report, we will be able to report about considerable progress
that we have made in tourism, unblocking challenges in ... What is it
called? When aeroplanes have to land? I’m having a senior’s moment. Alec?
It’s the strategy we have for many aeroplanes to come to South Africa.
[Interjections.] Airlift! We have been able to unblock what at some point
looked like insurmountable challenges of opinion around the Airlift
Strategy 2006, and therefore, we will be able to significantly increase the
number of tourists.

We actually moved, as a result of Asgisa, from targeting seven million
tourists per year to 10 million, and the department is comfortable that we
are going to be able to deliver. Also, in tourism, we have been able,
working together with all stakeholders of the sector, to have a shared and
consulted agreement on the skills, where we need them and who must train
and where we must train.

Concerning business processing, a relatively new industry in South Africa,
with the work that we have been doing in Asgisa, we have consolidated an
industry that did not present itself as a coherent industry in South
Africa. We have therefore been able to engage between and amongst ourselves
to design the incentives that we think should be targeted at that sector,
and a training strategy and collaboration also with the information
communication technology companies who have come to the party as a result
of our constant engagement with them.

The biofuel strategy is also due to go to Cabinet soon. Again, we still
think that the co-ordination we have been able to have in Asgisa to make
all these activities happen proves that it was the right decision for us to
have Asgisa.

Moving forward, we intend to focus, with similar intensity, on the other
sectors that are identified in Asgisa, such as the creative industry, the
chemical sector and the clothing and textile sector. Again, at an
appropriate time, we will also report on that.

We have also mobilised stakeholders across the board in support of
education and skills development through the Joint Initiative for Priority
Skills Acquisition. Through that partnership, we can now say that we will
substantially tackle the shortage of critical skills. We think that it is
no longer an insurmountable task.

I have to say for myself that when I started, I was convinced or
indoctrinated about how impossible it was to solve the problem of engineers
in South Africa, but now I am in a much different space about that issue.
This is because of the extensive and good work that has been done by the
Department of Education, the Department of Labour, universities, labour,
academics and everybody who is represented in Jipsa.

We therefore now have a coherent strategy about when and how we are going
to address the issue of engineers; how we are going to address production,
which means the passing rate at universities; how we are going to address
the issue of registration which, again, is a challenge in that not so many
of the people who graduate register and stay in the sector; how we are
going to address the issue of retention so that they stay and work in the
sector, as well as recruitment, and which categories of engineers we need
to train in South Africa and which ones we need to recruit from outside, at
least in the short term.

We have also gone to the similar extensive programme and planning in
relation to artisans. We have identified some of the problems that we have
in relation to producing artisans in South Africa. We have identified, in
particular, the challenge of pathways, that to become an engineer in South
Africa, you can either go through a further education and training college,
you can be an apprentice at work, or you can go through a learnership. All
of those need to be consolidated so that each one of them have similar
quality and content, which has a balance of both theory and practice. In
some of them, like learnerships, they are strong on theory but weak on
practice. Apprenticeships that people do at work are strong on practicals
and weak on theory.

In the consolidation that we are doing now, we will be able to standardise
the quality. We have been able to identify the numbers that we require and
we are able to state by when we will be able to train the numbers that we
require. The Department of Labour has made provision for money that we are
going to require. In addition, the Department of Education, through the FET
programme, will also add on the skills that we need.

I don’t think that if government had not chosen to have Asgisa and to co-
ordinate, we would have moved with this unified approach to the extent that
we have. Therefore, I still would say that it was the right decision that
we made as government to choose this intervention.

Mr C M LOWE: Madam Speaker, I would like to say thank you to the hon Deputy
President for a very comprehensive answer. I acknowledge as well that it’s
extremely difficult to accurately measure the effect of the Accelerated and
Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa on economic growth and on job
creation. It is not something that you can just pull numbers out on. I am
very aware of that.

I am also concerned that the term ``Asgisa’’ is becoming, in some circles,
really just a big, amorphous holdall for any economic development-related
initiative. It’s expected that everybody has to use the term or put it in
an annual report, without much thought as to what happens after that.

Now, the Harvard Working Papers, as you are probably aware, concluded that,
given our employment and productivity performance, even the largest
investments envisaged in Asgisa, from R373 billion rising up to about R409
billion, will barely deliver the desired growth rates, while at the same
time that will put a lot of additional pressure on investment. They believe
that Asgisa has serious macro inconsistencies that need to be addressed.

You obviously are aware of these conclusions. I wanted to ask you,
particularly in the light of your comments earlier this week that you may
not meet your 2014 GDS employment targets, how are you specifically
responding to those conclusions in that Harvard Working Paper, and what are
you doing, before you have to report next February to us, to ensure that
economic growth and job creation targets are going to be met, and achieved?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: This is a sangoma question, but, anyway, I will
answer. I did a course on being a sangoma, so I will try.

On how everybody has made the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
anything and everything, on the one hand, you may say that that’s a problem
because it becomes amorphous, but on the other hand, you may say that it
shows the degree of acceptance. If people don’t achieve what they need to
achieve, but they give it their best shot, I don’t think that you should
judge them adversely.

I would have been more worried if people didn’t speak about Asgisa, didn’t
smuggle it in any report that they wrote, because that would have been a
total reaction. People are people. Entrepreneurs take their chances. They
come to me, when they want an appointment, and say ``I’ve got a
groundbreaking Asgisa idea. You have to see me.’’ When I see them, they
say, ``You know, ITC has not given me money. Please put in a good word’’.
And I will say, ``Where is the groundbreaking Asgisa idea?’’ So, you will
have those things, and we must give it the warmth that it deserves.

At the same time, you must have a hardnosed mechanism to measure the
serious work that needs to happen. There are certain bodies who cannot play
around with those kinds of things, and that is why we have a structured
relationship with some of the major players in the economy, so that,
through those particular groups, we are able to work with them
systematically.
I think we will measure, in part and to a great extent, what is happening
there. For instance, the work that you do with state-owned enterprises is
not about faffing around. We want hard facts and hard figures about their
contribution and so on. So, yes, there will be a lot of amorphous bits, but
I think that in doing that, we are going to keep our eyes on the ball, and
when we report, we will produce concrete figures that you can check for
yourself.

I don’t want to discourage the cute people on the side of Asgisa. People
even have Asgisa T-shirts.

Regarding macro inconsistencies, yes, we have picked up some of those
ourselves. In fact, as late as last week, we were looking at a report on
how we are trying to actually align. I wouldn’t like to be commenting about
this before they have been formally presented to me and to Cabinet, but we
are working on those, and when we report, we would also reflect on those
inconsistencies.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, can I ask that you lower your voices as you talk
to each other.

Adv Z L MADASA: Hon Deputy President, statistics reveal that about 55 000
graduates are unemployed in South Africa. One of the excuses that are
normally advanced for this tragedy is that these graduates are not suitably
qualified for the job market.

The question is: What measures has government taken, as part of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa programme, to
retrain these youths to ensure that they make a contribution to economic
growth, to capacitate government and in their own lives? If I may add a
rider and say that instead of recruiting people who voluntarily left the
service, shouldn’t you give priority to these youth who are already
knowledgeable and easy to train? Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I will agree with you, hon Madasa, that in quite a
substantial number of cases, the employers are right when they say that our
graduates are not suitably trained. There is that problem.

The curriculum alignment between the supply and demand sometimes is not
what we would like it to be. We did a scientific study on the reasons why
we have these unemployed graduates. Besides the fact that we did have a
disproportionate number of people who were doing subjects that were not in
high demand in the market, the other problem was that even those who had
the right skills lacked the soft skills. We were actually amazed at the
number of employers who complained about soft skills – communication
skills, work ethic, presentation, and those kinds of things. Universities
don’t teach those things.

So, together with the Minister of Education, we are now looking at how we
could make sure that, before the students graduate – being able to drive is
just one of those skills – we make sure that those skills are integrated
during the learning years, so that by the time they qualify, they have
those skills.

Also, in addition, there is the challenge of ensuring that there is greater
alignment between employers and educators. What we have been able to
provide through the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition is a
forum where both educators and employers sit together. For instance, what
we have been able to do to address the challenges of artisans and engineers
is that we were able to crack that because we brought all the stakeholders
together. In the case of artisans, for instance, employers were complaining
about the quality of artisans, but they were not offering answers. When we
sat all of them together, they were able to have a trade-off, including the
fact that when employers train artisans at work, we do not have incentives
for them to do that. That is why many employers will send young people to
learnerships because there is a tax benefit there, and yet, they would
prefer people that they trained themselves in the workplace.

Treasury now is looking at how we could align that so that even for those
young and old people that are going through training at the workplace, we
are able to provide incentives, so that people who graduate out of all
these processes are more employable.
In addition, we have now commissioned, together with Umsobomvu Youth Fund,
a private sector intervention to take the database that we have on
unemployed graduates, and categorise the capacities and subjects that the
people have learned and their job-readiness, and then design training
interventions for the different categories.

We are hoping that they are going to report to us before the end of the
month on how they intend to do that. We have asked them to prioritise
ungraduated technikon students, because there is a large number of people
with the skills that we are looking for. The fact that about 40% of
technikon students are unable to graduate because they don’t do practical
work is again another challenge that faces them. They don’t even become
unemployed graduates. They just become ungraduated students who have not
failed, but who have not been offered an opportunity by society to complete
their studies.

So we intend to train those people, give them practical training, send them
back to their institutions so that they can graduate – please go to their
graduations as an incentive for them – and redeploy them back to society.

We think we can redeploy many of them in municipalities, because just for
2005, we have more than 8 000 people who are in that category. About 50% of
those have an engineering-related qualification. That will, again, unleash
a significant number of young people into the labour market.
I can go on about this subject. Stop me, because I am so passionate about
it. Let me stop there. [Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Hon Deputy President, the IFP is in full support of Asgisa
and, in fact, we admire and congratulate you on the leadership that you are
showing in this particular regard.

With regard to employment, we know that jobs are being created and that
we’re on track with a 4,5% growth rate - all this is very well. The IFP,
however, is of the opinion that we will eventually need a continued 7%
growth rate if we really want to break the back of unemployment in this
country.

We would like to know whether you would consider also looking at monetary
aspects, where instead of merely looking at interest rate hikes, you look
at alternative aspects in terms of the over-inflationary and particularly
overuse of credit in this country. The second part of my question you have
actually answered, in terms of your previous question. We indeed support
your passion for trade and particularly the training of artisans and the
movement away towards that side. We can assure you that the IFP will
support you all the way on that aspect. So, could you tell us, particularly
concerning deregulation and those particular aspects, what can be done to
further encourage particularly small business in this country? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, IFP, for your support. I knew I
could always rely on the IFP when the chips are down, or even when the
chips are up. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: ... and a piece of cake.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, and a piece of cake. [Laughter.] I actually was
not in the House yesterday when “Koos Cake” was here. I looked at it on TV
and I said, “God, I want that cake.” [Laughter.] Anyway, I am sure he
munched it all by himself.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Speaker, if I could just say to the Deputy President I
still own the cake. I have it, and if she would like a slice, I’ll send it
across to her office. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Please, send me a piece. Back to the question, hon
member, these are issues that are a work in progress. On the issue of what
we can do about the monetary policy, I don’t think that there is a magic
wand, and I also think that there is tension between what we can do as
government and what we should allow the market to do. So, it is somewhat a
chicken and an egg story that we are involved in. But I will refer this
matter to the Minister of Finance because, as you know, he is an expert and
there is the danger that when we all meddle in that, we actually compromise
ourselves in terms of how we impact on the markets. I will make sure that
there is a comprehensive way in which you get an answer on this issue.

Having said that, we are investing a lot in trying to promote a culture of
saving in South Africa. But, again, I don’t think we are succeeding as much
as we would like to succeed. Again, this is actually one area in which we
are mobilising ourselves and, in terms of our interaction, the private
sector and citizens in general by asking what some of the things are that
we need to do collectively so that we can actually address this issue, to
the extent that we can address regulatory impediments that impact on small
business.

The Minister of Finance has given some relief to small business, and I am
told that those that are taking full advantage of it are definitely getting
the relief they need but, as you know, entrepreneurs will always ask for
more. We think that it was a significant intervention. Also, Sars is very
meticulous, as you know, about making sure that all the deserving players
are able to benefit.

In addition to that, we know that we have the outstanding issue of a
regulatory impact assessment facility that we need to set up in the
Presidency. That is one of the things that we are busy with. Don’t steal my
thunder, hon member. I would like to be able to report on this when I am
satisfied that all the t’s have been crossed and the i’s dotted, but it’s
in the pocket. Thank you.
Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, in view of the fact that
the construction sector is one of the most crucial sectors for the
development and maintenance of growth infrastructure required to boost our
economy to the desired levels, and in addition to what you have said in
regard to engineers, have you put in place any measures that will harness
the strengths of the construction sector in such a manner that it addresses
the unemployment crisis, while simultaneously contributing to stabilisation
and progress within the construction sector? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The construction sector is one of the partners we are
working with. In fact, it is one of the more organised sectors of the
sectors we are working with. Minister Didiza is also working very hard, in
her capacity as Minister of Public Works, with this sector. You would have
also noticed that even the Minister of Education is dealing with cement and
bricks now and, together with this sector, has announced co-operation in
the area of skills and the fast-tracking of the skills that are required by
the industry.

A lot of the work that we have been able to do in terms of engineers and
artisans, we were able to do because we actually collaborated and
participated with them. We have also developed a maintenance strategy of
infrastructure in government, because we also see it as an important source
of sustainable employment. Again, in developing that strategy, we had lots
of consultations with the construction sector.
We have also been consulting and working with the construction sector, with
regard to input costs for construction. How do we recreate some of the
industries that are needed in order to lower the volume of imports of the
goods that come into the construction sector? Minister Erwin, if you ask
him nicely, will share the details with you, because he has been leading
that process.


                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE

                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

    Adequacy of the provincial tendering process on the supply of learner
           support material, and delays in supply of school books

338.  Mr A M Mpontshane (IFP) asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether the provincial tendering processes concerning the supply of
      learner support material has been found to be satisfactory; if not,
      why not; if so, why are there delays in the supply of school books to
      schools each year?                N1566E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Speaker, the short answer is yes or
no. The procurement and distribution of learner-teacher support material is
the responsibility of provincial departments of education. The processes
and procedures differ quite substantially from one province to another. The
procurement chain from specification to delivery is complex and depends on
the timeframes attached to the screening and requisitioning processes.

The Department of Education has negotiated timeframes with the relevant
stakeholders, including booksellers and publishers, for the timely delivery
of learner support materials to schools for 2007. The department is
monitoring the provincial education departments’ processes to ensure that
stipulated timeframes are complied with. Monthly progress reports in this
regard are submitted to the Minister.

Provincial departments have improved their tendering processes over the
years. They have awarded the tenders for the 2007 school year. However,
delays in the supply of schoolbooks do occur. Most delays are due to the
late ordering of books and of services, delivery processes and the fact
that some books are not readily available on demand, specifically with top-
ups that are out of print when ordered.

The department has established a consultative forum, which is represented
by all stakeholders, to look into the procurement and distribution of
learner support material across the country. All problems encountered are
reported at the forum and, collectively, creative solutions are sought to
remove obstacles and impediments that may hamper the process of delivery.
Thank you.
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy Minister, the reason I am
smiling is because your answer, with due respect, Deputy Minister, is
leaving me not any wiser. The question is: Are the tendering processes
satisfactory? The Deputy Minister answered yes or no. So, I am not too sure
what the answer is. Are the tendering processes satisfactory in all the
provinces? Because, Deputy Minister, we know that tenders in some provinces
are given to unregistered companies, companies with no tax clearance
certificates, and that would definitely not be satisfactory.

For instance, as we talk, two senior officials of the KwaZulu-Natal
department of education have been suspended, involving tendering processes
of about R70 million - money unaccounted for. All this, Deputy Minister,
suggests that tendering processes are not satisfactory and that the problem
persists. Does this suggest that the national department is powerless to
improve the situation? Year after year provincial departments are failing
the parents and the schools.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, if the hon member had
listened to my answer, he would know that I was quite clear in saying that
the process varies from province to province. The hon member ...
[Interjections.] Koos, I will. If you want the cake, I will give you the
cake too.

Whilst the process differs and varies from province to province, the
process is a very complex one. It involves screening of learners’ support
material and tender processes. What the Minister has done, is to initiate
monthly reports that she receives from the provinces to ensure that where
interventions have to be made, they are made timeously and appropriately.

You will have to agree that, in comparison to a few years ago, the
tendering process, as well as the delivery of books, has improved markedly.
Whilst there are problems, I think the national forum is a collective which
looks at the difficulties and challenges faced by various provinces.
Therefore, in consultation with the publishers and booksellers, they are
able to ensure that there is more efficient delivery.

In terms of the information at our disposal, it would appear as if there
would be almost full compliance next year for the delivery of books. Thank
you very much.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, certainly, the Deputy Minister gives the
impression that everything is back on track and that the delivery of books
and so on is taking place as one would expect it to, but we know, Sir, that
actually that is not the case and that a great deal of work still has to be
done.

But I would like to ask the hon Deputy Minister in particular, with regard
to provinces such as Mpumalanga, Limpopo, the Eastern Cape, those provinces
that are performing particularly badly in the area of textbook
distribution, whether he is satisfied - and he has referred to it to some
extent today – with the reporting process that these provinces need to
undertake to indicate not only that they are trying to improve the
situation but what they are doing to improve the situation. Is this really
satisfactory? If you wouldn’t mind elaborating a bit on that, Deputy
Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Certainly, Chairperson. Thank you very
much, hon member. What I have indicated is that we have recognised the
problem. And we have ensured that we establish a national team, comprising
the national department as well as provincial departments, where we look at
the issues and challenges of delivery, whether it’s Mpumalanga, Limpopo,
the North West or any of the other provinces.

The results of that are the following, in fact these are the benefits of
that. Screening is taking place by a collective involving all provincial
departments. So the curriculum is looked at by the collective and they
decide on what books have to be put onto the list. The tendering process
takes place much earlier rather than later. We look at challenges that
various provinces face in terms of interaction with booksellers and
publishers. There is engagement with the publishers and that forum has in
fact moved the process forward much more efficiently and swiftly.

Indeed, there may be problems. Amongst the problems which I might not have
spoken about is the difference between section 20 and section 21 schools.
You know for a fact that resources are provided to section 21 schools and
they have the responsibility and the power and authority to procure books
themselves. On occasion, some of these schools tend to purchase quite late
and the result is that the delivery takes place later. Now, we cannot
assume responsibility for every governing body in the country, but what we
can say quite confidently is that there has been a marked improvement in
the delivery of textbooks. Last year, about 93% of the books were delivered
already by the end of the year and we do believe that next year should be
better than last year. So, tomorrow will certainly be better than today.
Thank you very much.

Ms M J J MATSOMELA: Chairperson, we as the ANC do acknowledge and
appreciate the continuous initiatives and guidance offered by the
Department of Education to the provincial education departments. A case in
point is the effective management of the learning and teaching support
material tendering processes concerning procurement and the distribution of
these in the North West province.

While doing school-related constituency work, I recently observed that the
distribution of these materials is taking place for the 2007 academic year.
On that note, could the Deputy Minister inform this House about the issues
that are raised in the monthly reports that he receives from the
departments regarding this matter and how the department intends to address
challenges emerging from these reports? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Hon member, in fact, your question and
comments speak to the same issues that have been raised and I think they
are quite pertinent in the context of the question that has been put to the
Ministry.

The monthly reports focus on the progress made by provincial departments to
procure and deliver learner-teacher support material on time for 2007. The
issues raised and managed monthly relate to the deviation from scheduled
activities, that is, incomplete or late submission of requisition by
schools resulting in additional orders being placed, late delivery
processes, unavailability of books and books that are out of print. In
other words, it’s a range of issues and challenges that are identified.

It has been found that most of the provincial departments will deliver all
learner-teacher support material, or LTSM, before the opening of schools in
2007. However, the late screening and approval of catalogues for the
phasing of Grade 9 did have an effect on the procurement cycle and it is
expected that provincial departments will only be able to deliver textbooks
for Grade 9 by the end of January or during February 2007.

The challenges emerging from the report are being managed by the provincial
departments individually, and reported to the LTSM consultative forum,
which is a national forum involving all provinces, to seek collective,
creative solutions and remove any systemic obstacles that hinder the
procurement and delivery services. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson and hon Deputy Minister, the ACDP would like
know whether the Minister can provide details about the progress of the
national reading programme launched in May 2005, with specific reference to
challenges that have been identified regarding literacy as well as
envisaged changes to future implementation of the national reading
programme? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I could give you a very comprehensive
response to that, hon Cupido, but it does not relate to the question
concerned and it is not relevant. I do think an opportunity would present
itself in this House when the Minister is going to make a comprehensive and
full statement around this matter. I thank you.

 The plan to develop policy and programmes on poverty and the destitution of
                                  families
365.  Mrs T J Tshivhase (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:


      Whether he is planning to develop any policy and related programmes in
      response to the findings on poverty and the destitution of families in
      the macro-social report; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
      details?                     N2128E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, first of all, I want to
state that the process of the macro-social report on poverty is run by the
social cluster as a whole and it’s done from the Office of the President.
In other words, almost all the departments of the social cluster
participate and implement whatever has been decided regarding those bodies.


According to the macro-social report, some of the major social trends that
keep people trapped in poverty include factors such as education, gender,
geographic location, limited income, access to opportunities and assets, as
well as the least effective social capital.

In response to these findings, the Department of Social Development is in
the process of developing a strategy to mainstream gender in policies and
strategies within social development. It is also conducting a study to
assess the status and adequacy of services provided by the Department of
Social Development, the 13 identified rural areas and eight urban renewal
programme nodes. The findings provide evidence for the development of our
strategy to improve service delivery in these areas.

The Department of Social Development is embarking on a process to develop
community development policy and a comprehensive antipoverty strategy.
These two processes are still at a very elementary phase where terms of
reference and proposals have been developed but are still to be approved
and tenders advertised.

The department has launched a sustainable livelihood project to link social
grants and livelihood co-operatives which aim to restore participants as
quickly as possible to self-reliance through strengthening their capacity
to access local economic development opportunities and assets, and to
utilise existing social capital effectively. In this, the department is
working with the local government departments.

The department also has a draft national policy plan, which is in the final
stages of being approved. This policy outlines key intervention areas,
which focus on services to family. Poverty is dealt with through the key
intervention areas outlined in this policy, with specific reference to its
causes and impact on families. The policy is aimed at promoting integrated
co-ordinated services to families in South Africa by all relevant
stakeholders, with special focus on promoting functional families and
preventing dysfunctionality as well as focussing on family preservation.

A draft five-year plan for families, which is aligned to the policy, has
also been developed. Therein all stakeholders have indicated programmes
that will deal with all the key challenges that families are facing.
Poverty alleviation programmes and those focusing on destitute families
have been outlined in this strategy.

Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Ndi a livhuwa Muṱhomphei Minisiṱa. [I thank you hon
Minister.]

With reference to the NDA, an entity of the Department of Social
Development that is mandated to fund and capacitate community projects and
programmes for a direct impact on improving the asset base of poor
communities, I would like to know whether the department has a mechanism
and system in place to monitor the NDA and to ensure that it carries out
its mandate?

Ndi khou livhuwa. Vha nga ri fhirisa afho kha itsho tshipiḓa? [I thank you.
Can you clarify us in that regard?]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Yes, we do that. The NDA has a board
and that board has been strengthened. I want to underline that the NDA has
had a lot of problems. If you remember, the NDA was formed just after 1994
or 1995. The Deputy President, at the time, was in charge of that, within
this Parliament. Quite obviously, we expected to have problems, but not in
the manner in which we have.

At that time, the NDA was under Finance. But, apparently, Finance thought
that it was better to get away from that problem, and some overenthusiastic
official really agreed to take it. I was a little bit surprised that it had
to come to us in the state in which it was. But, since then, it has had
those problems, especially regarding this issue of management. I think
there is no year whereby there has not been something amiss that comes out
of it.

However, I think the new board has improved its status and the way it
works. I do congratulate them because they took almost all the problems
that had been there concerning the other boards before and are trying to
resolve the issues. The way in which it has worked makes me want to say
there is a promise that it can be better but it needs a lot of work and it
still faces a lot of challenges.

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, if you would allow me, I would like to thank the
Minister for fulfilling the promise he made yesterday in the debate when I
did ask him several questions. He didn’t have the answers with him and he
undertook to get those answers to me by today, and he has done so. I would
just like to say: Thank you very much for that. [Applause.]

The macro-social report also indicated that poverty is increasing, and I am
quoting from the report.


  In 1995, 28% of households lived below the estimated poverty datum line
  of R322 per month. While this figure for 2000 was just under 33%.

The South African Survey, which is another report, also confirms that the
number of people living in poverty is increasing. According to this survey,
17 million were living in relative poverty in 1996 and this had increased
to 23 million in 2000. My question to the Minister is: Is it not time that
government reconsiders its position regarding the introduction of a basic
income grant?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon member, quite obviously, I do agree
with you that there is a lot of poverty in this country. I would like to
invite this House to go to those areas where there is worse poverty,
especially the Eastern cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo so that members can
be able to understand what causes some of the problems we have in this
country, especially crime and all the other antisocial activities that
exist within this country.

We have not yet decided to institute the issue of a basic income grant. We
are basically working towards something like that, so that all of us can be
able to agree that there is a need for it. But that has not been policy so
far. Some of the things that have been causing that are mostly the
inability of government to basically reach everybody; and the problems we
have in the department itself of reaching almost all the poorest of the
poor.

I personally believe – and this is not an ANC position but my position –
that we do need something like that. We do need something like that. I am
sure that in the coming conference of the ANC next year it is one of the
issues that we will have to debate and agree on quite clearly, that there
is a need to relook at how we look after people.

Personally, I do not think that we would be able, in the next 10 years, to
ensure that each and every able South African works. In the meantime, some
of the social problems will increase. That is something that we still have
to debate amongst ourselves. It’s no secret but, basically, it is something
that we ought to be doing and not be answering here during question time
only but in our daily lives.

We are all empowered and well-affirmed individuals, 400 in all, but there
are more than 23 million people that are not affected or do not know what
they will eat tonight. That is a question about which we, as South
Africans, individually and collectively, should do everything to ensure
that we do discuss. The same issue arises, not only for us as
parliamentarians but also for society. That is why the role of
nongovernmental organisations becomes very very important since we are
unable to touch everybody as a government while, at least, they have that
possibility.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister, research shows that rural women in South
Africa are most likely to be poor, least likely to have an education and
least likely to find employment. They are most likely to suffer at the
hands of an abuser and yet are most likely to be the head of the household
and the sole breadwinner in their families. They are most often responsible
for child care, accessing resources, fetching water, preparing food and
caring for the sick and the elderly. Yet, rural women, however, have the
lowest status and are least likely to occupy positions of power. Hon
Minister, can you provide details of present and planned programmes aimed
at the specific alleviation of poverty among one of the most marginalised
communities in South Africa, that is rural women?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon member, can you repeat the last
paragraph of your question?

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Minister, I just want to ask whether you are able to give
details of present or planned programmes that are going to be specifically
aimed at the alleviation of poverty regarding rural women?

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: I can but it’s quite a big long thing
and it would not necessarily encompass what you are asking for. But there
are programmes that are there within the department, especially in the
provinces that deal with the issues of poverty alleviation as such. Here, I
do have one programme that deals with children, ie early childhood
development. The numbers are stated here or my department can bring them to
you so that you should be able to look at that.

However, we do need a comprehensive approach towards poverty. The tendency
that is there when you talk about poverty is that you talk about questions
of black empowerment, the elite and those that read and write in English
but not about the ordinary person in general. I think we need the latter
more than we need those questions. We can only be able to do that amongst
our people if they mobilise themselves on the basis of the ANC policy. They
should be looked into and all of us have to be in touch with our own
people. I hope the ID does the same.

           Special SABC team assigned to travel with the President

339.  Ms M Smuts (DA) asked the Minister of Communications:

      Whether there is a special SABC team assigned to travel with and
      provide coverage of the President on (a) foreign and (b) South African
      stories; if so, (i) what is the size and composition of the team and
      (ii) how much has its work cost the SABC?
                                              N2091E
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Mr Chairperson, we’ve been informed
by the group executive of the SABC as follows, in response to the question
posed: Two political journalists and a cameraman are assigned by the SABC
News to cover the activities of the Presidency. These journalists are
assigned to cover these activities both domestically and internationally.

The decision by the SABC to assign these journalists is in line with
international press practice, for example, both the BBC and CNN have
specialist teams that are assigned to cover the heads of state of the
United Kingdom and the United States respectively. It is also part of a
strategy on the part of the news division of the SABC to boost the quality
of news across their platforms through the development of specialist beat
reporters.

From the beginning of the financial year, that is, 1 April 2006 to date,
this presidential team has cost the SABC R1,458 158 million. Thank you.

Ms M SMUTS: Sir, the presence of the hon the President yesterday at the
funeral of a previous President, Mr Botha, was not only newsworthy, it was
by all accounts worthy from every point of view and worthy of coverage and
acclaim. But there is, however, Sir, a clear policy, as far as I can see,
to cover the hon the President wherever he is, which is frequently abroad,
whatever he does, and to do so unquestioningly.
I had really wanted to ask this question from the hon the Minister because
she used to run the SABC Board. We don’t really like ANC Ministers and
politicians to give the SABC any kind of instructions, but may I now ask
the Deputy Minister whether he took note of the finding, in the Sisulu
enquiry report into blacklisting, that Mr Zikalala, the MD of news, had
given an instruction - he did not deny it - that Prof Sipho Seepe should
never be used as a commentator unless there was a countervailing opinion
and, on this specific ground, that he undermined the President? Now as the
Sisulu commissioners point out, it is not the function of the SABC either
to represent the government or to shield it from criticism. In fact, that
would be contrary both to the broadcasting ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member, firstly, your
question is out of order, it’s not what is before the House. That is a new
question. And secondly, your time has expired.

Ms M SMUTS: Thank you, Chair.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Chairperson, hon Deputy Minister, we are talking here
about the President of the country, the head of the state. We are not
talking about anybody else who wanders overseas from time to time, someone
whom nobody takes notice of here in the country or even on the street where
he stays. He is the head of state. He is the country’s President and my
President. He is the President of the people.
Surely, Deputy Minister, you will agree with me that the so-called cost,
because people refer to it as a cost to the SABC, is nothing but an
investment to ensure that the public broadcaster of South Africa, the SABC
in this case, does report to the people, the public, about what the
President is doing overseas and in the country to ensure a better life for
people. The SABC has a particular mandate to inform, to educate, to
entertain, so when the President goes about his work - you don’t see him on
TV when he is on vacation - to ensure that tomorrow is a better day for all
South Africans, the public needs to be informed by the public broadcaster.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member! Your time has
expired.

Mr R D PIETERSE: Thank you, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I am not sure if there was a
question.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Yes, I think there was a question
and it was related to whether the amount spent by the SABC should be
considered a cost or an investment. I think the hon member is quite correct
in stating that it is the mandate of the SA Broadcasting Corporation, as
the public broadcaster, to keep the South African people informed.

When it seeks to do so with regard to the President, it is not seeking to
do so with regard to an ANC politician. It seeks to inform the South
African public of the activities of the head of state, of the government of
South Africa, of a President who works and speaks on behalf of the entire
people of South Africa.

Now, I think the cost to the country would be far more serious if we had a
nation which was uninformed about what the government was doing in quite a
transparent way. The fact that the SABC has taken it as part of its public
broadcasting mandate to assign a specialist team to cover the activities of
the President of the Republic of South Africa, so that our people can be
informed as best as possible, and the transparency of this government be
known to the entire world and the country, is in fact a laudable thing. I
think the hon member is quite correct in his assertions in this regard.
Thank you.

Ms M SMUTS: Chair, hon Deputy Minister, but is it properly informing the
public, as you have just set out, if it covers the hon President wherever
he goes, whatever he does, and it does so unquestioningly? Is that
informing the public? It is because of that approach, it seems to me, that
our news is sometimes accused of looking like a presidential diary. That is
not real information, is it, especially when it is conducted on an
unquestioning basis?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon member, I think the answer is
yes, the country is being informed and reliably so. Now, it may well be
that you may not be happy with what is reported and I’ve seen often your
interference in the matters of the SABC. As a politician, you do not
hesitate to direct statements to the SABC, yet you are the first one that
says that there should be no political interference in matters of
broadcasting. But you always seek to interfere by making statements.
[Interjections.] So I really think that the answer to your question is: I’m
satisfied that the SABC does adequately cover the activities of the
President and in a fair way. Thank you.

   Impact of non-allocation of funds by the National Lottery Distribution
   Agency and the benefits derived by sports clubs in disadvantaged areas

363.  Mr M M Dikgacwi (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      (1)   What impact does the non-allocation of funds by the National
           Lottery Distribution Agency have on sport federations and sport
           clubs;


      (2)   whether any sport clubs in the disadvantaged areas have
           benefited from the club support programme of his department; if
           not, why not; if so, how many?          N2126E
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Yes, the non-allocation of
funds by the National Lottery Distribution Agency has meant that some
projects that the federations were planning in anticipation of the funds
had to be placed on hold or scaled down. In some cases, they used their own
funds or funds allocated from the Department of Sport and Recreation. The
delay in rolling out of the programmes of the federations that were mainly
for capacity-building and the preparation of athletes, obviously, had a
negative impact on the federations and the clubs. However, the lottery
funding will not be lost to them, and let us hope that they will be able to
catch up once the agency has been properly constituted.

The answer to the second part of the question is: Yes, many clubs in
disadvantaged areas have been identified from the club development
programme by the department, which we introduced for the first time, during
this financial year. To date, since its implementation, the programme has
been introduced in 42 local municipalities in seven provinces. It will then
continue in the two remaining provinces.

As a pilot project, we introduced three clubs: football for males and
females and netball. That was introduced in all municipalities. To date, we
have formed 126 clubs. The programme has started with the development of
human resources in most of these areas. Club representatives are trained in
sports administration and team management. Both courses are accredited
according to SAQA. Very soon, sports training in, specifically, football
and netball will be started in the club development programme.

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Chairperson, firstly, I just want to understand as to what
measures have been put in place by the distribution agency to fast-track
the applications. Or, must they reapply? Secondly, what criteria are used
to determine which clubs must receive club support funds? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon member, once the lotto
agency is in place again, we will readvertise for applications to be
launched with them. Secondly, the criteria that we use are that we are
working in the identified poverty nodes as declared. That is the starting
point for the department to roll out the clubs.

Mr S J MASANGO: Hon Minister, every citizen in this country should be given
an opportunity to participate in any sport code that he or she wants to
participate in. The problem is that there is a lack of or no facilities in
the disadvantaged areas. I am especially talking about those sports codes
that have been played by the whites only. What is this department doing to
ensure that there are sports facilities in those areas and that they are
maintained?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Masango, you are aware, as
a member of the portfolio committee, that we had a programme called
Building for Sport and Recreation. Those funds that we received from the
poverty alleviation fund were transferred to the municipal infrastructure
grant.

We have said on numerous occasions in this hon House that it is for the
local authorities to prioritise sporting facilities in the various areas,
so that we can access the funds from the MIG. I need to say to hon Masango
that we are in absolute agreement that the right of the child to play must
be there and we, as government, are advocating that. We have done so during
imbizo week. We have been able to observe the situation during this past
imbizo, when we visited the Northern Cape. We have heard of some of those
facilities that were announced and that will be rolled out by the municipal
infrastructure grant.

Let me, however, also point out to the member that in northern KwaZulu-
Natal where, in partnership with the Department of Education, we launched
our school sports Mass Participation Programme during this past Saturday,
we also heard the mayor of that area announcing three facilities that will
be built next year by the municipal infrastructure grant. So, we are
advocating this, and I am asking the hon member and all other members in
this House to use the constituency offices and to advocate actively that
the local authorities prioritise sport facilities, because the money that
government provides is there.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Deputy Minister, do you have any idea of the timeframe
within which you expect the lottery funds to be opened for applications
again? I understand from your reply that funds are available from
municipalities, from which keen and young soccer playing teams who are very
much more enthusiastic about soccer because of the imminent Soccer World
Cup, can apply for funding. But, there seems to be some confusion as to
exactly where they apply for funding – whether it is from the local
municipalities or the provincial funds as well. So, can you give us some
clarity on that?

Can you also tell me if there are any current or future initiatives to work
with LoveLife to take advantage of the sporting activities of these young
people, and to also influence a change in their lifestyle through working
with LoveLife? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Let me start with the last
question on LoveLife. I think it is a new question and you will have to
table it, but the Department of Sport and Recreation does have a programme
with regard to LoveLife. If the hon member is interested in a more
comprehensive answer, she is welcome to table the question and we will
answer it comprehensively.

In terms of the first part of the question as to when we expect the lottery
fund to open, that is an administrative matter. The Department of Trade and
Industry, hopefully, once it is on board and the distribution agency has
been constituted, will shortly take the decision to advertise for
applications. In terms of the applications for funds to local authorities,
it depends on the provincial government as to what they make available to
the local authorities. But, what I was saying in terms of the MIG was that
if they prioritise sports fields and facilities in the integrated
development plan, they can then access the funds accordingly and have them
built. If I am still not clear, hon Rabinowitz, table your question, and we
will answer you more comprehensively.

   Initiatives taken in view of recent incidents of violence and crime in
                                   schools

369.  Adv A H Gaum (ANC) asked the Minister of Education:

      Whether any new initiatives have been taken by her department and the
      provincial education departments in view of numerous recent incidents
      of an escalation of violence, crime and a lack of discipline in our
      schools; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                              N2133E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Madam Chair, the emphasis on new
initiatives is important, since the matter of safety in schools has become
a matter of national concern in recent months. This is not to say that the
issue of safety has been ignored in the past. Various important steps have
been taken. Laws, policies, frameworks and guidelines have been developed
to address crime, violence, drug use and abuse in schools. The primary
protection of learners in this regard is set out in the Regulations for
Safety Measures at Public Schools, published in terms of the South African
Schools Act in Government Notice No 22754 of 12 October 2001.

However, we have been preparing over the past year to make a systemic
change to the way in which we prevent crime and violence in and outside
schools. The Department of Education, in partnership with the Centre for
Justice and Crime Prevention, has piloted the Hlayiseka Be Aware and Take
Action project in Limpopo, the Eastern Cape and the Western Cape. It is an
early warning system of reporting crime and violence. A final report was
submitted to the Minister on 4 October 2006 and we are developing
implementation and operational plans to make the system work in all
provinces.

There has been much comment in the press about a national pilot project to
tackle crime and violence at the worst affected schools in each province.
Provincial education departments were requested to identify schools in each
province and suggest interventions that could be made to address crime and
violence in these schools.

I can report that all provinces have submitted business plans to the
Department of Education for consideration. Schools have identified
interventions ranging from fences, burglar proofing, floodlights, alarm
systems, metal detectors, CCTV technology, and the appointment of safety
officers in schools.
Finally, at its last meeting on 23 October 2006, the Council of Education
Ministers agreed to take the following measures to improve school safety:
Firstly, a national template for a code of conduct will be made available
to all schools. Secondly, the 2001 safety regulations will be made widely
available in a simplified form, and I think many of you have noticed the
publication in the Sunday papers of the past week. Thirdly, a national
consultative forum on school safety will be convened before the end of this
year.

Perhaps I could conclude by stating that yesterday, the Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security and I met to look at a sustainable comprehensive
systemic way in which the SA Police Service and the Department of Education
could strengthen their collaboration - not in a few schools but in all
schools around the country. Thank you very much.

Adv A H GAUM: Chairperson, we must welcome these comprehensive initiatives
of the Minister. The danger is, of course, that we may be treating the
consequences of violence and crime without paying enough attention to the
causes. Something must be wrong with the moral fabric of our society and we
certainly need a comprehensive intervention also, as far as the causes are
concerned.

The Minister’s plan to introduce random drug testing in schools should be
supported. However, the legal problem might be that there has to be a
reasonable suspicion about the presence of drugs on the relevant school
premises before a search may be conducted. How do you plan to overcome this
restriction and how far has the process developed to declare all schools
gun-free? Lastly, would you be prepared to elaborate on the details of the
plan to send ill-disciplined learners home for short periods? How would
this work in practice? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Adv Gaum, you have raised three issues,
one is in relation to the schools being gun-free or weapon-free. In fact,
the regulations, which have already been published for public comment in
June this year, clearly request all schools to ensure that they post a
notice that the school is a drug-free and weapon-free environment. This
would enable searches to take place in the school. In the United Kingdom,
for example, searches can take place without any reasonable suspicion
occurring to show the seriousness of the state. So, those measures are in
fact to be promulgated very soon as an extension of the Safety Measures
Act.

With regard to the issue of drug testing, there are economic implications
in this regard, as well as constitutional implications. We have the right
to privacy on the one hand pitted against the right to security. That’s
something that we are looking at very consciously and we are investigating
it. It would involve the consent of the parents, the consent of the learner
and taking proper processes into account with regard to a dignified
process. One has to just look at the example of the World Anti-Doping
Association, which conducts tests on athletes to ensure that athletes do
not cheat. They voluntarily undergo testing. So, these are matters that we
are considering very carefully, with due regard to the constitutional
implications, and it’s something that we have to look at very carefully
with due regard to the constitutional framework.

However, many schools have approached the department to say that we should
give serious consideration to this particular factor, and some have in fact
offered to contribute towards the costs of such an exercise. So, the
department is investigating this particular aspect.

The Minister has at no stage stated that the children who are misbehaving
or ill-disciplined will be sent home and entrusted with their parents to
ensure responsibility. What the Minister indicated was that a mechanism
should be put in place in all districts to deal with learners who are ill-
disciplined so that they do not disturb the disciplined and the learning
possibilities that occur within the learning environment. Certainly,
districts will be paying particular attention to this, where a dedicated
time and a venue will be created in order to engage in this particular
issue.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, my colleague, the hon George Boinamo, put a
written question to the Minister recently asking in particular what the
total number of incidents of school violence reported to her department in
each of the three previous years is. The Minister, I’m sure, quite rightly
replied that, in actual fact, this was a matter handled by the Department
of Justice and Constitutional Development, and, consequently, these
statistics were not readily available. Now, we are of the opinion, Mr
Deputy Minister, that for the department to be able to handle this matter
properly, it needs to know exactly what instances of violence in schools
have been there over a period etc. You need to have those statistics. So, I
want to ask you, sir, is your department in touch with the SAPS and the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development in order to try and
get these statistics to handle the situation, and if so, what is the nature
of that relationship? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I would love to answer the question but
the hon Ellis will notice that a similar question has been posed and is in
fact on the Order Paper, which will be dealt with later.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, I’m interested in that because I want to say to
the hon Deputy Minister that part of my job as a Whip is to watch the time
very carefully and I’m pretty confident that we will not get to that
question. So, maybe, this is a good opportunity to answer it now.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, I think we have to follow
the Question Paper as it is set. It’s not for you to change it unilaterally
here. However, hon Minister, we can see what the time allows but I’m ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, certainly, I think the discipline
of the House is that we should deal with questions in the order that they
present themselves and it’s proper for a member to try to sneak a question
... Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That is exactly what I said.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you, and I agree and endorse what
the hon Chair said. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): It’s very kind of you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, sorry. I just looked through the question paper
again ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): No, no. I’m sorry!

Mr M J ELLIS: It may be a similar question, Madam Chair, but it’s not the
same question. And I think, in the context of my question in relation to
what the hon Gaum asked, there’s nothing wrong with what I asked.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, if there’s time for the
Minister and he wishes to answer on a question which is not directly
related or is going to appear later on, I will allow him to do so. If in
the meantime ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Could I ask you one question, Madam Chair? Could I ask the
Deputy Minister which question he is referring to? Which is the one that he
says comes up on the Question Paper later on? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I’m sorry, Mr Ellis. I can’t be
discussing the next questions. We are busy with question 369 and this is
what we are dealing with and therefore I will now continue to ask the hon
Dudley for her supplementary question.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Deputy Minister, the ACDP supports the proposed
new measures. I wanted to ask the Minister and yourself if you are prepared
to consider answers that do not fit into the humanist philosophy presently
propagated. For example, our children are being brought up on secular
humanism, which undermines moral values and leaves our children vulnerable
at every turn. And, without moral absolutes, how would a child know that
carrying a sharp weapon or beating a child within an inch of its life for a
cellphone is wrong? Add to this the shocking indoctrination children
receive on evolution which teaches racism in its most base form and
questions the intellectual and moral capacity of the majority of race
groups in South Africa. Surely, some drastic changes are necessary in this
regard. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, let’s say that there are many
perspectives to life which influence our moral and ethical upbringing
amongst which is ethical or secular humanism. I think the issues of values
and morals are critical – whether they come from a religious perspective or
a humanist perspective, it’s irrelevant. And responsibility for the
upbringing, the attitudes, and the disposition of children become that of
the parents, in any particular environment. I certainly do not think that
this is the appropriate time to debate the value, scientifically or
otherwise, of evolution and Darwinism. I think an appropriate forum should
be made available for that discussion to take place.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, I did say that
there was an opportunity for you to respond to Mr Ellis, if you so wish.
There is now an opportunity.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Well, I could respond to Mr Ellis by
saying that, in terms of the document that is before me, the question by Mr
Boinamo is as follows: “How many children have been killed and assaulted in
school grounds over the past six months up to and in including October 2006
and what steps is her department taking to prevent violence in future?”
That question does appear on the Question Paper, hon Chair and I think that
it’s appropriate that we respond to it accordingly, at the appropriate
time.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, may I ask the hon Deputy Minister what that has
to do with this relationship with the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development, the SAPS etc? I mean, it’s not answering my
question that I put. I’m quite sure that I’m entitled to an answer to a
question that was related to what Mr Gaum has said, and it doesn’t matter
if there’s another question on the Question Paper later on.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I cannot decide for the Deputy
Minister what he must say to you. I think he has dealt with the question
the way he finds fit. I don’t want to discuss it any further. I want to
continue to question ...

Mr M J ELLIS: [Inaudible.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Ellis, I think you are out of
order. Can we please proceed. Can we please proceed to question 346 by the
hon Coetzee to the Minister of Health.

 Proposed introduction of community services for nurses in 2007, and choice
                  of preferred locations by 2006 graduates

346.  Mr R Coetzee (DA) asked the Minister of Health:
      (1)   Whether, with reference to her reply to Question 243 on 10 April
           2006 and in light of the fact that the Nursing Act, Act 33 of
           2005, has still not been implemented, she intends introducing
           community service for nurses in 2007; if not, why not; if so,
           what steps have been taken in this regard;


      (2)   whether student nurses who will graduate in 2006 have been
           requested to choose their preferred locations; if not, (a) why
           not and (b) when is it envisaged that this will happen; if so,
           on what dates in each case?             N2100E


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Can we please proceed to Question 346
asked by the hon Coetzee to the Minister of Health. Hon Minister?
[Interjections.]

Please, please, please give the opportunity to the hon Deputy Minister to
answer the question. Hon Ellis! [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Chairperson, the answer to the
question is, yes, once the Nursing Act, Act 33 of 2005 has been promulgated
and the required regulations have been issued.

The answer to the second part is no. The required regulations to facilitate
community service can only be issued once the Nursing Act, Act 33 of 2005
has been promulgated. The implementation date will depend on the
promulgation date of the Nursing Act, Act 33 of 2005.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I now call upon the hon Coetzee.

Mr R COETZEE: Madam Chair, that’s a horrible confusion. Deputy Minister, in
a reply to exactly the same question, which we received on 10 April this
year, the Minister of Health gave exactly the same reply you’ve given now,
“No, the Act hasn’t been promulgated; no, the community service isn’t
happening and it won’t happen until the Act has been promulgated.” In other
words, no progress has been made at all. I would like to ask you, firstly,
what the department and the Ministry are doing to implement this particular
piece of legislation?

Secondly, you will know that there is a massive problem in the relationship
between the Ministry, the department and medical health professions in
South Africa. What is the department doing to communicate with these future
public servants whom we need to be motivated and enthusiastic about dealing
with health in South Africa to alleviate the trouble and the uncertainty
that they’ve had to live with throughout the entire course of this year?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, before you
answer, I’d like to remind the House that supplementary questions are
actually a question and can, at most, have two parts. We aren’t very strict
about it but I think we must take some care to observe the rule. So it’s
one question – two related parts. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Madam Chairperson, I will help the hon
member because he talked about confusion. I think the confusion is on his
side. Maybe they actually do need some education in this way: Once this
House passes a law, it is the President who then promulgates that law.
Until he has done that, we are not in a position to implement a law that
hasn’t been promulgated. So, indeed, we are keen to have this law
promulgated so that we can implement it.

Perhaps, I may just take the opportunity to say that community service has
been one of the most successful programmes in the Department of Health. In
fact, we are putting forward a proposal to other departments as well to
make use of community service because we think, in the situation of
shortage of skills, we can benefit from using the skills that are abundant
in our country. And for that matter, I think it would be a good idea if all
of us in this House offered ourselves for community service because there
are a lot of skills in this house. We can go and help our local government
in different ways, not necessarily politically but technically – with the
technical skills that we all have.

Concerning the relationship between the Department of Health and the health
professionals, indeed, I think I want to say that our health professionals
are the backbone of our health services. Without them we cannot implement
our health policies and programmes.

The relationship between the Department of Health and the professionals is
indeed improving. A few moments ago I just talked to the Democratic Nursing
Organisation of South Africa - Denosa, which is, as you know, the
association of nurses and they are very keen to help. I’ve figures from
them which tell us how many nurses qualify a year and how many we need to
train.

In this regard, I think I also want to make an appeal to all of us to help
to restore the dignity of the profession. Let’s restore the dignity of the
nursing profession. Let’s encourage our children to take up nursing. Then,
in that way, we are going to help the department and the country.

Ms M F TLAKE: Madam Chair and Deputy Minister, I would like to applaud the
Deputy Minister for answering the aforesaid questions on the issues of
community health. However, Deputy Minister, I would like to direct a
question to you as a follow-up.

We know that community service doctors have been very helpful in increasing
the pool of doctors available to service the poor. Which other health
categories are doing community service? What will be the benefit of
introducing community service in the nursing profession? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon member, thank you very much for that. I
think you are in support of our national policy to use national service.

In the Department of Health we don’t have only doctors doing national
service, we have a number of other sectors and professionals who are
already doing community service. I don’t have the exact information here
but I can get the details for you regarding the sections that are doing
community service in addition to doctors.

In relation to nurses, you know that our situation is that a number of
rural areas are far from the centres and tend to be areas where many people
don’t want to go to. So, concerning that matter, we would like to encourage
our young people – and they really love doing that – to go into the
hinterland to help our people there. So, definitely, they will help us
address the huge staff shortages in the rural areas.

You do find situations, for example, where we have a 50% vacancy rate in a
rural clinic and we find a situation where there is a very high turnover. A
number of nurses and professionals get trained, get located in rural areas
and they leave. So one of the things that we are trying to do is to use our
young people and we find that, in fact, they are very eager to do this.

We’ve had white doctors going to the most rural parts of our country, and
they say “Please, give us another opportunity.” Of course, one category
that I may mention, which has just come to my mind, are dentists. We’ve had
dentists who have done community service and have said to me, “We want to
do some more.” So this is a very successful programme.

Dr R RABINOWITZ: Hon Deputy Minister, the IFP supports the idea of
community service – for many professions, but I’m speaking only on behalf
of health. I just wonder if the delay has something to do with the concern
that there are nurses who will not want to be sent to areas where they
don’t want to go – maybe areas that are far from their homes?

Has the department, or would you, consider a change of policy, which would
involve drawing nurses to underserved areas through incentives, rather than
insisting that people go to places where it’s not convenient for them? In
that way, one is not likely to lose any nurses and you would have a win-win
situation for everybody. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Unfortunately, I don’t know the exact
reasons for the delay. I could get the answer for you from the Presidency
and find out what the reason is for the delay.

But when it comes to giving incentives, one of the things that we actually
do in the Department of Health – and I’ve been involved in this – is to
assist our young health professionals in their choice of where they want to
go. Some of them have come to us and said: “I want to go to Empangeni.” In
that situation we try our best to see if they can be posted in the area
where they want to go. Some of them want to go to a particular area for a
different reason, maybe because they think they’ll learn more in that area
in the field that they are interested in. So, indeed, I think we can give
incentives. Of course, you also know, hon Rabinowitz, that we have a policy
of rural allowances. This too is helping us because it actually gives
people an incentive to go to a rural area.

Very recently I was in a conference looking at bone and joint diseases. And
one of the people who gave a presentation works in Mseleni, in a rural area
in northern KwaZulu-Natal. The slides she showed indicated that she
immensely enjoys working in that area. So, maybe we need to begin to
project our rural areas as areas where you can actually live and enjoy
yourself. Some of our traditional leaders in the House can also help us
here and invite us to come to their areas, saying “It’s a lovely area – you
are going to learn so much in the area where I live.” Those are some of the
things we can do.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy Minister, with the drastic shortage of nurses
throughout the country and many hospitals having to limp along with less
than 50% of the required numbers, and the fact that the Health department’s
policies appear to rely on the need for increased responsibilities for
nurses, does the department have knowledge of the actual numbers of nurses
needed in the health care sector presently and in the next five years? Does
the department know exactly what the needs are in terms of training
facilities? If so, what are the relevant details? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you for that question, hon member. Of
course, I think if you had had a chance to look at our human resource plan,
which was launched by the Minister of Health earlier this year, you would
have been able to see that, indeed, we have worked out what the needs are
in the area of different sectors and professions in the Department of
Health.

But just for your information, in 2005 we trained 1 533 nurses. The need
for nurses is still huge because you find a situation where, according to
our statistics, we have one nurse per 245 people. Now this is not something
that is acceptable, because you can imagine a nurse having to look after
245 people. The ideal ratio is one nurse to 60 people.
So, indeed, we are aware of the shortage, and one of the strategies that we
have adopted is to open nursing colleges that were closed in order to
create a bigger pool of colleges that can train greater numbers of nurses.
Of course, in this area we find that we have a challenge in that we need
tutors who are going to teach our young nurses in these colleges. So we are
looking at this issue and we are talking with the profession to see how we
can deal with it. Thank you.

     Plans to make the ticket prices for 2010 FIFA World Cup affordable

371.  Mr B W Dhlamini (IFP) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether his department, together with the relevant authorities, have
      any plans in place to make the ticket prices for the 2010 Fifa World
      Cup affordable to the majority of South Africans, especially for the
      matches involving our national team; if not, why not; if so, what are
      the relevant details?             N2140E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chairperson, the 2010
Fifa World Cup is an event of the Federation of International Football
Association of Sport, Fifa.

As in previous World Cup tournaments, Fifa has its own contracted agency
called Match, which handles, amongst others, other aspects of business for
Fifa – the marketing, accommodation, ticketing, catering and hospitality.

Government has raised the issue that, while this is an international event,
for which tickets are sold worldwide, the majority of South Africans who
follow football ardently have tough economic circumstances. Government has
raised this issue with Fifa and with Match, who are at present considering
ways of accommodating the request forwarded by government.

Let me also say that it needs to be noted that even in a much more affluent
society and country such as Germany, the majority of football followers
watched the tournament on big screens at fan parks, and didn’t attend
matches at stadiums. Thank you.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Chairperson and Deputy Minister, I am happy that there is
something that the government has done about this because we wouldn’t like
to see a situation like yesterday, where we had a cake in the room but
couldn’t eat it. I think all South Africans would like to take part in the
eating of the cake that we are busy baking for 2010.

So, I am pleased that there is hope that there will be positive outcomes in
the interventions that we have asked for with Fifa. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chair, the problem with
yesterday’s cake is that the candle was too much big for the cake!
[Laughter.]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Madam Chair, I thank the Deputy Minister for his
elaborative and informative answer. However, we would like to know what
control measures are in place to ensure that people who cannot afford
expensive tickets benefit from discounted or cheaper tickets? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Deputy Chair, hon member,
I think we will have to be patient for that announcement to be made. We are
very far away from 2010. We are still in the run-up to that. We have
identified the shortcomings in terms of ticketing and we recognise the
challenges. I think we will have to request the hon member to wait for an
announcement in that regard, for the time being.

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, we have seen in Germany that
millions of people enjoyed watching the World Cup matches on big screens.
But, in South Africa, the rural people are in most cases forgotten, if not
neglected, when big sport events are staged in this country. What I want to
know is: Wouldn’t it be good for us to have big screens in the rural areas
also so that they can also enjoy these big events?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Deputy Chair, hon Masango,
yes, obviously, the more fan parks and big screens we create in the 2009
Confederations Cup and 2010 FIFA World Cup, the better for all of us. We
are certainly going to engage with the local authorities to make sure that
we make it accessible for our people.

I think it is much more conducive to go to a fan park or to a place where
there is a big screen to share in the hype of the event rather than to sit
in your house with a closed door, all by your lonesome self and watch this
wonderful spectacle taking place, all by yourself. So, we took note of that
and we are working on it.

   Financial support by Government in preparing Team S.A. for 2008 Olympic
     Games in Beijing, and regular updating of Sport and Recreation S.A.

362.  Mr L R R Reid (ANC) asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      (1)   In light of the 2008 Olympic Games to be held in Beijing, China,
           what type of (a) financial and (b) other support is the
           Government currently giving to sport federations and the SA
           Sport Confederation and Olympic Committee (Sascoc) in preparing
           Team South Africa to compete and be successful at the games;


      (2)   whether Sport and Recreation South Africa (SRSA) is updated on a
           regular basis on the state of preparedness and readiness of
           athletes who are earmarked by Sascoc to win medals in the
           Olympic Games; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                     N2125E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chair, I would like to say to
the hon Reid that the Department of Sports and Recreation is working very
closely with the SA Sports Confederation Olympic Committee, known as
Sascoc, in the preparation programme for federations and their athletes who
have hope that they will qualify to participate in the Olympics and the
Paralympic Games in Beijing in 2008.

As far as financial assistance is concerned, the department has allocated
R9 million to federations to participate in international events, and this
is part of their preparation for Beijing. In addition to this, the
department has also allocated another R9 million to Sascoc for their
Operation Excellence Programme, which further assists teams and athletes in
their preparation.

Secondly, the department itself has also contracted the services of the
High Performance Centre at the University of Pretoria, and this was done
through a tender process where the athletes and teams are accommodated in
camps, or in residential programmes where they are tested, trained and
where they receive the best medical and scientific support.

The department pays for all the transport, accommodation, meals, and
medical and scientific support as well as any sports technology support
that may be required. For this, we have budgeted R16 million.

In answer to the second part of the question, whilst Sascoc has
programmatic and oversight responsibility for the programme because they
are focusing on the high performance part of sport, the department is
updated on a regular basis on the progress of the teams and their athletes.
Athletes who are part of the programme also have to sign a performance
contract which binds them to certain standards and performance.

Officials of the department also monitor the programme through regular site
visits to the High Performance Centre.

Mr L R R REID: Chairperson, thank you, Deputy Minister, for your response.
We all know that to win an Olympic medal, an athlete must be trained from a
very young age. Therefore I would like to ask the Deputy Minister: Is there
a continuous programme in place to identify and train young athletes to
equip them for Olympic glory?

Secondly, as Sascoc is responsible for preparing Team South Africa, how
regular is the contact between the Department of Sports and Recreation and
Sascoc to monitor the readiness and progress of our athletes? Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Minister, I don’t think Mr
Reid heard me when I spoke earlier on about the one-question two-parts
issue, but please go ahead and answer if you feel that way inclined.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chair, I would like to say to
the hon Reid I am absolutely in agreement and so is the Department of Sport
and Recreation about the fact that we will have to start to get our
athletes into a 4-year, 8-year or even 12-year cycle if necessary. That is
precisely why we did announce earlier on that there would be an athletes’
support programme which will be rolled out by the department. We will make
it possible for our athletes that are now preparing for Beijing to
concentrate fully on their preparation.

As far as Sascoc is concerned, there is quite regular contact between
Sascoc and us. They are in charge of the high performance part of sports,
but as the responsible department and the custodian, we are interacting
with them on quite a regular basis. We attend the president’s council
meeting where we give direction to them. Yes, we have regular meetings with
the management of Sascoc.

Mr S J MASANGO: Chairperson, Deputy Minister, when financing this
federation for the Olympic Games preparation, do you have a monitoring
mechanism to ensure that the money is spent to uplift the performance of
the specific athletes so that, when they perform there, they bring the
medals to South Africa?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chair, yes, as I have answered
hon Masango, we don’t only have the athletes sign a contract relating to
their performance, but the federations who are the recipients of some of
the funds are also obliged to inform us. We interact with them on a regular
basis as they qualify to go to Beijing to make sure, through our monitoring
system and the site visits that we do through our officials and the
department, that they are performing according to standard.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICE OF MOTION

Mr L B LABUSCHAGNE: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I will move:

  That the House calls on the Speaker to institute a practical arrangement
  for the expeditious serving of legal processes on Members of Parliament,
  respecting the integrity of Parliament, the privacy of members, and
  serving the interests of justice.

 LAUNCH OF GLOBAL HUMAN DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH REPORT IN KIRSTENBOSCH GARDENS,
                                  CAPE TOWN


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move without
notice:

  That the House—

  (1) notes that—


        (a) today, 9 November 2006, the United Nations Development Programme
             launches a Global Human Development Research Report in
             Kirstenbosch Gardens, Cape Town;


        (b) this is the first time that a primary launch of the Research
             Report is happening in an African country;

  (2) recalls that—


        (a) this Research Report covers development issues with a focus on a
             particular issue every year and that this year the focus is on
             the global water crisis; and


        (b) the Research Report is entitled Beyond Scarcity, Power, Poverty
             and the Global Water Crisis; and


  (3) commends the decision taken by the United Nations Development
        Programme to have the primary launch of the Research Report in an
        African country.

Agreed to.

     SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) FOR PURPOSES OF SECOND READING DEBATE ON
                    ELECTRICITY REGULATION AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in the name of the Chief Whip on the Order Paper, as
follows:

  That Rule 253(1), which provides, inter alia, that the debate on the
  Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working
  days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended
  for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the
  Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill [B 20B-2006] (National Assembly –
  sec 76) today.

Agreed to.

                        PUBLIC SERVICE AMENDMENT BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I would just like to remind members
that, in terms of the guidelines adopted by this House on 12 September
2006, the member in charge of a Bill will be allocated 15 minutes to make
an introductory speech and to reply to the debate, while other members may
speak for no longer than three minutes each.

There is no speakers’ list for first reading debates. After the
introductory speech, members who wish to participate in the debate must
press the “to talk” button on their desks, and, when recognised by the
presiding officer, may speak from their floor microphones. I now call upon
the Minister for the Public Service and Administration to make an
introductory speech on the Bill.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Chairperson and hon
members, the Bill which is placed before you today for a first reading
provides an opportunity for Parliament to strengthen the organisational and
human resource matters in the Public Service.

Hon members will be aware that we are drafting a more far-reaching piece of
legislation to create a single Public Service covering the three spheres of
government, which will be tabled before Parliament towards the end of next
year, that is 2007. For various reasons, it is necessary to step in with
some urgency to strengthen the current Public Service Act of 1994 while we
undertake the necessary consultation processes on the more far-reaching
Bill.

The changes that are required are based on our experience over the past 12
years arising from the arrangement of some organisational and human
resource matters in the current Public Service Act, both directly and
indirectly, which impede the delivery of services to citizens by national
and provincial departments. These matters include inadequate provision for
the deployment of staff where they are most needed.

Some government functions are provided through national or provincial
departments and are not close to the point of service delivery, and are
without direct accountability and decision-making by the functionaries
tasked with such delivery. On the other hand, some government functions are
provided through entities outside the Public Service, without direct
control and influence by its political head.

The Public Service Act and its prescripts are frequently not complied with,
which results in weak organisational and human resource practices as well
as legal disputes. Employees dismissed from departments for any kind of
misconduct, including misconduct involving corrupt acts, are often
reappointed soon after dismissal.
Employees suspected of transgressions sometimes resign and are appointed in
other departments without disciplinary steps being instituted or continued
for those transgressions. Some provisions in the Act have resulted in legal
disputes while others are obsolete, overly complex or in conflict with
other legislation.

The primary aim, hon members, of the Bill is therefore to improve the
organisational and human resource framework for the Public Service to
address the abovementioned obstacles to service delivery. For this purpose,
the key objectives of the Bill are to improve staff mobility arrangement
for the Public Service through allowing for deploying staff where they are
most needed, but with due consideration of the circumstances of the
affected employees.

It’s also to introduce government agencies as a new institutional form to
be accommodated within the Public Service to enable direct service delivery
through a focused, ring-fenced, separate entity under the direct control of
a Minister, premier or MEC. It is also to enhance compliance with the Act,
through investigation and compulsory discipline of transgressors and
reporting thereon. It further looks at enabling the institution of
disciplinary steps against employees for alleged transgressions at their
former departments.

We are also wanting to introduce anticorruption measures to prohibit the re-
employment of persons in the Public Service dismissed for specific kinds of
misconduct, such as misconduct involving corrupt acts. It is proposed that
the prohibition on re-employment be for a stipulated period and to allow
that different periods may be determined for different kinds of misconduct.

It’s also to address a number of legal difficulties arising from the day-to-
day application of the Act as well as arbitrations and court cases, and to
simplify the Act through streamlining several provisions, removing obsolete
provisions and aligning the Act with other legislation in order to
facilitate its application.

Better staff mobility is proposed by clarifying the transfer and secondment
provisions, and transfer and secondment provisions can take place with the
affected employee’s consent. Provision is also made for transfers and
secondment in the absence of such consent. This, however, requires prior
consultation with affected employees and its aim must be to enhance service
delivery or be otherwise in the public interest. The continued employment
of transferred employees, namely no break in service for the purposes of
pension and other benefits, is also included in the Bill.

A government agency, as a new organisational form, is proposed to function
as a separate institution in the Public Service, with its head as the
accounting officer in terms of the Public Finance Management Act. This
model is based on the public entity proposals by the National Treasury and
the Department of Public Service and Administration. This government agency
model could be introduced separately from other proposals regarding public
entities.

The agency model is suitable for an institution with a unique identity that
has specific measurable functions that can be locally grouped in terms of a
particular service delivery model, for example a large public hospital.
Such an agency may have original statutory functions or assigned or
delegated statutory functions or a combination of these. The assignment of
statutory functions of the executive authority to the head of an agency
with accompanying shifting of accountability is proposed to be subject to
Parliament’s approval.

To improve compliance with the provisions of the Act, the Minister is
enabled to conduct investigations, and if an investigation confirms
noncompliance, the Minister can take remedial steps, including binding
decisions.

Provision is made in the Bill for enhancing greater alignment and co-
ordination, only where desirable, between the conditions of service of the
general Public Service falling under the Public Service Act and certain
sectors, although parts of the Public Service have their own employment
legislation.

To assist with the enforcement of the provisions of the Public Service Act,
executive authorities are compelled to take disciplinary steps against
transgressing heads of department, and heads of department are to take such
steps against transgressing employees. They are also required to report
transgressions to the Minister for the Public Service and Administration
and the director-general of the department, respectively.

The Minister for the Public Service and Administration may also report
transgressing national executive authorities to Cabinet and transgressing
provincial executive authorities through the relevant premier to the
provincial cabinet in question. That Minister must also annually report –
that’s the Minister for the Public Service and Administration –
transgressions to the relevant committees of Parliament and of the
provincial legislatures concerned. That’s of course the Minister of that
department and the MECs.

The Bill also aims to remove current legal difficulties with the head of
department being vested by the Public Service Act with the power to dismiss
an employee on the grounds of misconduct, while the chairperson of the
disciplinary hearing pronounces the sanction in terms of the relevant
collective agreement for non-senior management service employees and the
relevant ministerial determination for senior management service. It is
proposed that all sanctions pronounced by the chairperson must, subject to
the exhaustion of all available internal appeal processes, be implemented
by the head of department.

The abscondment provision for employees was revised to shorten the period
of absence to 10 days, since the current provision of one calendar month is
unduly long, especially if compared to employment practices in other public
institutions as well as the private sector. Employee candidature for
election to the National Assembly or provincial legislature or municipal
council and their appointment as permanent delegates to the National
Council of Provinces are proposed to be regulated in accordance with the
Constitution.

A comprehensive delegation provision enabling the Minister and executive
authority and head of department to delegate their powers or duties in
terms of the Public Service Act is also proposed.

If the Bill is passed by Parliament and signed into law by the President it
would, together with the required new regulations, improve the efficiency
of the organisational and human resource framework for national and
provincial departments by introducing a new service delivery model and
enforcement mechanisms, as well as simplify and clarify the Public Service
Act.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, you have 15 minutes,
but I just want to caution you that you are now going into your reply time.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Thank you. These
measures are designed to enhance governance, accountability and compliance,
which would in turn lead to improved service delivery to the people of
South Africa. Thank you.

Mr K J MINNIE: Chairperson, hon Minister and colleagues, the Public Service
Amendment Bill is the first shot fired by Government to move towards a
single Public Service in 2009. The creation of a single Public Service is
nothing more than an attempt to place the Public Service under central
control, leading to a central bureaucracy.

Government agencies are being introduced as a new institutional form within
the Public Service to enable direct service delivery through a ring-fenced,
separate entity under the direct control of a Minister or other executive
authority. This is the creation of another ANC monstrosity without any
indication of the costs involved.

Alhoewel plaaslike owerheid aanvanklike deel  van  die  beplanning  van  die
enkele staatsdiens was, is dit nie by die huidige wetgewing  ingesluit  nie.
Dit sal egter deel wees van die wet wat  vorentoe  voorgelê  sal  word.  Die
wetsontwerp konsentreer hoofsaaklik  op  die  mobiliteit  van  amptenare  en
bemagtig die Minister en die President om amptenare sonder hulle  instemming
te verplaas. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Although local government was initially part of the planning of the single
public service, it is not included in the existing legislation. It will
however be part of the Act that will be tabled in future. The bill
concentrates mainly on the mobility of officials and empowers the Minister
and the President to transfer officials without their consent.]

Government agencies will be able to enforce political will onto employees,
and should they not be willing to co-operate, they can be transferred at
the whim of the Minister and against their will.

Die DA sê ons moet plaaslike, provinsiale en nasionale owerhede versterk
deur alle beskikbare vaardighede te gebruik en sodoende dienslewering
verbeter. Die wetsontwerp meng in met funksies van ander owerhede en die
regte van individue, en is na my mening ongrondwetlik.

Die vraag ontstaan ten opsigte van sogenaamde  regeringsagentskappe:  waarom
gebruik ons nie die bestaande strukture nie? Waarom versterk ons hulle  nie?
Waarom gebruik ons nie die 40 000 vakatures wat in  die  staatsdiens  is  en
waaronder ek glo ’n klomp vaardige mense  aangestel  kan  word  nie?  Waarom
gebruik ons nie daardie strukture en daardie vakatures om die  probleem  aan
te spreek in plaas daarvan om nuwe strukture  te  vestig  nie?  Ek  dank  u.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The DA  says  that  we  must  strengthen  local,  provincial  and  national
authorities by using all available skills to  consequently  improve  service
delivery. The bill interferes with functions of other  authorities  and  the
rights of the individual, and is unconstitutional in my view.

The question that arises with regard to so called government agencies is:
why do we not use existing structures? Why do we not strengthen them? Why
don’t we use these 40 000 public service vacancies to which many skilled
people can be appointed? Why don’t we use these structures and these
vacancies to address the problem instead of establishing new structures? I
thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): I recognise the hon Roopnarain.

Mr K K KHUMALO: Chairperson, I have been pressing the button all along from
this side, but it appears my mechanism is not working.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Are you the hon Khumalo?

Mr K K KHUMALO: That’s correct, yes.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Sir, I have your name on here, but I
have it after several other names, so I will call on you.

Dr U ROOPNARAIN: Chairperson and hon members, improved service delivery is
one of the highest priorities of any government. In order to be able to
serve the people of South Africa, the Public Service must be adequately
staffed.

At the moment, the vacancy rate is too high and these vacancy rates are the
result of poor personnel management, poor leadership and lack of
appropriate management skills. This is a national shortage that must be
addressed. The Bill is a consequence of weak organisation and human
resource practices. The IFP welcomes the Bill, especially in trying to
provide for greater alignment between conditions of service and the various
departments.

The Bill also attempts to introduce government agencies as well as the
prohibition of the re-employment of those transgressors who have committed
acts of corruption and misconduct. There is no doubt that delivery of
services is intimately related to the efficiency of administration and the
absence of corruption.

Despite the merits of the Bill on paper, the IFP does have a certain
reservation, especially about the manner in which secondments and transfers
take place, namely without employees’ consent. Let me just say that the IFP
opposes the enforced movement of public servants from place to place.

Also, the IFP believes in freedom of choice. Public interest is too
subjective and due process is not an adequate provision. We believe that
due process is too costly, too complex and too cumbersome. This means that
public servants who don’t want to be moved will take packages and the
Public Service will be left with more vacancies.

Also, if transfers are not attached to incentives, the vacancies in the
Public Service will escalate further and service delivery will be further
hampered. In order for the state to deliver on its mandate, it’s imperative
that public servants are given adequate incentives.

The IFP looks forward to deliberations in the portfolio committee. I thank
you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Madam Chair, for a change, the MF has moved up on your list.


Constitutional supremacy in South Africa has instituted a system of
government comprising of three spheres - national, provincial and local
government. This is for ensuring that there is no centralisation of power
and that all sectors remain answerable for effective governance. These
spheres have operated effectively in transforming us into a democracy and
in instituting growth and development for the South African people.
Operating together, yet independently, and in a transparent system, we have
delivered much success, and continue to pursue our intentions to eradicate
poverty, stabilising sustained development for the betterment of an equal
South Africa.
This Bill has the intention of addressing the shortcomings and loopholes in
Public Service and regulates personal matters. The MF, itself, however, is
concerned with possible criticism the Bill may receive in view of
centralisation of power in the Presidency. This is one political objection,
that is, it may allow the majority party powers in our democracy which go
against constitutional values.

We, however, acknowledge the necessity and importance of this Bill in
informing management of matters pertaining to probation, retirement,
abscondment and re-employment. The MF supports the Public Service Amendment
Bill. I thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the amendments to the Public Service Bill
concentrate mainly on improving service delivery. For almost as long as it
has been in existence, our Public Service has generally not been held in
high esteem by the public. Complaints about poor service delivery and
unfriendly, unco-operative and inefficient service have become part and
parcel of the image portrayed by Public Service institutions. The irony of
this situation is that the very words “public service” make it clear that
the aim of such an institution is to provide service to the public.

The ACDP recognises that many government departments, and even the
embattled Home Affairs department, have shown vast improvements in the
manner in which staff deals with the public and with the effectiveness of
daily operational systems.
The Public Service Amendment Bill makes provision for spreading the
delivery of service to where it is most needed. This will in effect bring
government closer to the public, which is a goal that should have been
reached many years ago in our democracy.

The Public Service does not deliver to the public it serves because the
government may not be sufficiently aware of the fact that the public
servant is the government’s first line of contact with the people. It is
through the public servant that the man and woman in the street is
introduced for the first time to the government that he or she has put into
power.

The ACDP is encouraged by the fact that the Bill is primarily structured
around improving service delivery and improving the organisational human
resource framework. Every effort must further be made to ensure that the
transfer of staff from one office or province to another is handled with
sensitivity. The ACDP is in favour of the first reading debate.

Mrs M S MAINE: Chairperson, the introduction of the amending Bill on the
Public Service will certainly bear good fruits when it comes into effect.

This amending Bill will create a conducive environment in many departments
because it will improve governance via direct accountability and decision-
making, as close as possible to point of service delivery. It will also
facilitate service delivery to ensure that a better life for all is
realised.

Frankly, the amendment of the Public Service Bill seeks to address, among
other things, the area that directly or indirectly hampers service
delivery. For example, improving staff mobility arrangements within the
Public Service. The fact that we have three spheres of government doesn’t
mean that our Public Service is fragmented. The Public Service Amendment
Bill will enhance and improve the quality of service to all our people.

Therefore, there will be much greater co-ordination between government
departments. Furthermore, the amendment of the Public Service Bill will
have a positive impact on the intergovernmental framework, as it will allow
different government departments to work closely to ensure that the needs
of our society are addressed accordingly to guarantee that the Batho Pele
principles are taken into consideration.

Finally, the amendment of the Public Service Bill will assure that public
servants redeployed to other departments don’t lose their jobs. In this
way, there will be a greater mobility of staff entering certain departments
with no fear of or perception of losing their jobs, and it will allow
vertical transfer of skills from one sphere of government to the other.

The amendment of the Bill will also assist in addressing the problem of
mismatched skills. Thus, the amendment of the Public Service Bill might
enhance the labour force level. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.]

Mnr I F JULIES: Agb Voorsitter, met die sentralisering van munisipaliteite
om dienslewering te verbeter het die teenoorgestelde plaasgevind.
Dienslewering het drasties verswak. Die DA glo ’n enkele staatsdiens gaan
nie dienslewering verbeter nie. Inteendeel, dit gaan die staatdiens nadelig
raak.

’n Enkele staatsdiens is nie die oplossing vir beter dienslewering nie.  Wat
dienslewering wel sal verbeter is beter koördinering,  beter  opleiding  van
personeel en die skep van ’n kultuur van Batho Pele – die mense  eerste,  en
die samewerking  van  gemeenskappe.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans  paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr I F JULIES: Hon Chairperson, with the centralisation  of  municipalities
to  improve  service  delivery,  the  opposite  occurred.  Service  delivery
weakened drastically. The DA believes that a single public service will  not
improve service delivery; on the contrary it will adversely affect it.

A single public service is not the answer for better service delivery.  What
will improve service delivery will be better coordination,  better  training
of staff and the creation of a culture of Batho Pele  –  the  people  first,
and the cooperation of communities.]

Democracy is a political system in which decision-making power is widely
shared among members of society. A state within which all authority is
concentrated within the central government, and where the other spheres of
government exercise only the authority allowed to them by central
government, is a unitary state and, Minister, a unitary state won’t be able
to deliver services to all our people. I thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chairperson, while we were speaking, a question asked from
that side of the House: Why are we debating it then if it is not a fact? I
think it would be a good idea if there were to be a workshop to explain
first reading debates to those members who don’t understand it. We are
debating exactly this issue today so that we can highlight the introduction
of this Bill so that those people outside who have an interest in it will
actually have the opportunity to become aware of it and to address it.

From the side of the ANC we welcome the introduction of this Bill and the
process of engagement that was laid out here today. The importance of a
strong dedicated Public Service corps cannot be disputed or overemphasized.
Failure by public servants means that we fail to meet expectations or to
provide delivery and address the real needs of our people.
To be a public servant is not just to have a job, it is a vocation that
influences the quality of life of millions of our fellow citizens for the
better. The Batho Pele principle must become an ethos, a way of living for
every single public servant, whether the most junior or the head of the
department. It is in light thereof that we welcome the issues that are
opened up for debate through the introduction of the Bill.

I want to focus specifically on those clauses that will address discipline
within the Public Service. The period for abscondment will be reduced from
a month to ten days. The deemed resignation will exclude the applicability
of disciplinary procedure. In light of the high absence rates amongst
public servants, this suggestion must be welcomed. Absence puts unnecessary
stress on those public servants that are committed and hardworking. It also
negatively impacts on service delivery and has an add-on effect. An hour
lost is one less application that can go through the system. The Bill does,
however, provide that the provision of the reinstatement of such employees
remains. The Bill also introduces prohibition on re-employment in the
Public Service for a prescribed period of employees dismissed for
misconduct, including conduct of a corrupt nature.

Currently, employees who are found guilty of misconduct or of conduct of a
corrupt nature can be re-employed elsewhere in the Public Service. This has
now made such redeployment impossible, before a certain cooling-off period
has passed. In our fight against corruption, this sends out a very strong
message of no tolerance for corruption or misconduct. Many, and I believe
the majority, of the public servants are hardworking people and their own
performance morale and delivery is affected by acts of misconduct and
corruption, even more so when they hear that such a person has now started
working at another department.

The introduction of the Public Service Amendment Bill will also attempt to
clarify and properly address provisions regarding performance of outside
remunerative work. The guiding principle here will be the effect of the
functions of such an employee and the possibility of a conflict of
interest.

We welcome this introduction and we hope that all who will be affected by
this will make use of the processes that were outlined on how to engage in
the Bill. If we do that we will be able to ensure that we pass, in the end,
an Act which provides an environment that is conducive to those who commit
their careers to the Public Service, and that we enhance service delivery
and truly create a better life for all who live in South Africa. I thank
you.

The MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION: Hon Chairperson, I
would want to remind those members who are talking about a single Public
Service, particularly from the DA, that they are in the wrong debate; save
your speeches for when we engage on the single Public Service debate. I see
this is a trial run but you are wasting your time; keep your powder dry.

I would also want to respond to the hon Roopnarain. She spoke about the
improvement of service delivery that is required, that vacancy levels are
too high and that this is a result of poor personnel management. Our
concern is precisely that we want to move away from narrow personnel
management to human resource management. This particular Bill seeks to
ensure compliance with the regulatory environment within the Public Service
and greater accountability for it as well. So look at those particular
clauses.

I would further want to add that the Public Service Act at present enables
transfers in the public interest without the consent of employees. What we
are doing is simply proposing due process. So I don’t think we must look
for ghosts where there are none. We are actually putting in the legal
framework on what is already in practice and what is there in the Public
Service Act, but with some improvement.

I should also say that employee-initiated severance packages need the
employer’s permission before they are granted, and that has been the case
at the moment. That is because we want to avoid a movement out, as with the
voluntary severance packages where we lost people that we actually needed
to retain.

I would like to express my appreciation to those members who reflected a
profound understanding of what we are trying to achieve with this
particular Bill: the fact that this is to take forward our transformation
agenda and it’s to ensure that, in reality, we create a better life for all
by creating the environment that will make that possible, taking into
account our experiences over the past nine years.

Hon members Van Wyk and others, including hon Cupido reflected that deep
understanding, and I think that is the understanding that clearly says that
we need to ensure that the Public Service is so structured that it, as the
state machinery, will reflect the responsiveness to the needs of the
developmental state.

An issue that I should raise further is that the Bill also guarantees that,
where there is the mobility of employees across the different spheres of
government, they will not lose their conditions of service and macro
benefits such as medical aid, access to pension fund, etc, and that should
be taken into account.

I think if there is one point that one could and should make, it is that
centralisation is not anti-democratic, and there is a need for a profound
understanding of that. I think if you look at the various developed
democracies and look at the United Kingdom, there is much greater
centralisation than there is in the South African situation, and if you
want to ensure the decentralisation of a particular function, you need to
ensure that you have a strong centrifugal point because decentralisation,
an impactful and effective decentralisation, is dependent on a strong
centre. So let us not confuse issues.

Hon Julies, we are a unitary state at the moment, so don’t get confused. Go
and read your Constitution and read it from start to end, starting with the
basic values, the preamble, and the founding provisions. Spend some time on
chapter 10. Maybe you will learn something, and keep that for the single
Public Service debate.

I would like to see us working together and running a workshop, preparing
ourselves in a constructive way to deal with this amending Bill. Thank you
very much.

Debate concluded.




                    ELECTRICITY REGULATION AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, hon members, I table
before you one of the key pieces of legislation in the energy sector, the
Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill. This Bill seeks to regulate the
total electricity value chain, namely generation, transmission,
reticulation, distribution and the trading of electricity.

You will recall that when my predecessor, Minister Hendricks, tabled this
Bill in Parliament last year, it became clear that the issues that pertain
to the reticulation of electricity would need to be dealt with in terms of
section 76 of the Constitution. The Bill was therefore withdrawn to allow
the issues that relate to electricity reticulation to be removed, while the
issues that relate to section 75 of the Constitution were being considered
and deliberated upon.

The section 75 process was duly completed, and the Electricity Regulation
Act was signed into law in August this year. Issues pertaining to
electricity reticulation as an area of competence of the local sphere of
government, in terms of the Constitution, were therefore excluded from that
Bill.

Today I’m pleased to table before you a legislative framework that will
provide regulatory certainty to the whole value chain of the electricity
industry, including reticulation services.

The piece of legislation I present to you today is anchored in our energy
policy developed in 1998. The White Paper on Energy Policy was informed by
the realisation of the fact that the apartheid system had bequeathed to us
a legacy of an electricity industry characterised by a chaotic regulatory
regime, poor and fragmented service delivery, and limitation of access to
the privileged minority. As was stated in the said policy, various legal
instruments would be needed to give effect to a number of objectives
outlined in the Energy White Paper.

Subsequent to the promulgation of the Energy White Paper, numerous Cabinet
decisions were taken as part and parcel of the tools to actualise this
policy, with due regard for the dynamic global environment impacting upon
the electricity industry in general.

This piece of legislation is, amongst other things, one of such instruments
designed to weave together the various aspects of the plan to restructure
the electricity industry, as contained in the said Cabinet decisions. In
that regard, the greatest challenge we face is to ensure that our
legislative framework is in line with the prevailing constitutional
framework and provisions of other prevailing subordinate legislation.

This Bill seeks to empower our energy regulator, the National Energy
Regulator of South Africa to efficiently and effectively regulate this
industry, and that would include reticulation. In that context, there is
the power of the regulator to address such concerns as the blackout
pandemic that we see in our major cities. This would include Johannesburg
and, of course, Cape Town; and we have experienced this in the recent past
when we lost one of Eskom’s Koeberg units and other municipal electricity
distributors.
Ironically, when the section 75 issues pertaining to this Bill were being
deliberated upon in the National Assembly last year, one of the Koeberg
units was out of commission. I hope that there won’t be any outage after
we‘ve completed this Bill. No sabotage, hey. [Interjections.] So, are you
making a confession, sir? [Laughter.] The introduction of this Bill will
ensure that stringent levels of quality of supply are imposed, and we would
want the blackouts to be a thing of the past.

Also to be introduced in due course will be the Electricity Distribution
Industry Restructuring Bill, which will complete the suite of laws that are
meant to ensure that the electricity sector is governed in an efficient and
orderly manner.

It is a well-known fact that South Africa has been enjoying the cheapest
electricity prices in the world, at a wholesale level. It is also a fact
that our domestic tariffs in most local government cases do not reflect
these low prices, which, in some cases, result in lower levels of
affordability. If energy is not affordable, then it is not accessible. If
we are to address poverty and facilitate the improvement of the quality of
life of our communities, we have to regulate the electricity industry in a
manner that will achieve these key objectives.

The White Paper on Energy Policy identified a number of weaknesses within
the electricity regulatory regime that need to be addressed. One weakness
is the powers of the Energy Regulator to regulate the industry, and that
would include the municipalities. We are also going to look at harmonising
the legislation with the constitutional framework. For example, the
prevailing electricity regime at that time put the onus on the alleged
perpetrator to prove their innocence rather than presuming innocence until
proven guilty.

A framework for the setting of tariffs by distributors of electricity,
including municipalities, will also look at key performance indicators for
municipalities in relation to electricity reticulation services. Lastly, we
will look at the relationship between municipalities as services
authorities, as well as service providers that provide reticulation
services on behalf of the municipality.

To address the above gaps in the electricity legislation, I would like to
put the intention and rationale of this Bill in context. It is common cause
that the challenges in the electricity sector are both regulatory and
structural. This Bill seeks to strengthen the regulatory regime
irrespective of the structure of the industry. However, to ensure effective
regulation, the Electricity Distribution Industry Restructuring Bill seeks
to address the structural issues through consolidation of the industry.

The divergent views of the public hearings were an indication of the
complexity of the matters this Bill seeks to address. To this end, I am
happy to inform this House that we have considered all the views that were
tabled and we are now ready to present to you a Bill that seeks to regulate
the electricity industry while recognising the constitutional mandate of
the municipality. Indeed, it was a very tough exercise.

Hon members, I would like to take you through the issues that, I believe,
are critical to this Bill. The first is the need for us to clarify the role
between the Minister and the regulator so that there is no confusion in
this area. In terms of the governance framework, the Minister will remain
the custodian of government policy and its monitoring. The Minister will
also draft regulations. After all, anything related to policy is an
executive function.

The regulator will be responsible for those administrative functions that
will include overseeing adherence to regulations. It will also be
responsible for the execution of such regulations, and the drafting of
rules and procedures pursuant to such regulations. In addition, the
regulator will draft directives as provided for under the regulations.

The local government legislation regime already defines the authority-
service provider relationship. It is the intention of the Bill to leverage
this definition and enhance it in the context of the provision and
regulation of the electricity service. The definition of the service
provider has been refined in a manner that will ensure appropriate
regulation by Nersa.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, your time has expired.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, hon Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr E N MTHETHWA: Chairperson, comrade Minister, and members, the first
point we want to make about this Bill is that this is one of those pieces
of legislation in the broad transformation project of our society. It
becomes important, therefore, that we start by quoting what was said at the
ANC’s 51st National Conference in 2002:

   The process of rationalising electricity distribution should continue,
   ensuring viable and affordable electricity supply to all regions, as well
   as the progressive achievement of universal and affordable access, on the
   foundation of a minimum free basic electricity service to all households.

This resolution is informed by the status quo in the industry structure
that is fragmented. If I can give an example: Of our 284 municipalities,
180 of them supply electricity, whereas in the rest of them, the
electricity is supplied by Eskom. There is uncertainty in the industry
regarding electricity provision, partly owing to little or no maintenance,
resulting in the failure of the infrastructure.

Members would know that when we started to implement the RDP, as from 1994,
and because we were chasing a particular target, the infrastructure
collapsed due to too much pressure. Some municipalities experienced an
internal lack of capacity to deliver and maintain services such as
electricity provision.

The Bill seeks to regulate the remaining aspects in the electricity value
chain, as comrade Minister has said, but with specific reference to
reticulation, which so far has not been regulated. As you know, in this
country we have more than 2 000 different tariffs. We need to provide a
framework for certain tariffs. We need to harmonise the relationship
between municipalities - in this case the authorities - and service
providers.

But, members, we have traversed a path – a path of public hearings - which
started on a highly divergent basis. As it continued, we were able to
harmonise views by, and most specifically, leaving out the definition of
reticulation, as contained in schedule 4 of the Constitution. As we have
said earlier on, the division between the service authority and the service
provider is very important, so that we can regulate the latter.

It is our view, members, that this piece of legislation places a firm basis
for the overhaul of the industry to be in line with the transformation
agenda undertaken in the new dispensation.

We also support the Cabinet’s intention to introduce the electricity
distribution industry restructuring Bill soon, in order to essentially
introduce the REDs and complete the transformation process in this sector.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Chair, the economic regulation of a particular
sector should, as an important objective, promote low electricity tariffs.
Currently, a myriad of domestic tariffs are determined outside the current
regulatory framework that is applicable to the generation and transmission
of electricity. This leads to consumers, and in particular the domestic
users, suffering from high tariffs set by municipalities in order to ensure
maximum revenue and to be able to subsidise other services which local
government is compelled to deliver.

The most important feature of this Bill is to provide regulatory clarity in
respect of the role of municipalities, in conjunction with the envisaged
REDs. What is important to note is that municipalities will not be
compelled to enter into service delivery agreements with the REDs, but will
have the opportunity to provide for the reticulation and distribution of
electricity themselves.

The original Bill has, subsequent to public hearings being held, been
amended substantially. The administration of the Bill, the setting of norms
and standards, and the prescription of general key performance indicators
for the reticulation and distribution of electricity will be executed by
the National Energy Regulator, acting in consultation with the Minister of
Minerals and Energy, and not by the Minister acting in consultation with
the NER, as was previously the case.

The executive authority for the reticulation and/or distribution of
electricity continues to be vested in local government, with the additional
requirement that those municipalities wishing to undertake the reticulation
and/or distribution of electricity themselves, as well as those wishing to
conclude service delivery agreements with REDs to exercise the reticulation
of electricity on their behalf, will have to be licensed by the NER to
ensure that minimum standards in the provisioning of electricity are to be
maintained. The executive authority of local government – as provided for
in terms of schedules 4B and 5B of the Constitution – regarding electricity
reticulation vests, of course, in local government.

It is argued that, in order to enable a municipality to perform its
constitutional obligation of rendering its services to a community in a
sustainable manner, service providers such as REDs and municipalities
should be licensed. The purpose thereof would be to ensure that the NER can
effect uniformity in the provisioning of electricity through national norms
and standards. A nondiscriminatory licensing regime, regulated by – very
importantly – an independent authority, namely the NER, is envisaged.

The fact that the department proposes to regulate a service provider by
requiring it to be in possession of a valid licence does, arguably, not
infringe the constitutional function of the municipality to render
electricity reticulation. Municipalities and entities will only have to
apply for a licence in so far as they themselves elect to provide for the
provisioning of electricity to consumers. They do not have to apply for a
licence in respect of other services that they provide and will not have to
do so if they conclude a service delivery agreement with service providers.
This also does not prevent the municipality from performing that same
function. It merely stipulates that the party employed by the municipality
to assist it in rendering that function must be a licensed party.

On the question of surcharges to be levied by municipalities, it is
important to note that such surcharges are not prohibited by this Bill.
What is intended is that municipalities “ring fence” the reticulation and
distribution of the electricity function, to ensure that a sustainable and
viable service will be rendered by the municipalities and/or service
providers. This is to ensure that municipalities do not use the revenue
intended for maintenance and the replacement of ageing electricity
infrastructure for other services.

In terms of section 26 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, the
Bill authorises a municipality to render its services by way of being a
licensed service provider registered or recognised in terms of national
legislation. In light of the above, the DA supports the Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H J BEKKER: Madam Chair, this Bill has gone through a rough ride. It was
even rejected by the different organisations at the hearings, including the
portfolio committee. There were a number of points on which we disagreed;
however, we are happy that they have been amended accordingly by the
department.

Among the definitions, the word “reticulation” caused quite a debate and
was open to many interpretations. We are pleased to note that the
department has clarified what was meant by “reticulation”, that is,
“trading with or distribution of electricity by a municipality in the
community within its area of jurisdiction and includes services associated
therewith”.

We were also concerned about municipalities being reduced to reticulating
only to customers requiring between 11KV and 22KVs. This was going to be a
serious setback because it would deprive the municipalities of light
industrial or commercial customers.
Another concern was that the municipalities would have to keep separate
financial statements of the reticulation businesses. However, it was
pointed out that ring-fencing was for proper financial reporting and
preparing the process towards the introduction of the regional electricity
distributors, or REDs. Our argument was that some municipalities did not
have dedicated staff for water and electricity, and therefore there would
always be an overlap of services.

We sincerely hope that the amendments will help to reduce the price of
electricity. We need even cheaper electricity in this country to be
absolutely competitive, although ours is one of the lowest electricity
rates in the world. It can help our industry tremendously if we can even
improve on this. We also need to ensure that the municipalities have proper
skilled people to deliver electricity of high quality.

Finally, we have also been concerned about the constitutionality of the
amendment, but we believe that the amendments, in their current form, will
be acceptable and that this will address the problem. The IFP supports the
amendments before us. I thank you.

Ms M D SEADIMO: Chairperson, hon members and the Minister of Minerals and
Energy, the Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill should be understood
within the context of the broader transformation of the electricity
distribution industry.
This Bill flows from the Electricity Regulation Act passed by the House at
the beginning of the year. The main object of this Bill is to insert a new
chapter into the Act dealing with the reticulation of electricity by
municipalities. This legislative development seeks to provide a framework
for the setting of tariffs by municipalities. It also empowers the Minister
to prescribe key performance indicators for municipalities in relation to
reticulation services.

Se se raya gore bagaetsho, gantsi re fitlhela e le gore boMmasepala ba rona
ba duedisa batho lekgetho le le farologaneng mo kgaolong e le nngwe go na
le makgetho a le mantsi tse di duedisiwang batho. Jannonong Molaotlhomo o,
o tla dira gore Tona e netefatse gore go nne le makgetho a a lekalekanang
mo Aforika Borwa yotlhe. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ladies and gentlemen, this implies that most of our municipalities charge
people residing in the same area different levies, which results in some
people paying more levies. Now this Bill shall ensure that the Minister
sees to it that there are equal levies for everyone in South Africa.]

The Bill makes provision regarding the relationship between municipalities
and service providers who provide reticulation services on their behalf. It
also provides for service delivery agreements entered into by a
municipality with an external service provider.
Furthermore, it allows the Minister to make regulations relating to
standard provisions included in the service delivery agreements. The Bill
also allows the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, in consultation
with the Minister, to prescribe general key performance indicators in
respect of the technical operational issues pertaining to the reticulation
system for municipalities.

In order to ensure that a quality service is rendered, the Bill caters for
norms and standards relating to quality of supply, and it is compulsory for
them to be included in service delivery agreements.

This Bill empowers the Minister to make regulations regarding types of
energy sources from which electricity must be generated and percentages of
electricity that must be generated from different energy sources.

The Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill serves as a springboard for the
realisation of the RDP pronouncement of electricity for all. This
legislative development seeks to integrate the regulation of the
electricity distribution industry and to do away with different tariffs.
This will benefit the poorest of our country immensely.

Central to the essence of this Bill is efficiency and improved quality of
service provision. As the ANC-led government, we are committed to ensuring
that the masses of our people become beneficiaries of equal services. This
Bill sets a clear path for us to achieve our transformation agenda in the
electricity industry. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms S-C Botha): Thank you, hon Seadimo. I believe
that was your maiden speech. I would never have guessed! [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes the fact that the Electricity
Regulation Amendment Bill will put in place a solid foundation from which
the six regional electricity distributors will function. Regarding the
national regulation initiatives, it is our belief that the regulation by
the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, will ensure that
municipalities consistently act in the interest of consumers; and that the
quality of electricity and the reliability of electricity provision is in
accordance with the highest standards.

Strengthening of the regulatory framework means that standardised service
levels agreements will form the basis of operations of municipalities. It
will further be possible for municipalities to add a surcharge to the
electricity tariffs. All these factors contribute towards the establishment
of regulated municipalities that can simultaneously generate revenue and
deliver better services.

The ACDP supports the amendments of the Electricity Regulation Amendment
Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, for those South Africans who are the major
victims of poverty, the commitment by government that by 2008 all
households will have clean running water; that by 2010 they will have
decent and safe sanitation; and that by 2012 there will be electricity for
all, brings hope but is yet a long wait.

The MF notes the united effort by all sectors. There is a need to press on
towards the realisation of the potential of local government to speed up
delivery. We find that the reticulation of electricity by municipalities is
a great means to stimulate and increase income for municipal services.

However, we have noted that the Bill fails to provide for skills
development and education of personnel that shall operate these facilities
at municipal levels. We also express our concern regarding the management
of payment of rates and tax. We do believe that this should be transferred
to an ad hoc section that could deal with late payment areas and payments
in general ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Rajbally, your time has expired.

Ms S RAJBALLY: The MF supports the Bill. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Mr M H MATLALA: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Chairperson, hon members, it is imperative for the House to locate the
Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill within the broader context of the
transformation of electricity industry, in particular the electricity
distribution industry.

The Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill serves as a propeller to the
realisation of an integrated electricity industry. This legislative
development seeks to provide uniformity as it integrates tariffs setting
through the national framework of the norms and standards. This piece of
legislation effects changes that will go a long way in protecting the
masses of our people from unequal tariffs. Interestingly so, we have
approximately 2 000 tariffs that are in existence. Others are called inner-
city tariffs and others are called outer city tariffs. Unfortunately, our
people are subjected to whatever tariffs the municipalities deem
appropriate. The Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill seeks to do away
with this scenario.

Consistent with the RDP’s pronouncements of electricity for all our people,
this Bill gives practical expressions to our ANC-led government’s policy of
free basic electricity for the poorest of the poor of our people. This
indicates our consciousness and concern regarding the conditions that our
people are subjected to.

Central to the essence of the Bill is to ensure affordability of
electricity for the masses of our people and improved quality of service
provision. The ANC-led government believes that our people should be
beneficiaries of quality and efficient service. The Bill lays the
regulatory basis of a rational electricity distributor. The regulatory
provisions in this Bill are at the heart of the existence of the REDs and
charting the way forward for the electricity distribution industry.

Furthermore, in order to ensure that there is no confusion on roles, the
Bill clarifies the roles of both the REDs and municipalities. The
Electricity Regulation Amendment Bill is a crucial piece of legislation in
effecting transformation in the electricity distribution industry. We
believe that it will benefit the masses of our people a great deal. I thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Chairperson, I think I must take this
opportunity to thank heartily the portfolio committee, led by a very
capable young man, Comrade Mthethwa. Thank you for the overwhelming
support. [Applause.] It is so refreshing to listen to South Africans
speaking in one voice on such a matter that would impact positively on the
lives of our people.

I will just quickly speak to the benefits of this Bill. Adequate and
improved quality of supply of electricity is what we want to achieve. We
also want to ensure that we provide free basic electricity reticulation
services to the poor as part of our poverty alleviation intervention. We
want to ensure universal access to modern form of energy for all South
Africans.

Regarding the issues that the hon member of the MF raised in relation to
the skills development, that is a very important matter and we can
accommodate it on the regulations. But, concerning the issue of rates, I
think that that is a function of the services authorities. We cannot
interfere in that matter.

Thank you very much, colleagues. We will still rely on you to monitor this,
going forward. We might have to improve here and there but thank you very
much for the support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read the second time.

The House adjourned at 17:21.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran regarding Mutual
        Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Islamic
        Republic of Iran regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.


    (c)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo regarding
        Mutual Assistance between their Customs Administrations, tabled in
        terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Democratic
        Republic of Congo regarding Mutual Assistance between their Customs
        Administrations.


2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
        Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2005-2006, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General for 2005-2006.


    (b)     Government Notice No R.873 published in Government Gazette No
        29186 dated 1 September 2006: International Trade Administration
        Commission of South Africa: Import restrictions on textiles and
        clothing originating from the People’s Republic of China, in terms
        of the International Trade Administration Act, 2002 (Act No 71 of
        2002)


    (c)     Government Notice No R.949 published in Government Gazette No
        29245 dated 21 September 2006: Prescribed Time Frame for Free Credit
        Records, and Determination of Application and Registration Fees, in
        terms of the national Credit Act, 2005 (Act No 34 of 2005).


    (d)     Government Notice No 928 published in Government Gazette No
        29233 dated 22 September 2006: Incorporation of an external company
        as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Star Gaze Limited, in
        terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of 1973).


    (e)     Government Notice No 960 published in Government Gazette No
        29256 dated 29 September 2006: Incorporation of an external company
        as a company in the Republic of South Africa: Portfolio Deal
        Services Limited, in terms of the Companies Act, 1973 (Act No 61 of
        1973).


    (f)     Government Notice No 995 published in Government Gazette No
        29277 dated 13 October 2006: Standards Matters, in terms of the
        Standards Act, 1993 (Act No 29 of 1993).


3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    (a)     Request for approval by the National Assembly of the exclusion
        of Portion 1 of the farm Mozib 279, the farm Droogte Veldt 292 and
        Portion 1 of the farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National Park in
        terms of section 21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management:
        Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


    (b)     Explanatory memorandum on the proposed exclusion of Portion 1 of
        the farm Mozib 279, the farm Drooge Veldt 292 and Portion 1 of the
        farm Than 280 from the Vaalbos National Park in terms of section
        21(1)(a) of the National Environmental Management: Protected Areas
        Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the withholding of remuneration, Magistrate M Matereke,
    in terms of Section 13 (4 A) (a), dated 8 November 2006:


       The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
       having considered the report on the withholding of remuneration of Mr
       Matereke, tabled by the Acting Minister for Justice and
       Constitutional Development on the 12 October 2006 in terms of section
       13(4A)(a) of the Magistrates Act, 1993, reports as follows:
       The Committee recommends that the House approves the suspension of
       the salary of Mr Matereke as recommended in the report tabled by the
       Acting Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Annual
    Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Correctional
    Services for 2005/06, dated 07 November 2006.
    The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services, having considered the
    Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Correctional
    Services for 2005/06, reports as follows:


A.    Introduction

    The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services has scrutinised the
    Annual Report of the Department of Correctional Services for 2005/06,
    including the Report of the Auditor General.

    The Portfolio Committee held the following meetings to discuss the
    2005/06 Annual Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
    Correctional Services (DCS):


      •  Deliberations with National Treasury on Legislative Oversight
        through Annual Reports of Departments as well as Research Analysis
        of the 2005/6 Annual Report of the DCS.
      • Formal deliberations and assessment on the Audit Report of the
        Auditor General on the 2005/6 Annual Report of the DCS; Financial
        performance andexpenditure of the DCS for 2005/6.
      • Hearings with the Department of Correctional Services on the 2005/6
        Annual Report of the DCS.
B.    Findings and key issues of Concern:

    The Portfolio Committee noted the following key issues:

    1.      Deliberations with National Treasury on Legislative Oversight
        through Annual Reports of Departments.


         • The role of Portfolio Committees was clearly indicated in this
           guideline and it was emphasised that it is the duty of the
           Committee to question the DCS on any irregularities that comes
           to the Committees attention.
         • The Committee agreed that the interaction with the National
           Treasury was empowering, but wanted to know whether the
           Executive is aware of the guidelines by Treasury on how to
           analyse Annual Reports of Departments, as it appears that the
           Department is not aware of this.

    2.      Research Analysis of the 2005/6 Annual Report of the DCS.


         • The Research Analysis identified many shortcomings in the
           structure of the Annual Report. It does not report on all the
           targets as set out in the Strategic Plan and in many cases it
           was unclear as to whether the targets had been met or not.


               • Programme 1: Administration:


           The DCS has developed an Integrated Human Resource Strategy to
           address recruitment, retention of scarce skills and the quality
           of performance management and development systems.
           Equity and Recruitment: It is unclear as to what the targets are
           for gender and racial equity in the DCS.
           Vacancies: The overall vacancy rate for the Department for
           2005/06 was 7.8%. This is an increase from the previous year
           where the vacancy rate was 7.3%. The DCS thus did not meet their
           target to decrease the vacancy rate.
           Performance rewards and promotions: An interim promotion model
           was developed, negotiated and implemented. The target for
           2005/06 was to finalise the career pathing models (i.e. the
           promotion model). It seems as if this target was not met, as the
           promotion model is an interim one.
           Skills and training: The DCS has embarked on a skills audit to
           identify existing skills and skills required.
           Disciplinary and corruption cases: 68% of the 359 corruption and
           fraud related cases registered for 2005/6 were finalised. The
           DCS is implementing the anti-corruption strategy in partnership
           with the Special Investigation Unit (SIU) and the Directorate of
           Special Operations (DSO).
           Vetting of officials: 50% of all officials should have been
           vetted, but only the officials from the Gauteng region were
           vetted. The DCS states that vetting is slow as the DCS is
           reliant on National Intelligence Agency (NIA).
           Financial Management: The fact that DCS has received a qualified
           audit opinion from the Auditor General for the past 5 years
           makes it clear that there are financial management problems in
           the Department.
           Review of policies: The DCS is in the process of reviewing
           policies and procedures to bring them in line with the White
           Paper.


               • Programme 2: Security:


           Unnatural Deaths and assaults: Both the number of unnatural
           deaths in prison and the number of assaults decreased in 2005/06
           in comparison with the previous year.
           Escapes: The number of escapes decreased substantially from 171
           in 2004/05 to 112 in 2005/6, however escapes have become
           increasingly violent. The decrease in escapes is attributed to
           the installation of new security equipment, training of
           officials and the development of a strategy to deal with
           escapes.
           Security Plan: The Security Management Policy and Minimum
           Security Standards for Correctional Services were approved
           during 2005/06.
           Security Infrastructure: Access control equipment was installed
           in 66 Correctional Centres at a cost of R88 million.


         • Programme 3: Corrections:


           Centres of Excellence (CoE): The 36 Centres of Excellence (6 in
           all 6 regions) were launched in 2005/06. A project manager has
           been appointed to ensure optimum performance of the C of E.
           Unit Management: The Report does not state whether the DCS has
           completed and approved a national resource provisioning plan
           with regard to identifying the necessary resources required to
           implement unit management at the various centres.
           Risk assessment, profiling and sentence plans: The 2005/06
           Report states that the target of using the risk assessment and
           offender profile tool for 23% of offenders was not met, but it
           does state that the tools were developed during2005/06 (in draft
           form).
           Offender Rehabilitation Path: The Offender Rehabilitation Path
           (ORP) was developed which outlines a process to be followed from
           admission to release, including reintegration into the
           community, in line with the White Paper on Corrections.
           Overcrowding: In March 2006, the total inmate population was 150
           302 in comparison with 180 335 in April 2005. However, the
           approved offender capacity was only 114 796 and thus there was
           still a 76.6% rate of overpopulation.

         • Programme 4: Care:


           Social work, psychological and spiritual sessions for inmates:
           The DCS reached its targets in terms psychological sessions and
           spiritual care sessions, whilst the number of social work
           sessions dropped.
           Pharmacies: 18 community service pharmacists were allocated to
           DCS in 2005/06. The Department of Health facilitated
           registration, listing and licensing of DCS pharmacies to ensure
           compliance with the new pharmacy legislation.
           HIV/AIDS: The target for training of 420 inmates as master
           trainers and peer educators for HIV/AIDS awareness was surpassed
           and 1 254 inmates were trained. The targets for training
           correctional officials including health care workers of 1 160
           trained officials were not met and only 355 officials were
           trained


         • Programme 5: Development:
           Implementation of new policies and procedures: Development
           policies and procedures were to be implemented at 50% of all
           management areas prioritising the C of E. The procedures have
           been developed but not implemented.
           Education: According to the Report, the target for the number of
           inmates participating in formal education programmes was not met
           due to the special remissions
           Skills Development: According to the Report, the reason why only
           8 502 offenders (in comparison with a target of 21 000)
           participated in skills development programmes in 2005 was due to
           the late receipt of funds fromthe Department of Labour. In
           2004/05, 15 004 offenders participated in these programmes.
           Work opportunities: Only 3 400 internal work opportunities were
           provided to inmates in comparison to a target of 32 700.


         • Programme 6: Social Reintegration:


           Community Corrections: The Report states that the target of
           reducing the number of probationers and parolees per supervisory
           officer to 30 was not achieved. In addition, only 10.3% of
           absconders were traced in comparison with a target of more than
           36%.
           Correctional Supervision and Parole Boards: The DCS developed
           Directives involving Complainants Involvement in Correctional
           Supervision and Parole Boards (CSPB). The DCS also developed a
           Service Charter and Minimum Standards for Victims. The Boards
           did not reach the target of placement of 55% of cases before it
           under correctional supervision. The Report attributes this to
           longer sentencing patterns. The chairpersons and vice
           chairpersons of the 52 boards nationwide were inaugurated in
           2005/06.


         • Programme 7: Facilities:


           New Prisons: According to the Strategic Plan, 4 new prisons
           should be completed by 2006/7, but this target will not be
           reached, because of major setbacks during 2005/6. The Annual
           Report does not report back on the target in terms of the second
           group of 4 prisons, which referred to the completion of a
           feasibility study.
           Maintenance: Only 15% of prisons were audited with regard to
           minimum standards and norms during 2005/6 compared to the target
           of 25% that were to be audited.
           Own Resources: Own Resources refers to the involvement of
           offenders in maintenance work in prison. The DCS planned to
           approve a policy in this regard during 2005/06 and establish
           capacity building for the implementation of this policy.

    3.      Formal deliberations on the 2005/6 Audit Report of Auditor-
        General and the financial performance and expenditure trends of the
        DCS.

        In a meeting with the Office of the Auditor -General (AG) and
        National Treasury:
        Directorate: Correctional Services, the following key issues were
        highlighted:

     1. Key issues of concern raised by the Auditor -General:


         • The DCS attributes its problems with internal control on its
           information system (computer systems and programmes) and says
           that it can only address these problems once the systems have
           been attended to.
         • However in the opinion of the AG’s office, the problem is not
           with the information system. The problem lies with the fact
           that, while DCS has a Compliance Management Policy, this policy
           is poorly monitored and there are poor controls at the lower
           levels, (i.e. in prisons, areas, and regions) where incorrect
           information is fed to Head Office. In the opinion of the AG, if
           lower level supervision was properly performed (i.e. the
           information was monitored by supervisors at all these levels),
           then the information could be more verifiable. The problem lies
           with monitoring and DCS needs to ensure compliance before
           reports are sent to Head Office.
         • The AG’s office has stated that there are at least 3
           Qualifications in this report which can be resolved by the end
           of 2006 to ensure that they do not result in Qualifications in
           the next audit.
         • The monitoring and review processes at institutional, area and
           regional level is the main problem facing DCS, which leads to
           poor audit performance.
         • According to the AG, while Regional Commissioners try to attend
           Audit Committee meetings, the Accounting Officer must attend
           these meetings as well as the Chief Deputy Commissioners.
         • The lack of financial skills in DCS was identified as a problem.
         • Public Private Partnerships Prisons (APOPS): The AG’s office is
           adamant that the APOPS lease should be identified as finance and
           not an operating lease and this opinion has been substantiated
           by 2 other independent auditors.
         • According to Treasury, it might be because DCS has an incorrect
           understating of the powers of accounting officers to sign a
           finance lease (they may in fact sign a finance lease for a PPP).
         • Public Private Partnerships Prisons (APOPS): The DCS told the AG
           that they will set up a meeting with Treasury and the AG to
           resolve the disagreement over the operating versus finance lease
           issue. To date (10 months into the new financial year), they
           have not done so. In the opinion of the AG, these matters should
           have been resolved in 2005 and should not have resulted in a
           qualification.
         • Asset Management: The AG raised the concern that problems with
           Asset Management began as a Matter of Emphasis as early as
           2002/03 and turned into a Qualification in 2005/06, because the
           problem was not seriously addressed by DCS during the interim
           period.
         • The AG’s office believes that the problems with asset management
           can be addressed before the integrated system comes on line, by
           DCS being aware of the information that is required and then
           putting in place processes to address this.
         • According to the AG, the Provisioning Administration System
           (PAS) can reconcile differences between Basic Accounting System
           (BAS) and the Web Asset Tool (WAT). This is not done at regular
           intervals at area and regional level. The AG is of the opinion
           that this is achievable.
         • Medkor: The problem identified with Medkor relating to amounts
           paid on face value was identified last year and not rectified.
           This year, the problem is compounded by the fact that the DCS
           cannot identify who its current and continuation members are. In
           the opinion of the AG, this problem with the database of current
           and continuation members is easy to rectify and should have been
           sorted out by DCS before the end of the 2005/06 audit as it just
           needs commitment and manpower. In the opinion of the AG, this
           should not have escalated to a Qualification.
         • Medkor: The AG’s office asked for the involvement of the
           internal audit committee to resolve the problem with the medical
           aids specifically the checking of the database, but DCS stated
           that they did not have enough staff to do this.
         • Medkor: The AG’s office says the problem with the medical aid
           database may have arisen because DCS does not have contracts
           with the medical aids.
         • Employee benefits and Leave: The AG stated that lack of skills
           and capacity in the Human Resources division is a serious
           problem. The AG also said that they have informed the DCS that
           this Emphasis of Matter will escalate to a Qualification if they
           do not take urgent steps to address the problem.
         • Supply chain management: The AGs office has stated that the
           response of DCS to the concerns that it raised over contracts
           and the level of sign off were ‘wishy washy’ and that there was
           little detail in the response. The Special Investigation Unit is
           addressing some of these concerns.


        3.2 Key issues of concern raised by National Treasury

         • Treasury has noted with concern the fact that the DCS has stated
           that it has problems dealing with National Treasury and that
           Treasury has been unhelpful. It also notes as inaccurate, the
           statement in the Report that Treasury turned down enhancements
           to the asset management system. In fact, the decision not to
           authorise enhancements in this regard was a Cabinet and not a
           Treasury decision.
         • Treasury has noted that the DCS spending during the 2005/06
           financial year is erratic.
         • It was also noted that the end of the financial year expenditure
           (March 2006) is very high (18.2% of the total budget) as
           compared to other months.
         • According to Treasury more appointments of administrative and
           other support staff under the Public Service Act could result in
           about R40 million savings each year on pensions alone
         • There was a huge downward trend in expenditure on training in
           2005/06, considering the problems with skills in the DCS. The
           Head Office and Free State/Northern Cape region were the only 2
           areas where the expenditure on training increased and all other
           areas experienced a decrease in expenditure.


    4.      Hearings with the DCS on the 2005/6 Annual Report and Financial
        Statements of the DCS.
        The following are key areas of concern raised by the Committee on
        the Annual report and the responses of the Department.

        4.1 Auditor-General Report

         • The DCS received a qualified audit opinion by the Auditor-
           General for the 5th year in a row and the most audit
           qualifications in government for this financial year.
           The Department of Correctional Services (DCS), Treasury and the
           AG’s office agreed that the key problem is that there are poor
           monitoring systems in place at prison, area, and regional level
           to ensure that the information that is fed upwards to Head
           Office is correct. DCS explained that because of the legacy of
           problems inherited in DCS it has been difficult to deal with the
           resultant problems, while at the same time ensuring that the
           Department continues to function in its daily duties. DCS
           provided input at the meeting with the Portfolio Committee on
           ways in which it is improving its monitoring and reviewing
           processes as well as the financial management training of its
           employees.

        4.2 Key areas of concern in the AG’s report and the response of DCS
           included:


         • APOPS: APOPS was indicated as an operating lease and not a
           financial lease in the Annual Report. The DCS has now agreed
           with the AG that the R195 million is a financial lease and this
           will be indicated in the next Annual report. .
         • Staff debt: Debtors records – the DCS will review these records
           in order to have debt written off for deceased members and will
           also look at how other departments deal with the issue of
           recovering debt and may use an external agency to assist in
           addressing this problem.
         • Asset Management: DCS wants to implement the system used by the
           Department of Justice and will speak to Treasury about this in
           order to reconcile its records.
         • Medical expenditure: A Project Manager will be appointed to
           monitor medical expenditure. The DCS is trying to address
           problems in the database without relying on the database from
           the administrator. The DCS has embarked on a process called
           Integrated Corporate System and places regular advertisements in
           newspapers calling on continuation members to register.
         • Housing loan guarantees: An Action plan has been drawn up and
           the DCS will look at improving capacity in the Human Resources
           section.
         • Audit Committee meetings: The DCS stated that it is not always
           possible for the Accounting Officer to attend these meetings,
           but the Chief Deputy Commissioners do attend these meetings
           where possible.

        4.3 Performance

       The Committee has raised a number of key concerns, especially with
       regard to the number of performance targets not met for 2005/06.
       These include:
         • Vetting of correctional officials: 50% of officials in high risk
           centres should have been vetted last year and were only vetted
           in Gauteng.
         • The DCS mentioned that the National Intelligence Agency does
           vetting of officials and that this is a partnership between two
           Departments.
         • The Annual Report does not make mention of the Awaiting Trial
           detainee (ATD) children population and whether this is
           decreasing.
         • The DCS stated that there is an Interdepartmental Committee
           dealing with ATD’s and ATD children. The DCS provides weekly
           statistics to the Department of Social Development with regard
           to children that were arrested and need to be moved to Secure
           Care Facilities.
         • A number of critical posts have very high vacancy rates and the
           number of personnel in some of these posts is actually
           decreasing rather than increasing. An increase in the vacancy
           rate from 7.3% in 2004/05 to 7.8% in 2005/06 was noted.
         • These include:
                 o Financial and related professionals.
                 o Doctors.
                 o Pharmacists
                 o Nurses.
                 o Psychologists.
                 o Social workers.


           The DCS stated that it does have a Recruitment and Retention
           strategy in place, but mentioned that they do not only compete
           with other departments, but also with other countries.
         • The Committee was concerned that there is little progress with
           regard to the building of prisons and mentioned that
           overcrowding is worsening the pressure on existing facilities.
           The DCS indicated that time frames will be established on the
           basis of the feasibility studies.
         • The Committee was concerned about the performance bonuses paid
           out to the Accounting Officer and senior managers. The Committee
           wanted to ascertain how much in rand value is paid to the
           Accounting Officer in terms of Performance bonus and the
           Committee is of the opinion that if a Department does not
           perform, no Performance bonuses should be paid out.
           The DCS stated that severe action will be taken against staff
           who are not performing after interventions has been put in place
           and that it is busy addressing under performance in the DCS. The
           DCS stated that it is important to reward staff for excellent
           performance.
         • The Committee was very concerned about the equity plan of the
           DCS and requested statistics with regard to racial and gender
           breakdown of new recruits during 2005/6.
         • The Committee was concerned that the DCS purchased vehicles to
           the amount of R 94 million during March 2006, just before the
           end of the financial year.
           The DCS stated that it decided to use its savings in other areas
           and identified the need for smaller vehicles such as combis to
           transport offenders. This was done throughout the whole
           financial year and the vehicles were delivered during
         • The risk assessment and profiling tool was reported as developed
           in 2004/05 but not implemented as per target in 2005/06.
         • HIV/AIDS training for correctional officials did not meet the
           target of training of 1 160 officials (including health
           professionals). Only 355 officials were trained.
C.    Recommendations

Having considered the 2005/6 Annual Report and Financial Statements of the
DCS, the Portfolio Committee makes the following recommendations:

Auditor General Report

The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services is extremely concerned
that the DCS has received a qualified audit opinion from the Auditor
-General for the 5th year in a row.
In addition, the Committee notes that the Department received the most
qualifications in its audit in 2005/06 in comparison to any other
department. The Committee recommends that:

   1) The Department of Correctional Services submits a full written report
       (Action Plan) on issues raised in the Auditor -General Report 2005/06
       to the Portfolio Committee, by 1 February 2007. This report must
       include:
          • A full explanation on progress made to address each of the
            areas of qualification and matters of emphasis outlined in the
            Auditor General Report for 2005/06.
          • An outline of future actions which will be taken to address
            these areas.
          • An outline of clear time frames by which each of the actions
            taken to address each qualification and matters of emphasis
            will be implemented. This report will be presented during the
            first quarter of 2007/8. .


   2) The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services will establish a
       subcommittee of selective members of the Committee to deal with the
       issues raised in the Auditor –General’s Report. This subcommittee
       will be supported in its functions by the Committee Secretary and the
       Parliamentary Researcher.

   3) The Department of Correctional Services must report to this
       subcommittee on a monthly basis. This must be in the form of a
       written report to the subcommittee, submitted on the 1st day of each
       month beginning February 2007, outlining the following issues:
       (1)  Progress in addressing each of the areas of qualification and of
           matters of emphasis outlined in the 2005/06 Auditor General
           Report.
       (2)  Identification of the current stumbling blocks in addressing
           each of the areas.
       (3)  Steps taken by the DCS to overcome these stumbling blocks.
       (4)  Amendments to the time frames stipulated in original report
           submitted to the Portfolio Committee on this issue.


   4) The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services will invite the
       Auditor General on a quarterly basis to report on problems related to
       issues outlined in the Auditor–General’s Report, as well as new
       issues that may have arisen in the course of the 2006/07 financial
       year and issues that may arise in 2007/08 financial year.

   5) The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services will invite National
       Treasury on a quarterly basis to report on expenditure trends within
       the DCS, as well as problems related to any issues outlined in the
       Auditor General Report.

   6) In order to improve the effectiveness of the Audit Steering Committee:
       (1)  The National Commissioner and the Chief Deputy Commissioners
          must attend all Audit Steering Committee meetings.
       (2)  Regional Commissioners should be encouraged to attend all Audit
          Steering Committee meetings where possible.


Technical Changes to the Annual Report

In order to improve the ability of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
Services to effectively fulfil its oversight function over the Department
of Correctional Services, the Committee recommends that:

   1) Each target outlined in the DCS Strategic Plan is covered in the
      Annual Report so that there is clear information available to the
      Committee and the public on whether DCS is achieving its identified
      targets. Future Annual Reports should therefore include:
            • A clear identification of each and every target, whether in
              table or descriptive form.
            • An outline of progress and constraints in meeting each target
              for the relevant financial year.
            • Clear identification as to whether each target was achieved
              or not achieved.

   2) When the DCS appears before the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
      Services to present on its Annual Report, its presentation must
      include:


            • A comprehensive briefing on departmental performance and the
              extent to which the targets outlined in the Strategic Plan
              were met for the relevant year.
            • An overview of the financial statements of the Department for
              the relevant year.
            • An outline of key issues raised in the Auditor Generals
              report for the relevant financial year.


Performance of the DCS

The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services notes with concern that a
number of performance targets as outlined in the Strategic Plan for 2005/06-
2008/09 were not met.
The following recommendations are made with regard to the DCS performance
in 2005/06:

  1)  The DCS must submit to the Portfolio Committee by 1 February 2007, an
      action plan with clear time frames for all the projects identified by
      the Department for the 2006/07 financial year. This plan must report
      whether the time frames identified in the action plan have been or
      will be achieved, and if not what steps will be taken to address the
      problems.


  2)  The increase in the vacancy rate overall in the DCS from 7.3% to 7.8%
      must be addressed as a matter of urgency. The two main areas of
      concern are the high vacancy rate by professionals in the Care
      Programme (including doctors, nurses, pharmacists, psychologists and
      social workers) and vacancies with regard to financial professionals
      and human resources related personnel. In terms of all categories of
      professionals, the DCS should:


             • Consider employing professionals under the Public Service
               Act, rather than the Correctional Services Act, as well as
               provide clarity on whether Professionals are generally
               employed under the Public Service Act or Correctional
               Services Act. Treasury has stated that very few
               Professionals in DCS are employed under the PSA in
               comparison with other departments such SAPS or Defence.
             • Identify in the form of a written report submitted to the
               Portfolio Committee by 1 February 2007, interventions that
               it has and will be taking to ensure the recruitment and
               retention of professionals in the abovementioned categories.
               This report should include a description of creative
               measures to reduce the current outflow of professionals from
               the Department.


  3)  The DCS must submit to the Committee a report identifying new recruits
      for 2005/06 broken down in terms of province, race and gender.


  4)  The security vetting of officials working in the DCS, especially at
      high risk centres must be addressed as a matter of urgency, in order
      to reduce the likelihood of DCS compliance in escapes and other
      corrupt activity in prisons. The DCS must submit a report to the
      Portfolio Committee by 1 February 2007, detailing measures that it has
      taken and will be taking to ensure the security vetting of officials
      at high risk and other centres, in order that its target of completion
      of the vetting process for all officials by the end of 2007/08 is
      realised.

  5)  The Committee recommends that the DCS prioritise training for
      officials including health professionals in managing HIV/AIDS and that
      it ensures the speedy rollout of implementation of the comprehensive
      HIV/AIDS programme in all management areas. In addition, the DCS must
      prioritise discussions with the Department of Health with regard to
      the accreditation of correctional centres as ART centres. A written
      progress report on the management of HIV/AIDS in prisons must be
      submitted to the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services twice of
      year. This report should include:


             • Outline of the key components of the comprehensive HIV/AIDS
               programme.
             • Progress on the implementation of the comprehensive
               programme in all management areas. Clear time frames should
               be stipulated for implementation.
             • Stumbling blocks in the implementation of the plan.
             • Steps taken to address these problems.

  6)  The poor performance of the DCS in meeting its targets in the
      Development programme for 2005/06 is noted. The DCS must submit a
      written report to the Committee by 1 February 2007 outlining:


             • Barriers faced by the Department in realising its targets in
               terms of the Development programme for 2005/06.
             • Identification of measures that have been taken to address
               these problems in 2006/07.


  7)  The DCS must submit the feasibility study report on the second set of
      4 new prisons to the Portfolio Committee by 1 February 2007. The DCS
      must include a report identifying clear time frames for the various
      processes involved in the building of each of the 8 prisons.

  8)  The DCS must report to the Portfolio Committee on a quarterly basis,
      in a comprehensive written report, on progress made with respect to
      each of the 8 new prisons. This report, which must be given to the
      Committee on the 1st day of each parliamentary quarter must include:


               • Progress with respect to each prison.
               • Stumbling blocks with respect to each prison, which may
                 affect time frames.
               • Mechanisms to overcome these stumbling blocks.
               • New timeframes where applicable.

      The Portfolio Committee may call the DCS to present on these reports
      wherenecessary.
  9)  The DCS must submit by 1 February 2007, a list of all facilities which
      have been or will be upgraded or renovated and are due for completion
      in the 2006/07 financial years.

D.    Conclusion

The DCS received a qualified audit report for the fifth year in a row. This
is of enormous concern to the Committee, particularly in light of the
comments made by the Auditor-General in Parliament, where he stated that
poor financial management processes may also point to poor performance
information processes in a Department. The concern is that if the DCS
processes for management of its financial information are faulty, then its
processes for managing performance information may also be faulty. This may
mean that the performance information provided in the Report is
questionable.
The Committee takes cognisance of the fact that the Department is facing
serious challenges and is in the process of addressing it. The Committee
feels that only through strengthened partnerships, the DCS will be able to
address challenges. The Portfolio Committee will monitor the progress made
with regard to the recommendations.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on its
    Visit to Prisons in the Gauteng Province, 03 November 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services having undertaken an
      oversight visit to the Gauteng province from Monday 09 October till
      Friday 13 October 2006, reports as follows:

A.    Introduction
      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services undertook an
      Oversight visit to the Gauteng Province from 09 – 13 October 2006.

B.    Delegation

      The following members of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional
      Services visited prisons in the Gauteng province.
         • Mr. DV Bloem (ANC) (Chairperson)
         • Mr MA Cele (ANC)
         • Ms LS Chikunga (ANC)
         • Mr. NB Fihla (ANC)
         • Mr. S Mahote (ANC)
         • Ms ZN Nawa (ANC)
         • Ms. W Ngwenya (ANC)
         • Mr. LJ Tolo (ANC)
         • Mr. ET Xolo (ANC)

      The following Members submitted their apologies:
         • Mr J Selfe (DA)
         • Mr MR Shah (DA)
         • Mrs. SA Seaton (IFP)

C.    Objectives
      The objectives of the visit were to examine the following:
      Awaiting Trial Detainees (ATD’s): The large number (46 327/ 29%) of
      awaiting trial detainees in our prisons contributes toward the problem
      of overcrowding. The delegation focussed on the plight of the ATD’s in
      the various prisons with a view to identifying blockages in the
      system, which prevent release while awaiting trial. Awaiting trial
      prisoners are not involved in any training rehabilitation programmes.
      They do not receive schooling and seldom have access to recreational
      activities. The Committee intended to meet with the various
      stakeholders in the province who play a role in determining the
      release of ATD’s into the community, including the police, the justice
      officials, the Legal Aid Board lawyers and representatives from the
      Department of Social Development.

      Oversight over the Department of Correctional Services (DCS): The DCS
      has appeared before the Committee on many occasions with regard to its
      budget, Annual Report and Strategic Plan. One of the ways in which the
      Committee can monitor the implementation of legislation and policies
      of theDCS, would be to investigate the implementation of policies at
      the different Correctional Centres.
      Staff Concerns: The delegation met with correctional officials at the
      prisons in order to discuss staff concerns and solutions to the
      problems faced by staff on the ground.
      Corruption: The DCS stated that it is committed to a cleansed, trained
      and dedicated management, the consolidation of relations between
      managers and their staff in order to form a team necessary to deliver
      on rehabilitation and an enhanced ability to immediately investigate,
      prosecute and deliver appropriate sanction to any allegation of
      corruption. The Committee is of the view that staff of the DCS should
      strive to improve public perceptions of the DCS. Only the behaviour of
      officials will dictate how the public perceives Correctional Services.

      Youth and Children in prison: There are 2354 children under the age of
      18 years in prison, 12 are younger than 14 years, 1217 of them are
      awaiting trial, and 1137 are serving sentences. In line with the
      President’s State-of-the-Nation Address, the priority of the Committee
      remains to assist in the creation of a better environment for
      juveniles in conflict with the law and to ensure that children are not
      in prison. With the Special Remission process and a concerted effort
      of the DCS, Prosecutors and Magistracy, there are now 706 less
      children in prison, but the Committee does not want to see children in
      prison at all.


      Overcrowding: Centres in the Gauteng region such as the Johannesburg
      and Pretoria Central prisons are extremely overcrowded. Many efforts
      of the DCS are hampered by the severe overcrowding. A lot of offenders
      are repeat offenders and the Committee wants to ensure that
      rehabilitation programmes are implemented in the region. This is one
      of the measures to reduce the overcrowded prison population.
      The Committee visited the following prisons in the region:
         • Pretoria Central Correctional Centre
         • Baviaanpoort Correctional Centre
         • Leeuwkop Correctional Centre
         • Johannesburg Corrrectional Centre

D.    Findings and recommendations


      The following are the findings and recommendations of the Portfolio
      Committee on Correctional Services:

      1.    Overview of the Region
      The Gauteng region has 8 Management areas, 27 Correctional Centres and
      8 Community Correction offices. Five Centres of Excellence were
      established in Gauteng, namely Baviaanspoort – Emthonjeni;
      Johannesburg Female Centre; Johannesburg Medium C; Leeuwkop Medium B
      Centre and Pretoria Central Centre.
     The region had 22 escapes during 2006, of which many were very violent.
     Many of the escapees were rearrested through the hard work of
     officials, the Emergency Support Team and various other measures to
     curb escapes. Many of the sentenced offenders and the awaiting trial
     detainees at Johannesburg Prison were involved in cash –in-transit
     heists or are suspects in cash-intransit and are often the ones who
     plan these escapes.
     The region has a total number of 9009 staff members. Some of the
     challenges faced by the staff members are shortages of staff, the slow
     pace in filling of vacancies, overcrowding, low morale as a result of
     poor salaries, corruption as well as the high number of HIV positive
     inmates and problems with the accreditation of Anti Retroviral
     Treatment sites.
     Whilst the Committee was informed of the many programmes the different
     centres offer to offenders, it must mention that Gauteng has two
     piggeries, a broiler and 7 vegetable gardens. The region produces
     fruit, red meat as well as milk. The region also has its own abattoirs
     for slaughtering. The Leeuwkop Management Area has one of the biggest
     and well developed golf courses in the Gauteng region and has received
     many offers to purchase from local and international interested
     parties.
     The Committee was informed that the region has successful interaction
     with the Intersectoral Justice Cluster and attends monthly meetings.
     The Committee only met with Magistrates, Prosecutors and the Police at
     the Johannesburg Management Area, as this initiative was not organized
     and coordinated by the Department as requested by the Committee at an
     earlier stage.

     2.     Overcrowding
        The region has a total of 43 538 offenders of which 26 890 are
        sentenced adult Offenders, 12 311 are unsentenced adult offenders,
        3691 are youth offenders under the age of 21 years and 646 are
        children under the age of 18 years. The region has a total approved
        accommodation of 25 347 and is 172% overcrowded.
        Overcrowded conditions in prisons affect both offenders and staff
        working within those prisons. The following table represents the
        percentage of occupation in the most overcrowded centres in
        Gauteng.


|Prison         |Approved           |Actual Total     |% Occupation  |
|               |Accommodation      |                 |              |
|Johannesburg   |1300               |4763             |366%          |
|Medium B       |                   |                 |              |
|Baviaanspoort  |305                |722              |237%          |
|Maximum        |                   |                 |              |
|Johannesburg   |2630               |5734             |218%          |
|Medium A       |                   |                 |              |
|Leeuwkop       |763                |1662             |218%          |
|Maximum        |                   |                 |              |

        Even though the above mentioned centres are the most overcrowded in
        the region, the Committee feels that the entire region is extremely
        overcrowded and this has a serious negative impact on the morale of
        staff as well as offenders. It is only a matter of time before
        structures such as Johannesburg ‘Sun City’ prison, originally built
        to house 4837, but now houses 11 948 offenders, will collapse. At
        this specific centre, 119 offenders sleep in a cell built to house
        38 offenders. Of these inmates, 16 sleep in the shower and toilet
        area. It was mentioned that it is difficult touse the ablution
        facilities (1 toilet only) at night, as inmates sleep in the
        corridors and some even underneath the beds.


        Overcrowding also poses a health risk not only to offenders, but to
        staff as well. Officials must take offenders to the Baragwanath
        Hospital, which has a high number of Tuberculosis patients. Many
        officials contracted TB, because they must guard and handle these
        offenders infected with it. Overcrowding has a serious effect not
        only on the inmates, but on the Correctional staff as well. Staff
        members have to guard, count, rehabilitate and lock up inmates and
        in many instances the staff to inmate ratio can be very high. Many
        of the male staff members are under extreme pressure at these
        centres, because they have to guard the offenders as well as
        safeguard their female colleagues as well.


        Not all inmates at the centres can participate in rehabilitation
        programmes as the facilities are not conducive for rehabilitation
        programmes and because of the high occupation levels, programmes
        such as social work programmes cannot be offered to inmates. Some
        social workers can see as many as 1150 offenders. Offenders must be
        assessed within the first three months of admission and must
        thereafter attend programmes for up to six months before the social
        workers can compile a profile of the inmate.
        Some inmates have to wait up to 1 year before being seen by a
        social worker. An offender must also attend three programmes before
        his/her profile is being drawn, but because of staff shortages and
        availability of space, many offenders only attend 1 programme.
        Before an inmate appears before the Parole Board, he must have been
        through the programmes and a profile must be drawn. This is not
        always possible and has resulted in many actions against DCS.


        Management has also indicated that often inmates’ visits have to be
        shortened because of the number of inmates incarcerated and the
        visitors they receive. Correctional facilities do not have the
        infrastructure to accommodate the huge number of visitors visiting
        the facilities.


     2.     Intersectoral Communication

        The Portfolio Committee met with the Intersectoral Cluster only at
        the Johannesburg Management area and had very successful
        discussions with all the stakeholders. Intersectoral communication
        between the various components of the criminal justice sector
        including the police, the courts and the prisons are imperative in
        all the management areas in the region.


        (a)      The SAPS from the Johannesburg region indicated that they
            have good working relations with the DCS in terms of combating
            overcrowding and handling the vast number of Awaiting Trial
            detainees at this management area. The SAPS had a huge
            operation in the Johannesburg City centre, where they tried to
            identify persons with parole and the DCS assisted with this
            operation.
            SAPS also indicate that they are in continuous discussions with
            Magistrates with regard to alternative sentencing and are also
            of the opinion that when a person admits to guilt, he /she
            should be considered for community supervision. The SAPS
            regularly visits Johannesburg Correctional centre in an attempt
            to identify awaiting trials who might be wanted for other
            crimes. This initiative is made easier with the successful
            implementation of the Inmate Tracking System.
        (b)      Senior Prosecutor, West Rand: The prosecutor also
            indicated that the West Rand has very successful interactions
            with the DCS.
            They have introduced a plea bargaining project. Monthly
            statistics on plea bargaining are forwarded to the National
            Director of the National Prosecuting Authority. Senior persons
            have also been appointed as plea bargaining officers and
            prosecutors come to the centre during the week to identify
            individuals who want to Plea bargain. The Director General of
            the Department of Justice has approved a Saturday court in
            Soweto where such cases are being heard. The Independent Prison
            Visitors should also explain to inmates their options in terms
            of plea bargaining.
            It was also mentioned that diversion can only take place with
            organizations who have the necessary funds to run diversion
            programmes. Due to the serious nature of offences, i.e. murder,
            rape, cash –in-transit heists, many juveniles can’t be
            considered for diversion programmes.
            It was also mentioned that magistrates were informed that if
            bail is set for less than R 1000.00, the person should be
            sentenced to community corrections, but it was also stated that
            the Judiciary is independent and this cannot be forced upon
            them.


        (c)      The Johannesburg Justice Centre: It was indicated that
            Legal Aid can only assist if there is continuous co operation
            between the DCS and SAPS. It was mentioned that Plea bargaining
            was tried at the Johannesburg court, but was not very
            effective. The Justice Centre tried to open Saturday courts at
            the Johannesburg court, but the Chief Magistrate and the Chief
            Prosecutor were reluctant.


        (d)      The staff of Correctional Services also highlighted the
            importance of community corrections. It was mentioned that some
            inmates are being sentenced for petty crimes and that DCS staff
            is in a position to identify who are seasonal offenders e.g.
            those who commit offences during winter with the intention of
            being detained.


            Comments and Recommendations


            The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services understands
            that the Department of Correctional Services (DCS) cannot be
            held solely responsible for resolving the problem of long
            periods of awaiting trial. The Committee, through interaction
            with the different stakeholders, has established that
            cooperation between the DCS and the Johannesburg and Wynberg
            courts is very difficult and that the Magistrate at the
            Johannesburg court refused to attend this meeting as it was
            beyond his working hours.

            The Committee recommends the following additional measures that
            should be initiated in the shorter term to reduce the awaiting
            trial population:


            (a)  The Portfolio Committee believes in a just and fair
                 judicial system and will never be soft on crime, but in an
                 attempt to relieve overcrowding in Correctional Centres,
                 recommends that the DCS should liaise continuously with
                 Magistrates with regard to those ATD’s who cannot afford
                 bail and that such people should be considered for
                 alternative sentencing.
            (b)  Independent Prison Visitors (IPV’s) should act as the link
                 between the offender, DCS and the Judiciary. It is the
                 responsibility of the IPV to ensure that all cases are
                 attended to.
            (c)  The Committee supports the recruitment of senior persons
                 as plea bargaining officers.
            (d)  The Committee is very impressed with the successful
                 intersectoral activities and commitments in the region.
            (e)  The Committee is aware that the Judiciary is independent,
                 but urges that all stakeholders in the cluster must
                 communicate and participate to ensure intersectoral
                 solutions. The DCS must take responsibility for ensuring
                 the effective functioning of cluster committees at all
                 levels and should report back to the Committee on this
                 matter.
            (f)  The Portfolio Committee recommends that Community
                 Structures must be set up with all relevant stakeholders to
                 monitor the reintegration of offenders on parole.


     3.     Staff Concerns

        The Portfolio Committee met with both management and staff in all
        Correctional Centres to address key concerns and problems. Most of
        the problems identified were common not only in this region, but
        countrywide. The Committee was particularly impressed that staff
        members throughout the region were interested in feedback from the
        Committee and wanted to know if objectives the Committee has set in
        place, has been achieved. The following are some of the key
        concerns highlighted by managers and staff:

        3.1      Overtime


            The DCS has phased in the 7-day establishment. Previously the
            DCS functioned as a 5-day establishment, which means that work
            during the weekend is paid out as overtime. Due to financial
            concerns with overtime payments, it was necessary for the DCS
            to move to a 7-day establishment.


            With the 5day establishment, staff working on a Saturday get
            one day off, which must be taken within 21 days and Sundays are
            paidas normal overtime. This has resulted in staff taking
            Fridays or Mondays off and is very problematic to other staff
            members.


            Many Heads of Prisons find it difficult to relieve staff during
            the week, because of staff shortages. In addition, they raised
            concerns that the shortage of staff means that other staff
            members suffer when staff takes leave that is owed to them in
            lieu of overtimepayment.


            Comments and Recommendations


            The Portfolio Committee supports the decision to move from a 5-
            day to a 7-day establishment.
            The Committee recommends the following:
            (a)  That all Heads of Prison should ensure that action plans
                 are completed to ensure the correct staff complement
                 especially over weekends.
            (b)  The Portfolio Committee is of the opinion that more staff
                 needs to be recruited in order to have the full staff
                 complement working over weekends.


        3.2      The Awaiting Trial Detainee population


            Staff has indicated that it is extremely difficult to work with
            awaiting trial offenders, as the DCS has no policy to guide
            staff when guarding and handling ATD’s. ATD’s are not
            classified in terms of their crimes and many often brag and
            boast to officials that they have all the privileges. All ATD’s
            can receive food parcels from outside and this is often where
            firearms and drugs are smuggled in.


            Comments and Recommendations
            The Committee is aware that the White Paper on Corrections does
            make provision for Awaiting Trial detainees and that the ATD’s
            are not solely the responsibility of the DCS alone. The DCS is
            only responsible to detain such persons until such time they
            are found guilty or acquitted. With 14 726 persons in awaiting
            trial (Johannesburg prison receives ± 1000 ATD’s daily) in
            Gauteng, it becomes critical that a policy be developed for the
            handling of ATD’s. Staff at the Pretoria prison have
            recommended that a disciplinary system needs to developed for
            awaiting trials as well, as the DCS currently only has a
            disciplinary system for sentenced offenders.
            (a)  The Committee recommends that the DCS develops policy with
                 regard to all areas concerning Awaiting Trial detainees.
                 The policy should include the privileges of ATD’s as well
                 as a guide on the handling and guarding of such persons.


        3.3      Training of officials

            The Committee has heard numerous complaints from staff that not
            enough training is being afforded to them. With the onset of
            the White Paper, that states that officials are rehabilitators
            and does not only correct offending behaviour, staff training
            and development on the White Paper is imperative.

            Comments and Recommendations
            Staff development and training is vital in any institution or
            organization. The workforce needs to be empowered and
            capacitated to deal with the challenges faced by the DCS. The
            Committee was informed by the Regional office that the DCS is
            currently busy with a project looking at the re-defining of job
            functions of DCS staff and 500 staff members will also be
            chosen to undergo Emergency Support Training (EST). The DCS
            will also go on a market drive to promote the White Paper on
            Corrections as well as implement training on the Offender
            Rehabilitation Path.


            (a)  The Committee recommends that all staff, especially long
                 serving members of the DCS, be trained in terms of the
                 Strategic objectives of the DCS i.e. the White Paper.


        3.4      Abuse of Power

            The issue of abuse of power has been mentioned by staff
            throughout the region. It was stated that disciplinary
            procedures often are not fair and that managers favour certain
            staff above others. Officials also claimed that they are being
            threatened by managers. It was also stated that unqualified
            persons as well as persons not from a specific management area,
            get positions, rather than those who have the qualifications
            and are employed at a specific centre for a lengthy period of
            time. Staff is also of the opinion that offenders have more
            rights and privileges afforded to them by managers, than those
            who have to rehabilitate them. This scenario makes it very
            difficult for staff to work with offenders as they are not
            being respected by the offenders and in some instances, by the
            management as well.


            Staff stated that their grievances are not attended to or even
            ignored and that the guideline/manual on grievance procedures
            is not being used. Staff indicated that when grievances or
            complaints are lodged, they are labeled as problematic and are
            often served with suspension letters.


            Comments and Recommendations
            Through intensive discussions with the management in all the
            areas, many of the challenges facing staff were brought to the
            attention of the Committee. The Regional Commissioner and the
            Regional Executive were part of the visit throughout the region
            and clarified many of the concerns raised by staff members. The
            Regional delegation indicated in more than one instance that
            issues raised by staff are not taken lightly, but very
            seriously. The region held management workshops as well as
            ‘Relationship building by objective’ sessions to empower
            managers. It is clear to the Committee that the Gauteng region
            has a very strong managerial leadership and is capable of
            handling grievances or complaints and execute functions.


        3.5      Communication


            Staff complained that they have little interaction with the
            National as well as the regional office. It was also mentioned
            that staff meetings are not held and that the interaction
            between the Portfolio Committee and staff, is the first of its
            kind. Important developments and key information are not
            filtered through to staff.


            This causes a lot of uncertainty and confusion amongst
            officials as they are not adequately informed on key issues and
            developments within the Department.


            Comments and Recommendations


            The Committee recommends the following:


            (a)  It is recommended that monthly meetings be arranged in
                 each management area and that these meetings be adequately
                 represented by officials from the Regional Office. The
                 Committee further recommends that the National Head office
                 embark on country wide staff information sessions, where
                 staff will get information on all new developments within
                 the DCS. This will certainly address concerns of staff
                 members and relieve frustration in the work place.


            (b)  Verbal communication is important and written memorandums
                 and newsletters should not be identified as the key
                 components of communication. In addition, staff must be
                 given the opportunity to discuss and identify their
                 concerns in a nonthreatening environment and management
                 needs to take these concerns seriously and identify
                 constructive ways of addressing them.


        3.6      Salary Adjustments and Promotions
            Staff was extremely dissatisfied with the current status of
            promotion and salaries. Staff feel that they should be on par
            with the salaries paid to SAPS staff. Staying on the same
            salary levels is demoralizing staff. Furthering academic
            qualifications, with or without bursaries awarded by DCS, serve
            as no incentive to staff as there is no upward mobility.
            The Committee was informed that the Interim Promotion Policy
            implemented by the DCS only benefited certain categories of
            staff e.g. those with matric. Many employees did not benefit
            from the Interim Promotion policy, as they did not meet the
            criteria, but had years of service in the DCS. Many long
            serving staff members in the DCS do not have matric and this
            was not recognized previously. Staff felt that Interim policies
            oppress certain staff categories.


            Some of the Correctional Centres in Gauteng are situated in
            very upmarket areas e.g. Leeuwkop, which is situated in
            Bryanston in Johannesburg. Staff has to travel very far to the
            workplace as they cannot afford property in these areas, with
            many having to pass through tollgates daily. It was cited that
            this scenario is worsened by low salary packages of staff. It
            is the view of staff that the DCS will not attract staff such
            as artisans, educationist and nurses because of the
            unattractive salary packages. Many other Departments, such as
            the Department of Education has recently upgraded salaries of
            its employees.
            New entry level staff has indicated that they have to wait
            almost two years before they graduate and receive their
            certificates. This has a negative impact on these staff members
            as they are not considered for promotions.


            Comments and Recommendations
            The Regional Executive has confirmed that staff at lower levels
            (e.g. those with secondary education up to Grade 10) would be
            considered in the next Interim Promotion phase. It was also
            mentioned that the DCS is currently working on Group Insurances
            schemes for staff members. Staff at the Baviaanspoort Centre
            recommended that staff within the staff component of a centre
            should first be considered for promotion rather than others
            from outside.
            (a)  The Portfolio Committee recognises the implementation of
                the Interim promotion policy within the DCS, but recommends
                that much more needs to be done in terms of  promotions. The
                lack of promotion is one of the key factors that have led to
                the decline in staff morale.

        3.7      Shortage of Professional Staff

            The shortage of professional staff within prisons hampers the
            ability of DCS to fulfill its stated mandate of rehabilitation.
            Many DCS officials e.g. nurses, leave the Department in search
            of better work opportunities, some being employed abroad and
            some returning to the Department of Health, who offer better
            incentives to health care workers. The ratio of nurses to
            inmates is sometimes as high as 1100 inmates: 3 nurses, as is
            the case at the Leeuwkop Centre.
            The shortage of social workers is especially problematic, as it
            is a requirement that an inmate must consult with a social
            worker before appearing before the parole board. The shortage
            of social workers means that parole hearings are often delayed.
            The ratio of social worker to inmate can be as high as 1 to
            1150 as is the case at the Johannesburg Medium B.
            Poor salaries and difficult working conditions for
            professionals have been identified as key reasons for the
            inability of DCS to attract and retain professional staff. The
            need to offer improved salaries for professionals was
            identified as a priority by staff.


            Comments and Recommendations


            The Portfolio Committee recommends as follows:


            (a)  The Committee is aware that the DCS has a retention and
                recruitment strategy for professional staff, but this should
                be considered for all staff of DCS, not only professionals.
            (b)  The Portfolio Committee has on numerous occasions
                complained about the salary packages of Professionals. Those
                packages will not attract and retain the necessary and
                critical staff members.
            (c)  The Portfolio Committee should be provided with a list of
                all vacant positions within the DCS.


        3.8      Shortage of staff


            Whilst many of the staff members understand the provisions and
            or procedures of the 7-day establishment, it has created many
            problems within their working environment. When offenders go to
            court e.g. a maximum offender must be escorted by two
            officials, there are not enough officials to assist with other
            duties.


            The guarding of inmates has become a very stressful duty,
            because of the high numbers of inmates in the centres coupled
            with the shortage of staff.


            Staff shortages in terms of the approved post establishment
            compared to the actual filled vacancies proves to be
            problematic. Administrative staff at centres is often used to
            assist with the daily movement of offenders.


            Given the circumstances and dangers of the Correctional
            Service, staff well being and development is essential. The
            Committee was informed that there is a shortage of Employee
            Assistance Practitioners throughout the region.


            Comments and Recommendations


            The Gauteng region has a high offender population of 43 538
            with only 9009 officials to guard, count, lock up, escort and
            rehabilitate offenders.


            (a)  The Portfolio Committee would like to be kept abreast with
                 the recruitment drive of staff in the DCS on a 3 monthly
                 basis.
            (b)  With the high levels of stress amongst staff as well as
                 staff suicides, the Committee urgently recommends that the
                 appointment of an Employee Assistance Practitioner (EAP) in
                 the region be fast tracked.


        3.9      Danger Allowance


            The Committee was informed that staff do not receive danger or
            special allowances for working with ATD’s. Only staff that work
            with offenders such as at the CMax centre in Pretoria and those
            working with maximum offenders, receives danger allowances.
            Many staff members have to stand in at the Maximum centres when
            there is a staff shortage, but do not receive a danger
            allowance. Staff said that the ATD’s are also very dangerous
            persons just as sentenced maximum offenders.


            Comments and recommendations


            (a)  In the light of the above, the Committee recommends that
                danger allowances for staff working with ATD’s, be
                developed.

        3.10     Facilities


            Correctional Centres were not built to rehabilitate offenders,
            but rather to detain people. These facilities are very old and
            definitely not conducive to rehabilitation. DCS facilities are
            literally bursting at their seams.


            It is difficult to implement Unit Management at these
            facilities and with the high inmate population, rehabilitation
            programmes cannot be implemented.


            A centre such as Johannesburg prison can receive about 6500
            visitors weekly. Visitors must come through one area, the
            visitors centre, which is very small and has one turnstile.
            This can be a lengthy process.


            Fences are falling apart and it has proved to be very easy to
            escape by merely jumping over fences. Another area of concern
            raised with the Committee is that some kitchens are very old
            and dilapidated, but are in the process of being revamped.


            Comments and Recommendations


            (a)  The Committee recommends that the upgrading of facilities
                be prioritized. Proper fencing at facilities is a
                prerequisite and will definitely assist with security
                measures.
            (b)  The Portfolio Committee is aware that all maintenance and
                repair work of all government buildings are done by the
                Department of Public Works, but recommends that the DCS
                looks into the possibility of using its own labour force
                (inmates) to do minor maintenance and repair works.


        3.11     Resources


            The Committee is very disappointed that yet again the issue of
            lack of resources is stressed by staff in this region as in
            many other regions. Staff is not allowed to have their mobile
            phones inside the sections and the absence of telephones in the
            different sections is not only problematic, but dangerous as
            well.
            It was stated there are many telephones that can be utilised by
            the inmates, but staff do not even have access to telephones,
            two way radios or office materials. The Committee was also
            informed that many cash-in-transit heists have been planned
            from within the Johannesburg prison, because inmates have
            access to telephones.


            Comments and Recommendations
            The Portfolio Committee recognises that there are 241
            Correctional Centres country wide, but it is a serious problem
            if the National and Regional offices do not provide the basic
            resources.
            Resources, such as telephones or two way radios are essential
            to combat escapes, assaults or the ambushing of staff members.


            The Committee recommends the following:


            (a)  The Committee is aware that the DCS has utilised its
                budget to purchase protective clothing such as bullet proof
                vests, but would like to see that sections are equipped with
                telephones for staff and that each staff has a two way
                radio.


        3.12     Bagless Prison Society


            The bagless prison society was introduced to assist the DCS in
            combating the smuggling of weapons, drugs etc. This is
            problematic to female staff as they are not provided with
            facilities to store their handbags, the contents of which may
            be needed during a working day.


            Comments and recommendations


            (a)  Accessible lockers for the storage of handbags should be
                made available in all sections.
            (b)  The Head of Prison is responsible for ensuring that the
                policy is applied equally to all staff in the prison,
                including management.


        3.13     Transport and Transfers

            The issue of transport and transfers was also raised with the
            Committee throughout the region. Staff indicated that
            previously they have been provided with transport to and from
            work. This is no longer the case and seems to be problematic to
            staff, considering the location of Correctional facilities.


            Many staff members identified that they had been placed to work
            in prisons far from their hometowns and that they had applied
            for transfers to prisons closer to their hometowns.


            Comments and Recommendations


            (a)  Recruitment should be nation wide but placement after
                training should take into consideration proximity to the
                areas in which people come from.


 E.   Youth in Prison


     The Committee is very concerned about the high number of youth in
     prisons. The centres visited had high numbers of youth in their care,
     many with extremely violent offences or are suspects in very violent
     crimes. This contributes to the fact that Magistrates do not consider
     alternative sentences or send persons to diversion programmes, because
     of the serious nature of the offences.

     It must be mentioned that the youth the Committee interacted with,
     praised the officials who take care of them and has a lot of respect
     for them. They also indicated that socio -economic circumstances often
     force them into crime. Many youth indicated that they would like to
     attend more educational and recreational programmes and that the DCS
     should attempt to better equip them for release. This was cited as a
     reason for recidivism.

     A number of unsentenced juveniles were identified in the prisons with
     the option of a fine but could not afford to pay.

     Comments and Recommendations


     The Portfolio Committee believes that youth especially those under the
     age of 18 years do not belong in prison. The Committee supports the
     commitment by President Mbeki, in the State of the Nation Address to
     ensure that the number of children housed in prison is drastically
     reduced. This should occur primarily through diversion from the
     criminal justice system but also by ensuring that there are sufficient
     alternative care facilities in the country for those children who
     require placement in these facilities.


     However, the Committee also believes that out of all offenders, it is
     those young offenders who are incarcerated in prisons that could be
     most successfully rehabilitated to ensure that they do not recommit
     crimes on release. Young offenders should thus be targeted for access
     to educational, training and treatment programmes.
     The Committee also feels that young offenders accused of non-violent
     crimes, who are deemed by the courts not be a threat to society and
     have been granted bail of R1 000 and below, but who are in prison as
     they could not pay the stipulated bail amounts, should be released.


     The Committee recommends the following:


     (a)    Youth should be transferred to prisons in the area in which they
         live rather than in the areas where they committed the crime, in
         order to facilitate continued contact with families, which is an
         essential component of rehabilitation.
     (b)    The Committee strongly recommends that the DCS have all steps in
         place before a juvenile is being released. It must be compulsory
         for all youth to attend Social Reintegration programmes, to
         prepare them for their release.
     (c)    The Regional Commissioner must report to the Committee, within 3
         months of tabling of this report on identified shortages in all
         juvenile centres with regard to professional staff including
         teachers, trainers, social workers, psychologists and health care
         professionals and other challenges.


F.    Mothers with Babies


    The Committee also interacted with Mothers with babies who are
    incarcerated with them. Many of the children have been born whilst the
    mother was incarcerated (mother arrested when pregnant). The Committee
    recognizes the continous effort by the DCS to create a conducive
    environment for children in their facilities.


    What is of huge concern to the Committee is the fact that most mothers
    were sentenced for petty offences such as theft of infant milk or
    clothing. It costs theDCS far more to keep mothers with children
    incarcerated than the actual value of the items that were stolen.


    Staff and mother with babies pleaded with the Committee that children,
    incarcerated with their mothers, should not be kept in prison. This was
    demonstrated by handing over a teddy bear with a slogan saying “Take me
    Home” to the Committee.

    Comments and Recommendations
    (a)     The Committee urges the DCS to sensitise Magistrates and
        prosecutors about the effects prison can have on mothers with
        children. This should be done through regular interaction with the
        Intersectoral Justice Cluster.
    (b)     All children above the age of 2 years old should go to crèche
        outside of the prison. The prison management must take
        responsibility for liaison with the community in which the prison is
        suited to make arrangements of this nature.
    (c)     The Committee recommends that the Justice Cluster must, as a
        matter of urgency, obtain alternative accommodation for those
        females who do not pose a threat to society as a measure to
        alleviate overcrowding. This category of female offenders can be
        detained in Secure Care Facilities.
    (d)     The Committee also recommends that the Justice Cluster must, as
        a matter of urgency, obtain alternative accommodation for children
        who do not pose a threat to society as a measure to alleviate
        overcrowding. This category of children can be detained in Secure
        Care Facilities.


G.    Conclusion
     It is the mandate of the Portfolio Committee to do oversight over the
    Department of Correctional Services and to ensure that policy is
    implemented. The Committee recognises that the Gauteng region faces many
    serious challenges and that the strong and capacitated management
    contributes to the successes of the region. It is only through regular
    interaction with the management and staff on the ground that the
    Committee will better understand and monitor the implementation of
    policy of the DCS.

    The Committee applauds the officials of the region for their hard work
    under very difficult circumstances, especially the staff of the
    Johannesburg Management Area. During the visit, the Committee was made
    aware that the Baviaanspoort Correctional Centre does not have a Parole
    Board and this matter raised serious concerns both by the Committee and
    the inmates incarcerated at the centre. Through the intervention of the
    Committee, an Acting Chairperson has now been appointed.

    The Committee will monitor the implementation of the recommendations in
this report.

Report to be considered.

4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the
    Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30-2006], dated 8 November 2006:


        The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises, having considered the
        subject of the Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill [B 30-2006]
        (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
        Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
        amendments [B 30A-2006].
        The Committee reports further that:

        1.  The Transnet Pension Fund Amendment Bill is an outcome of the
           agreement negotiated between the Transnet management and trade
           unions to settle the major strike that took place early this
           year. The Minister of Public Enterprises contributed to the
           settlement of the strike and endorsed the agreement. The
           Portfolio Committee welcomed the settlement of the strike.


        2.  Given the context and nature of the Bill, the Committee felt
           that we should process the Bill without undermining the
           agreement arrived at – but in a way that is consistent with our
           powers and functions as a parliamentary committee to determine
           legislation. We are clear that our Committee is not an
           industrial relations forum or bargaining chamber. Our amendments
           to the Bill therefore aimed to simplify the Bill, make it more
           readable, avoid undue repetition and erase inconsistencies. Our
           other concerns, obviously, were around the constitutionality of
           provisions of the Bill and their consistency with other
           legislation.


        3.  We found processing the Bill challenging for many reasons. We
           will not deal withall the reasons here. Suffice it to say, that
           the Bill had to be fast-tracked in the difficult end-of-the-year
           period and we had limited time to finalise it. It is, moreover,
           a Bill that amended an Act originally adopted in 1990 that was,
           by today’s standards of “plain language drafting”, extremely
           badly written. Many of the amendments to the original 1990 Act
           that made up the current Bill were also, unfortunately, written
           in the old “pre-plain language drafting” style. The Bill dealt
           too with very technical issues that require a certain
           understanding of pension issues – and though the Committee
           coped, we had to do so without assistance of a suitably
           experienced pensions expert. The Committee also did not get
           adequate legal support to process the Bill – and this matter
           will be raised further with the appropriate authorities. The
           Committee is certainly clear that we cannot process legislation
           of a good quality in these circumstances, and we are determined
           that we should not find ourselves in this situation again. In
           short, within capacity and time limits, we sought to simplify
           and improve the Bill. With better support and more time we could
           have done better. The Bill though does meet the basic
           requirements, and so is offered to the House for adoption. Of
           course, if there are unintended consequences to any of our
           amendments to the Bill, the Committee will expeditiously attend
           to this through a further Bill the Minister might introduce to
           parliament.


        4.  Although the key provisions of the Bill were meant to be an
           outcome of the negotiated settlement between the Transnet
           management and the trade unions, it emerged at the public
           hearings on the Bill that at least one of the Transnet unions,
           UTATU (United Transport and Allied Trade Union) and an SAA
           union, AUSA (Aviation Union of South Africa) felt that people
           who become employed by an “alternative employer” (as defined in
           the Bill) after the implementation of this Bill should be
           allowed to join the Transnet Retirement Fund and that if they
           were to be excluded, this should not be set out in the Bill but
           in the rules of the Fund. The Transnet management opposed these
           proposals. The Transnet management and the unions presented
           their respective arguments regarding these issues in written
           form.


        5.  Consistent with the Committee’s views that we cannot serve as an
           industrial relations forum or bargaining chamber, we felt that
           it was not appropriate for us to decide on whether new employees
           should belong to the Transnet Retirement Fund. Following further
           negotiations between the Transnet management and trade unions on
           the recommendation of the Committee, we were informed that
           SATAWU (South African Transport and Allied Workers Union) and
           SARHWU (South African Railway and Harbour Workers Union), who
           represent the majority of workers, agreed that new employees
           should not be included in the Transnet Retirement Fund and that
           this exclusion should be set out in the Act and not just in the
           rules of the Fund. UTATU and AUSA still held to their views, but
           decided that they would not pursue the matter further with us -
           and wanted us to record their views in our report to Parliament.
           The Committee processed the Bill accordingly. However, some
           members of the Committee felt that it was not necessary for the
           exclusion of new employees to be set out in the Bill. Others
           suggested that whether the provision to exclude new employees
           from the Transnet Retirement Fund is in the Bill or not would
           not, ultimately, affect decisions by the unions to take
           industrial action on the matter – and so too much should not be
           made about the practical effects of the differences between the
           management and some of the unions on this matter.


        6.  In processing the Bill, various issues relating to the pensions
           fund industry not germane to this particular Bill arose. The
           Committee is aware that Treasury has for many years now been
           undertaking a major review of the pensions industry, and
           following discussions on this, feels that this process needs to
           be finalised as soon as possible. This matter has already been
           raised verbally with the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
           on Finance, Mr Nhanhla Nene, who responded sympathetically. It
           was agreed that individual members of our Committee will also
           raise their concerns relating to broader pension fund issues
           with him.
        7.  Several members of the public who responded to our request for
           comments on the Bill raised concerns about the Transnet Second
           Defined Benefit Pension Fund (TSDBPF). We also received a
           collective submission on behalf of pensioners with similar
           concerns. But these concerns cannot be addressed through the
           processing of this particular Bill. They essentially revolve
           around the following:


               • Since 2003 pensioners of the TSDBPF have been receiving
                 increases of 2% per annum.
               • There are pensioners who receive less than the amount
                 granted to those receiving State Old Age Pensions.


        8.  Obviously, the Committee empathises with the above concerns. In
           her briefing on Transnet’s Annual Report to the Portfolio
           Committee on 10 October 2006, the CEO, Ms Maria Ramos said that
           Transnet was also concerned about the issues raised by the
           pensioners in section 9 above and had presented a proposal to
           the trustees of the Fund in this regard. With the money that
           will come into the TSDBPF with the recent sale of the V and A
           Waterfront, the prospects of resolving the matter are much
           greater. The Committee also raised the matter in the First
           Reading Debate on the Bill, and welcomes the Minister’s
           favourable response.


        9.  Other issues raised by pensioners of the TSDBPF directly and
           through the collective submission dealt with claims that the
           TSDBPF has been mismanaged and suffered undue financial losses.
           Unfortunately, the Committee cannot address these concerns
           through the processing of this Bill, and will refer them to
           Transnet and the TSDBPF Board to attend to – and will monitor
           developments in this regard. The Transnet management agreed to
           assist with regard to the dependants of pensioners who were
           entitled to be part of the Fund but had only recently become
           aware of this.


        10. The Committee expresses its appreciation to all those who
           contributed to the processing of the Bill through the National
           Assembly.


        11. The Committee reports to the National Assembly that the Bill, as
           amended, is supported by all parties in the Committee.

