---
title: 'National Assembly - A3 October 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-10-A3
---

FRIDAY, 31 MARCH 2006
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 09:02.

The House Chairperson, Mr K O Bapela, took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Are there any motions without
notice?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, there is a motion of
condolence that we wish to table later. We will be consulting with our
counterparts.




            FILLING OF VACANCIES ON COMMISSION ON GENDER EQUALITY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move the draft
resolution printed on the Order Paper, in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:

   That the House requests the Ad Hoc Committee on Filling of  Vacancies  on
   the Commission on Gender Equality, when considering  the  nominations  to
   fill the eleven vacancies that will have arisen by the end of April 2006,
   to have regard to and in its report make recommendations on –

   (a)      the appointment of full-time and part-time commissioners; and


   (b)      with reference to the recommended term of office included in the
        advertisement inviting public nominations, the statutory
        requirement that the terms of office of the full-time commissioners
        should not expire simultaneously.

Agreed to.


                         TIME ALLOCATED TO QUESTIONS


                             (Draft Resolution)

THE DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, I move the draft
resolution printed on the Order Paper, in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:
   That, notwithstanding any Rule to the contrary, questions shall be taken
   for one hour on the following Tuesdays: 16, 23 and 30 May and on 6 June,
   in accordance with the programme as agreed to by the National Assembly
   Programme Committee.

Agreed to.

   REFERRAL OF REQUEST REGARDING APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSIONERS TO SERVE ON
  NATIONAL YOUTH COMMISSION TO JOINT MONITORING COMMITTEE ON IMPROVEMENT OF
     QUALITY OF LIFE AND STATUS OF CHILDREN, YOUTH AND DISABLED PERSONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed on the Order Paper, in the name of the Chief Whip of the
Majority Party, as follows:

   That, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of Provinces,
   the request from the Minister in the Presidency regarding the appointment
   of commissioners to serve on the National Youth Commission, the term of
   office of the current commissioners coming to an end on 30 June 2006, be
   referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
   Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons for consideration
   in terms of section 4 of the National Youth Commission Act, No 19 of
   1996, the Committee to report by 15 June 2006.

Agreed to.


 CONSIDERATION OF RULE AMENDMENTS TO ESTABLISH COMMITTEE ON AUDITOR-GENERAL



There was no debate.



Rule amendments to establish Committee on the Auditor–General adopted.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL




Debate on Vote No 21 – Defence:


The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, hon members of the House, Deputy
Ministers, Secretary for Defence, Chief of the SA National Defence Force,
distinguished guests, friends and comrades, in the gallery this morning are
young deserving South Africans whom we have recruited and who are
undergoing training in terms of our training programme, the Military Skills
Development System. They consist of 50 SA Army members, 50 SA Navy members,
50 SA Air Force members, some 50 SA Military Health Services members and
members of our Siyandiza project.

The President of the Palestinian Authority, His Excellency Mahmoud Abbas,
will address us later today. His visit includes a mission to tap into South
Africa’s and other relevant national experiences of conflict resolution,
and the maintenance of enduring and sustainable peace. This event in itself
highlights the significance our national profile has assumed in the search
for peace in Africa and around the world. It explains why, together with
the Department of Foreign Affairs, we are now formulating a new White Paper
on international peacekeeping.

This White Paper will draw mainly, but not exclusively, from our
accumulated experiences in peacekeeping. This immediately brings us face to
face with the ever-present question of the readiness of the National
Defence Force. In order to best respond to this question we must ask: Ready
to do what? We must proceed from there, because readiness must flow from
the constitutional mandate placed on our shoulders. Secondly, it must flow
from objectives that our government must achieve; and, thirdly, it must be
linked to challenges, sometimes unforeseen, which might arise.

It is my submission this morning that the National Defence Force is not
only ready but will also continue to be increasingly ready in the year and
years ahead. Since the democratisation of our country and the consequent
termination of the isolation of our nation from the community of nations,
South Africa has made a paradigm shift from the mentality of the apartheid
years. We think now with the mind of a free nation, at liberty to
participate with other nations of the world. We not only enter but we are
welcomed as a partner in all forums, and, consequently, our planning must
know no bounds.

But, we are not drunk with the excitement of the dawning of this new era.
We proceed into the wider world with the necessary prudence of a people who
understand the limitations of their situation and, therefore, especially
that priorities have to be chosen carefully. In this paradigm, Africa
remains the priority and central area of focus in the conduct of our
foreign policy initiatives. Therefore, we are ready to reinforce
continental and regional structures, in particular the African Union and
the SA Development Community.

In this regard, we are working closely with the Department of Foreign
Affairs on a programme to strengthen bilateral relations in execution of
the Cabinet decision of 2002 to ensure a representation in each African
country. The Department of Defence is already working to merge the
Department of Foreign Affairs’ ambassadorial postings with our own postings
of defence attachés, in order to provide sorely needed defence input in the
arsenal of diplomatic work.

To date, the Department of Defence has deployed 14 defence attachés in
Africa. We intend to catch up with the diplomatic postings of the
Department of Foreign Affairs and then keep pace and are planning to
increase this number so that by the end of 2008 we will have a total of 29
defence attachés on the continent.

I ask again: Ready to do what? We are ready to support South Africa’s goal
of promoting peace, democracy and good governance in the continent.
Stability is key to the attainment of this goal. And that is why the
National Defence Force carried out the mission to secure Burundi leaders
and led the African Union mission in Burundi.

After the recent democratic elections in that country, the SA National
Defence Force continues to sustain the burgeoning democracy there. As
institutions of governance firm up in Burundi, as the economy of that
country revives, and as national life normalises, the National Defence
Force will be withdrawn and be available for deployment in new areas of
continental and international concern.

May I take this opportunity, therefore, to inform the House that the
Ministry shall in the near future approach the President of the Republic
and Commander in Chief of the SA National Defence Force to take time and
pay tribute to the members who made Burundi and other missions the proud
success it is today. [Applause.]

Yes, we are ready to continue to support the United Nations through Monuc
deployments to sustain the stability of the Democratic Republic of Congo,
DRC. We are ready and, indeed, we are already at work to help secure
elections and promote democracy in the DRC by finalising the integration of
the armed forces of an emerging, unified and patriotic defence force of the
DRC.

We, in collaboration with friendly countries, have already registered and
identified more than six battalions of that country’s forces, in
preparation for the security of the presidential elections on 18 June. By
the time national elections take place there, we would have increased that
number to 12 trained battalions.

In keeping with SA Development Community commitments, we are giving all
necessary support to the SADC organ, in order to ensure that sister
regional countries not only own the process but actively make available
what additional support may become necessary for the success of the DRC
election process.

Very recently, Cabinet approved the deployment of South African troops to
the Comoros to secure the holding of free and fair elections there. The
command of the National Defence Force promptly ordered the deployment of
some 371 troops to that country. We are ready and are supporting stability
missions in Darfur, Eritrea and Ethiopia. Presently, the National Defence
Force is already assisting regarding the reunification of the armed forces
of Côte d’Ivoire, through technical advice to the AU mission team as well
as to the chiefs of staff as to how to proceed with the disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration process of the divided armed forces of
that country.

In all of these missions, the National Defence Force has deployed, in these
theatres of conflict and tension, some 3 293 men and women together with
concomitant equipment. But the readiness of the National Defence Force has
to be measured also in terms of its performance.

We exist for the purpose of executing successful missions. The success of
its operations is the only way in which the Department of Defence is
assessed and judged by our government, other governments and the
international community.

In this regard, I take this opportunity to place on record that the Chief
of the SA National Defence Force, General Ngwenya, last week returned from
a tour of the operational areas in the continent, and he returned in an
upbeat mood. He reported that he had met the United Nation’s special
representatives in Burundi, the chief of staff of the Sudanese armed
forces, the UN force commander in Sudan, the AU ambassador in Sudan and the
overall commander of the Monuc forces in the DRC. We have deployed in the
DRC, at present, some 1 218 South Africans. He also met Brigadier-General
Satya, brigade commander in the DRC.

General Ngwenya reports that without exception, all these individuals
attest to the outstanding contribution the National Defence Force members
have made, and continue to make. [Applause.]
I quote from his report:

  Two South African Infantry Batallion Commander, Lieutenant Kenneth
  Sereko, was singled out for praise for being a leader who ventured into
  territory where no other nation was prepared to go.

[Applause.]


  The discipline of the South African forces was also mentioned as
  exemplary.


I hope members of the House will take note of that. [Applause.]

What must further be placed on record is that the National Defence Force is
ready to act, not on behalf of, but together with other countries of our
region and continent. To this end we are ready to expand joint training and
joint military exercises with other regional defence forces. We must open
up on this front in order to best capacitate our neighbours, so as to
enable them to join with us in future missions in the region and the
continent.

Added to this is our abiding responsibility to strengthen the SADC
headquarters, and other relevant structures, by both seconding staff and
contributing technically. However, our relationship, with sister regional
states is a two-way process.

We have begun to benefit from the regional peace centre in Harare,
Zimbabwe, which is a SADC institution. We have recently, at a bilateral
level, welcomed six Zimbabwean air force pilots and six Zimbabwean air
force technicians, to assist us with the training of our young people. We
have seconded a full-time military officer to serve at the United Nations
headquarters, in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

The United Nations is an important area of operations for South Africa. On
broader defence issues, there is a lot of interaction between the different
countries of the world. It is also an important forum for us to put forward
our views, and to listen to the views of others. Our country is
progressively taking its place among the nations of the world in this area
without fear, without hesitation, and without doubting itself.

With all the successful deployments of the South African National Defence
Force, we are ready to sustain the continental peace processes, because
they must eventually lock into the Nepad processes of development.

We are at all times working to ensure that peace is sustained, and that our
achievements are not undermined. These peacekeeping operations are
conducted and managed in such a manner that the possibilities of peace are
firmly laid. We are indeed ready, and breaking new ground every day, both
on the continent and in the region.

Our work with SADC is progressing well, and we are now in the process of
seconding full-time officials from the Department of Defence into SADC and
its interstate defence and security committee structures, in order to build
our regional capacity and empower these structures.

We have begun a process of seconding officials from the Department of
Defence in the Peace and Security Committee of the AU. The SADC brigade,
the regional component of the Africa stand-by force, is moving according to
plan, and we are hoping it will be fully operational by the middle of 2006.
The functioning of this brigade will be a great step forward in the
development of SADC.

Our constitutional mandate also directs that the defence force must be
structured and managed as a disciplined military force. It must be capable
of training and preparing men and women, who will be imbued with skills,
for all the deployments at home and abroad. Based on our experience in
peacekeeping, the strategic business plan tabled in Parliament last week
states:

  At present the most important risks to the combat readiness of the South
  African army remain within the human resources and logistic domains of
  the landward defence programme.


In order to meet our readiness requirements, two years ago we embarked on
the re-organisation of the top level of the department. We have to get the
balance right between the needs of the Public Finance Management Act and
clear accountability within the framework of control and command.

The restructuring focuses on the areas of logistics and human resources
wherein lie our most serious challenges. I believe that we have now found
the correct formula to respond to this challenge. Nevertheless the Deputy
Minister will talk on this issue a bit more later on in this debate.

We have taken serious account on the last report of the Auditor-General and
recognised the gravity of qualified audits. I would like to report to the
House that the accounting officer, the defence secretary, has identified
areas where there are problems, and he has proposed to the Ministry and the
department plans to address and solve those problems.
Furthermore, the review of the Defence Review is nearing completion. The
complexity of budgeting for a new force structure and design pushed our
timeframe to the right and the work took longer than we thought. But we are
back on track and expecting to present it to Parliament after the winter
recess.

Within the Department of Defence, our concentration is on training,
relevant training. Training that will prepare our men and women to execute
those functions that will produce the desired results. Such training must
include dispute resolution skills. It must imbue our young men and women
with the skills to initiate post-conflict reconstruction activities.

This must be so because peacekeeping is more than just keeping warring
factions apart. On a daily basis peacekeepers need to do things which are
not normally considered military. In short, peacekeepers need to be trained
in a range of skills that articulate responsibilities that go beyond the
comfort zone of the military base and military barracks.

In many ways modern peacekeeping is a much more difficult task than
fighting wars. The lessons drawn from other peacekeeping deployments are
being incorporated into our training programmes at different levels.
Training must be aimed at improving our effectiveness. We are fully
utilising the expertise within the different sections of government, and
work closely with other departments in our cluster.
We are contributing to the national reservoir of skills. These skills will
be taken back into society. Within the context of the Accelerated Shared
Growth Initiative for South Africa (Asgisa), we are contributing to skills
development, where we train the youth in various life skills. We are
forging relations with the Department of Labour and the Department of
Education to develop joint initiatives in this area of training.

We are reopening some capabilities that were mothballed, and in doing so we
are training our young people, and thus increasing our capacity. It was the
great Chinese military strategist, Sun Tzu, writing on war 2 500 years ago,
who observed:

  One who knows the enemy and knows himself will not be endangered in a
  hundred engagements. One who does not know the enemy, but knows himself,
  will sometimes be victorious, sometimes meet defeat. One who knows
  neither the enemy nor himself will invariably be defeated in every
  engagement.


[Applause.]

In the current African scenario, and for the foreseeable future, Army
Vision 2020 is an in-house plan to address the transformation of the
biggest component of the SA National Defence Force - the Army. It is our
belief that it will reach maturity in the year 2020.

Let me report on some exciting progress on the reserve force front. Under
the able leadership of General Anderson and the Reserve Force Council, two
reserve force infantry companies have been successfully deployed alongside
the permanent force in peace support operations in the DRC and it is
planned to deploy a minimum of a further two companies in 2006.

Twenty-nine officers and 14 non-commissioned officers successfully
completed their courses in 2005. A further 100 officers and 80 non-
commissioned officers will be trained in 2006, thereby accelerating the
rejuvenation process and improving representivity. I invite the members
again to look for themselves around the House in the gallery. [Applause.]

To date 1 200 members of the commandos have elected to transfer to the
reserve force and will undergo conversion training in the next year. Ek
hoop mnr Groenewald sal dit geniet. [I hope Mr Groenewald will enjoy that].
[Interjections.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Ek sal dit waardeer, ja. [I will appreciate it, yes.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Fantastic! We have committed ourselves in the
Strategic Business Plan to ensuring that the commissioning of the strategic
defence package equipment is implemented within the budgetary guidelines,
and that the new equipment is fully integrated and functional over a period
of time within the SA National Defence Force doctrine.

I pause to announce that on Wednesday we hosted members of the defence
committees of Parliament on board one of our new corvettes, the SAS
Spioenkop, for the limited purpose of demonstrating to them the efficiency
of this new equipment. It is not for me to comment at length on their
experiences there. Suffice it to say that the new equipment will be
employed expediently and in such a manner that safety and security are
enhanced in the region and around the shores of our country. We are also
ensuring that representivity is achieved through the training of recruits
in the new capabilities.

The SA Navy patrol corvettes are in the process of being integrated into
service and are being prepared for operational deployment at home and
around the continent. The first, the SAS Amatola, was handed over to the SA
Navy in February this year. [Applause.] I appeal to members of the House to
contain themselves. Similarly, the arrival of the SA Navy’s first Type 209
MOD SA submarine is eagerly awaited on 7 April 2006. As I talk to you, it
is sailing the oceans heading south, coming here. [Applause.]

Our constitutional mandate to support the people of South Africa is being
demonstrated by our continued support for government activities and
initiatives like the securing of major events, that is, local elections,
sports events, Soccer World Cup 2010 and national events like Youth Day,
Women’s Day, etc. Again, and this is to the credit of the SA Navy, as we
speak, the SAS Drakensberg is on her way to Cape Town with the rotor for
Koeberg, which will switch on the lights in Cape Town. [Applause.] Modesty
makes it difficult for me to comment more in that direction.

Work on the re-organisation of the defence industry is now in full swing.
Together with the Department of Public Enterprises, we have set up joint
workgroups to re-examine and align the interactions between Armscor and
Denel. This may result in amendments to the Armscor Act. The Department of
Defence is looking at Denel’s restructuring and participating in it to
ensure alignment with the present and future requirements of the Department
of Defence.

The Department of Defence requires a defence industry that is able to
maintain strategic abilities. We are aiming for an industry relationship
that allows the National Defence Force to maintain and develop those
strategic and niche capabilities that secure our sovereignty, and ensure
our ability to sustain our industry’s consumables without being dependant
on others. The South African industry is the largest and most sophisticated
in Africa, and we must jealously guard it in order to preserve our
continent’s interests.

Emanating from our strategic work sessions and guided by our environmental
scan, we have allocated the following resources as our Ministerial
priorities for 2006 -07: Firstly, R100 million for the military skills
development system. An intake of 4 300 is planned for 2006, which will
bring military skills development system members to some 9 500 for the 2006-
07 financial year. Secondly, the renewal of the DOD information and
communication systems will consume some R50 million. Thirdly, enhancing the
capability of defence intelligence services will consume some R121 million.
Readiness and service ability of operational vehicles will receive some
R150 million, defence infrastructure R10 million and expanded anti-
retroviral rollout R26 million.

I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for his contribution and support
over the last year. He has made it possible for me to lead the department,
especially on the broader transformational front. [Applause.]

I would also like to thank the three parliamentary defence committees who
worked hard to perform effective oversight of the defence function.

I would also like to thank the Defence Secretary, Mr January Masilela, the
Chief of the SA National Defence Force, General Ngwenya, the leadership of
the Department of Defence as represented in the Plenary Defence Staff
Council and my staff in the Ministry.

I need to acknowledge and thank the chairperson and Board of Armscor who
continue to grapple with the intricate issues of the transformation of
Armscor and the acquisition process.

But my special thanks are reserved, as always, for the rank and file, men
and women of the SA National Defence Force who make our country as a whole
so proud. If the Department of Defence is able, ready and more than willing
to ensure peace and security across the continent and elsewhere, it is
because these are the people who are ready to serve whenever and wherever
they are called upon to do so.

I thank you, House Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms T V TOBIAS: Mohlomphehi-Modulasetulo wa Ntlo, matona a hlomphelileng le
matsoho a bona, maloko a Ntlo, bomme le bontate, batjha ba Afrika Borwa ba
tletseng mona kajeno ba battle ... [Hon Chairperson of the House, hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members of the House, ladies and
gentlemen, the beautiful youth of South Africa that is here today ...]

... my instincts told me today that this House would be filled by this
beautiful youth, and my regalia therefore looks similar to theirs.

I am humbled by the responsibility bestowed on me by the ANC to lead the
Portfolio Committee on Defence. Today it is an honour for me to have the
opportunity to engage in a discussion following the presentation of the
budget by the Minister of Defence, Comrade Terror Lekota.

It will be an omission not to mention the fact that this debate takes place
in a very important epoch, as we are celebrating the anniversary and the
centenary of the Bambatha Rebellion, the 50th anniversary of the Women’s
March, and the 30th anniversary of the June 16 uprising.

As we celebrate the army days in our country, we also need to be patriotic
to the gallant fighters of our revolution, and put the heroes of our people
on the map. The strategic objective of the ANC-led government is that of
promoting peace, security and stability in the region, and on the African
continent as a whole. We need to improve and maintain our defence
capabilities at all times, and we will achieve this.

This month we celebrated Human Rights Day, which is an important day in our
South African calendar. As the Freedom Charter outlines, ``All shall enjoy
equal human rights’’, and ``There shall be peace and stability and
friendship’’.

The people of Walmanstahl are happy today that they have successfully
claimed and battled to get their land back, and thanks go to the portfolio
committee in helping them to achieve this. [Applause.]

We have to build a peaceful and stable region, and a continent that is
prosperous, for the growth of the African economy, and for the betterment
of the lives of our people. The resolutions at the ANC’s Stellenbosch
Congress on peace and stability emphasise the engagement of African
challenges, and focus on peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Sudan and lately, the Comoros, and on negotiating
with the World Trade Organisation, the WTO, to help resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Therefore, the state of preparedness of the South African troops and the
SADC standby force is of crucial importance to attain this. There is also a
need to engage Iran on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and the
usage of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.

It will also be important when South Africa spearheads peacekeeping
operations to make sure that it concentrates on the issue of the Western
Sahara, and the struggle for self-determination of the Saharawi people
against occupation by Morocco.

As the Minister might have already elaborated in his speech, South Africa
operated in Burundi and the DRC. Burundi successfully held its elections
last year, and the Burundi people are thankful for the interventions made
by the South African government. In the same vein, the DRC will hold their
elections in June this year.

As part of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development Programme, South
Africa participated in the African Peer Review Mechanism, a mechanism that
encourages self-assessment of countries, and this assessment not only
focuses on how government performs, but also deals with the strengthening
of the African Union and forging peace in the continent. This performance
audit, if adopted by all African countries, will bear more fruit.

There is also a need for the peace and stability cluster of Parliament to
participate in the Pan-African Parliament. I hope that this will be taken
into account. South Africa has linked the issue of peace and stability to
poverty eradication - as the Minister has indicated - housing provision and
food security through social cohesion programmes, and issues of skills
development for the youth, and today is a typical example thereof.

The ANC government, through the Military Skills Development System, the
MSDS, is training young people in the different occupations, be it in the
army, the navy, or the air force, and so these skills projects will be a
guarantee for employment but, at the same time, we still need to train more
youth to deal with unemployment.

Having presented this overview, one is obliged to zoom in on the issues
that relate to this Budget Vote. It is important to reflect on the facts of
allocation adequacy, as we all know that it is totally impossible for any
government in the whole world to report that it has unlimited resources for
unlimited needs. Therefore, we are also faced with the challenge of limited
resources for unlimited needs.

Comparisons can be made in this regard with countries like Brazil, whose
military spending, according to a global organisation, is $13,1 billion,
and this is a country I compare South Africa with in correlation to defence
capabilities, but of course the South African budget is justified. South
Africa is expected to exercise with overseas counties in demonstration of
its modernisation, sharp and high-tech capabilities to comply with the
current challenges. So we need more funding.

This issue might be sensitive in a country that is in transition and still
addressing social ills, created by the cruel apartheid system of
unemployment and poverty, but at the same time, South Africa needs to rise
to the occasion, as it is playing a critical role in peacekeeping in the
continent. It therefore warrants that it acquires state-of-the-art tools
that will assist the Defence Force to intervene with the desired speed.

The budget for the current financial year has not increased that much.
Therefore, in my opinion, the R23,830 billion budget allocated to defence
is not adequate to address the defence capabilities needed, and the amount
that the Department of Defence has to come to terms with in its strategic
planning. It means that some programmes must be put in a slow gear until
such time that there are alternatives to address the above.

At the current juncture, South Africa has only four Corvettes to patrol and
train our soldiers. The underfunding the navy will not disempower us from
purchasing the fifth Corvette to augment our capability. Therefore, we
should not be tempted, at the same time, to pre-empt the discussions on the
R6,1 million prematurely, on the issue of submarines and the Corvettes in a
negative manner.

The recently launched SAS Amatola has been commissioned with pride for
peacekeeping, and will return very soon to South African waters.

As we have ushered in the transformation of the department, we should also
maximise the participation of women to the extent that a 50/50 composition
is achieved.

Regarding this, as is the case with local government, women also have a
pivotal role to play in the force, and in the same breath, the youth must
continue to occupy strategic positions to rejuvenate our force. The exit
mechanism will not only bring about rejuvenation, but will also usher in
modernisation and high technology and skills.

The R3,3 billion allocated to address issues of administration should also
speak to the 2010 human resource strategy of the department, and this
allocation should deal with maintenance of property and other related
matters. The database of the department should be harmonised in such a way
that issues of pensions, non-statutory funds and special pensions are fast-
tracked.

The role that military veterans have played should not be underestimated.
In my opinion, the reintegration process is not yet over. Therefore the
importance of payouts for special pensions and the consideration of the ANC
and NGC resolutions on this issue, of specifically the under-35s, is vital.
Also, the integration of uMkhonto weSizwe, and the MK and Apla Military
Veterans Association in the establishment of the SA Military Veterans
Association should not only be an exercise that ends there, but should be
able to address issues of pension, housing needs, medical needs and
training of our veterans through projects.

A workforce with a high morale excels in its service if there is
motivation. Therefore, there needs to be an improvement in the working
conditions of our forces, including medical facilities like military
hospitals, obsolete stock should also be disposed of, and Armscor should
design a disposable plan.
South Africa, like any other country, can be vulnerable to mercenary
activities, and as we have seen with the war in Iraq, this has invited in
our ranks people who saw an economic opportunity. They comprise national
security companies in our country, and therefore, we need to tighten up the
law in relation to the role played by South African security companies who
are stationed in either Iraq or Cote d’Ivoire.

Therefore, Parliament will fast-track the prohibition of mercenary
activities in areas of armed conflict, and the legislation will close gaps
which were created by the Regulation of Foreign Military Assistance Act.

The restructuring of public enterprises and tasks given on issues of
reclassification should harmonise the role that Denel and Armscor should
play, and these entities of the Department of Defence should meet and the
respective departments should fast-track the process.

As part of the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa, the
defence industry must supply machinery and other tools, and must also
reflect the demographics of our transformation agenda, and broad-based
black economic empowerment and should also reflect the demographics of
women. The department must therefore engender the budget to address this
capacity constraint.

We should also bear in mind that efficiency is a procedure necessary to
limit weaknesses to deliver. Therefore, the role that the Defence Force
needs to play in community projects is important. We will be reflecting on
social responsibility, as houses can be built by the army, and also in
dealing with disaster management programmes.

As the MSDS is the key priority of the Department of Defence, the full
operation of the Didata Seta is of this utmost importance.

As I said before, we as Parliament, through the Portfolio Committee on
Defence, identified the achievements and challenges of the Department of
Defence. We have been playing an active role in maintaining oversight over
the department in executing its mandate and managing its limited budget, as
there are constitutional provisions on oversight.

Oversight can also be perceived positively or in a negative manner,
depending on the angle from which it is viewed. Therefore, it is the role
of this committee to ensure that there is mitigation action taken to
address risks that might hamper the process of delivery.

This oversight tool, in this case in point, has played a positive role on
the issue of separation of powers, and it is clearly understood by the
committee. The committee rose above petty politicking when it addressed
issues of national importance, and worked as a collective as a multiparty
committee of the House.
Today, as we said earlier, the community of Walmanstahl will be proud of
this committee for its work on the issues of the land claims. This
committee takes this opportunity to thank the former chairperson of the
Portfolio Committee on Defence, Professor Kader Asmal, for the work he had
done, together with the committee, to facilitate this process.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms T V TOBIAS: Chairperson, the policy of the ANC on peace and stability
has seen the light today, and the Freedom Charter says ``There shall be
peace and friendship’’.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms T V TOBIAS: The ANC supports the budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We do not have the luxury of time
today, unfortunately. There is an international event that is going to take
place later today, so please let us respect time allocations.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, members of this
House, the people of South Africa do not deserve a Defence Force that is,
by the government’s own admission, not combat-ready. At present, the people
of South Africa are confronted with a Defence Force that is unable to
properly fulfil its constitutional obligations or have the required
capacity to play an even greater role in helping to bring about peace on
the African continent.

What the people of South Africa deserve instead is a professional and well-
resourced Defence Force that is able to carry out its duties in an
efficient and cost-effective manner, as well as a Defence Force that is
able to make a positive contribution to the security of not only the
Republic but also the region as a whole. Sadly, it appears that unless
there is an urgent shift in focus by the management of the SANDF, this will
not become a reality any time soon.

Only the most partisan of observers could fail to admit that there is a
crisis in the SANDF. The Minister of Defence himself has admitted that the
SANDF is struggling to maintain even its core capability. The Minister has
admitted, for example, that maintenance programmes ... [Interjections.]
Read the briefing documents of the Department of Defence. The Minister has
admitted, for example, that maintenance programmes are at their lowest
levels ever, that military hospitals are in need of extensive renovation,
and that infrastructure in general is in a perilous state.

The decline in infrastructure is now so dire that in the air force, for
example, the Department of Defence has admitted that pilots are in constant
danger owing to a failure to keep all systems in the required technical
condition.

This dismal state of affairs is compounded by reports which have indicated
that the SANDF can no longer be regarded as a fighting force. This is due
to the fact that 10 000 ... [Interjections.] No, this is what the
department tells us. Read the reports, my friend. [Interjections.] This is
due to the fact that 10 711 officers are too sick to be deployed, with as
few as 5% of some battalions able to be deployed owing to ill health. The
reality is that the SANDF is indeed in a perilous state, both in terms of
its equipment levels and in terms of the numbers of battle-ready personnel.

When it is considered that virtually all battalions are unfit for
deployment and that all available fit soldiers are deployed in foreign
peacekeeping missions, then there is simply no way that the SANDF can be
viewed as capable of defending the territorial integrity of the Republic.

The implication is that the SANDF is finding it extremely difficult to
fulfil both its primary constitutional duty and its ability to contribute
to its ever-increasing peacekeeping duties on the continent, which are in
support of our Nepad initiative.

Instead of honestly, and, I repeat, honestly, confronting this crisis, it
appears that the political leadership of the SANDF is intent on burying its
head in the sand. To make matters worse, it appears that they are
determined to compound the problem by placing an even greater burden on the
SANDF. In this context, it is extraordinary indeed that there is a
ministerial directive in terms of which the possible acquisition of a fifth
Corvette is being contemplated now.

The DA wishes to place on record our grave concerns about such an
acquisition, if it is done. It is unbelievable that this acquisition is
even being considered, given the enormous problems the navy is already
experiencing with regard to the integration of the four Corvettes which
have already been purchased under the strategic defence package programme.
Surely, the acquisition of a fifth Corvette will not only divert funds from
other critical operational areas, but also serve to compound the numerous
problems facing the navy? As it is, the navy has not met its 2004 to 2005
target in terms of sea hours, and the further 15% reduction in the budget
for maritime training capability will only deepen this problem.

Furthermore, other problems such as the availability and development of
personnel for the new equipment, the lack of spares and support contracts
for the existing Corvettes, and the deterioration in existing
infrastructure have yet to be addressed.

We therefore urge the hon Minister to give due consideration to this matter
and not to exercise the option of purchasing the fifth Corvette. It must be
remembered that there exists no obligation to acquire a fifth Corvette
under the initial contract, but rather only an option that can be exercised
if the government chooses to do so, and I hope they do not.

It is clear that the government has not got its priorities straight. All
too often it seems that instead of tackling the root causes of the crisis
that exists within the SANDF, the government is instead intent on acquiring
expensive weaponry which we cannot afford and for which we certainly do
not, as of yet, have the available skills to operate and sustain.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to salute the many fine men
and women in uniform who are seated in this House this morning, who serve
this country with distinction and with great sacrifice. The fact that the
SANDF is able to function ...

An HON MEMBER: That’s a contradiction.

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: That’s not a contradiction. The fact ...
[Interjections.] Why? If I agree to the five Corvettes then it means that I
support the Defence Force. Is that what you want? The fact ...
The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, please continue with your speech.
Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: All right. The fact ... [Interjections.] You
don’t like listening to the truth. Yes, that is the problem.

The fact that the SANDF is able to function, despite the enormous
constraints it faces, is ultimately a tribute to the tenacity of these
soldiers and officials. It is high time that their efforts were rewarded
with a focused plan, which aims to deal with the core problems that
continue to beset the SANDF so that they are able to serve their country in
a Defence Force that we can all be proud of. Until there is evidence of
such a plan, the DA will continue to oppose the Defence budget. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr G P MNGOMEZULU: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister of Defence, hon
Deputy Minister of Defence, hon members, comrades and compatriots, three
days before this Budget Vote, as Whip of the defence committee, I
personally spoke to the hon Shah. He confided to me that his party, the DA,
expected him to oppose this Budget Vote despite what he knew about what had
happened.

He knows the truth and, for that matter, we went to the Democratic Republic
of Congo with him. The UN authorities praised the role that the SA National
Defence Force is playing, which he also agreed to. Now the reason why he is
contradicting himself in front of this august House is because he is
echoing his master’s voice. [Applause.]

In his state of the nation address in February this year, the President
stated that, inter alia, primary health has been expanded since 1994; more
than 1 300 clinics have been built or upgraded and 2 300 have new equipment
installed; childhood immunisation programmes have been extended; our health
services receive 101 million patient visits a year; and HIV treatment
programmes are in place at 192 health facilities.

The SA National Defence Force recognises the fact that HIV and Aids pose a
serious threat to human society, and it is a national challenge, which
seriously affects standards and combat-readiness to a certain extent.

The SA Military Health Service, as a caring arm of the SA National Defence
Force, has introduced the following programmes to address this pressing
challenge within its ranks – which will, of course, prove wrong what the
hon Shah said. These programmes are Masibambisane, which means “let’s work
together”, and Phidisa, which is a Sesotho word for “make better or save
lives”.

The SA Military Health Service is part of the national roll-out of the
antiretroviral treatment of Aids. Enrolment and treatment medication is
determined by the protocol supplied by the national Department of Health.
Each military site involved in the roll-out will be identical to the
national Department of Health, in order to ensure total community support
at the same time.
In addition, the SAMHS has an outreach programme called Project Phidisa,
which provides antiretroviral treatment to any member or registered
dependent in the catchment area of six research sites. Enrolment in the
study is determined by the research protocol; and members who do not
qualify for antiretroviral treatment are enrolled in a non-antiretroviral
research arm.

The SA Military Health Service, being the health care arm of the Defence
Force, followed suit and planned accordingly. It was a fact in 2004 that
the SAMHS would most likely not obtain additional funding for this purpose.
This has now been rectified through the R26 million that has been budgeted
for it and, therefore, it is reflected in the overall plan of the
Department of Health.

The Department of Defence’s Masibambane project addressed issues of
prevention and promotion of efforts against HIV and Aids for the past
years. Master trainers established a hierarchy of knowledge to the level of
peer educators throughout the organisation. The knowledge base of the
members in the organisation regarding HIV and Aids improved over time, and
was confirmed by two annual knowledge, attitude and practice studies over
the past two years.

The biggest frustration remains the lack of behavioural change towards
reduction in the prevalence of the disease. The Masibambane programme
focussed on the following: education for all members in the Department of
Defence, with respect to HIV and Aids and the prevention thereof; training
of a critical mass of Department of Defence members to the level of peer
educators for every military unit. Awareness programmes are ongoing, to
ensure that everybody is fully in the picture.

The first accredited sites to roll out these ARVs will start as from 1
April 2006, tomorrow, and there are six sites of Phidisa. The military
sites are similar to those of the national Department of Health. The ARV
treatment programmes will roll out in the Department of Defence where
soldiers have been acknowledged as a strategic issue. The SAMHS would
therefore want to roll out in four-month intervals during this very same
financial year. Eventually, the ARV treatment must be sustainable and must
provide equity in treatment throughout the organisation.

Poverty reduction, education and self-actualisation must form part of life
skills development towards self-employment and high productivity. Those who
are HIV-negative must be an important focus group and should remain
negative. The follow-up patients, with respect to adherence to drug
regiments, must be a high priority. The following methods have proven to
work: information technology, buddy support and pill counts.

In conclusion, there is confidence that much more will be achieved in the
SAMHS over the months to follow. Equality upholds the reputation of the
SAMHS as health service providers, leading to trust and alignment in
expectation and effort.

Clear guidelines given through policy formulation are a starting point for
an effective strategic direction process. Planning, execution and
monitoring will ensure the desired outputs and outcome towards a healthy
military community, not only to make the military health service acceptable
but also proactive and caring.

The ANC, as a steel-tempered political party and organisation, with a tried
and tested leadership, declares its unequivocal and unwavering support for
Vote 21. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Madam Deputy Speaker, honourable Ministers, colleagues, we
would like to welcome the newly recruited students of the army who are
present in this debate. We want to put it on record that their recruitment
was transparent but we want it to be even more transparent so that the
medium to communicate the detail of recruitment should be accessible to as
large an audience as possible to give everyone a chance to access
employment within the SANDF, especially people who reside in the rural
areas. We must also get the chance to be members of the army.

Last year the portfolio committee visited the military units in the Thaba
Tshwane area to ascertain the state of the facilities and maintenance
thereof. Some of the findings of the committee were: the appalling state of
accommodation of nurses, the living conditions of learners in some quarters
are not fit for human occupation and severely impede the education and
training of learners and foreign learners are accommodated in private
guesthouses due to the bad state of living quarters to save the image of
the party. The budgeted items of this session should take that into
account.

With regard to the deployment of soldiers abroad, we don’t believe that our
soldiers stationed abroad on peace missions are getting a fair deal with
regard to their living conditions and allowances. The manner in which their
allowances get worked out should be reviewed. Our soldiers are used to a
certain standard of living and should be remunerated accordingly. Therefore
the people negotiating the memorandum of understanding should negotiate it
in such a manner that it satisfies the people who are on the ground and not
the people in the offices. [Applause.]

It was reported last year, Chairperson, that the South African military
operation in the DRC is responsible for almost a third of sexual complaints
against the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the country. We want to
commend the steps taken by the leadership in disciplining those people who
were involved and who shamed our members with their behaviour.

How does HIV/Aids affect the SANDF? The numbers have been thrown around,
but I, Velaphi Ndlovu of the IFP, say that the roll-out of ARVs should be
done in a manner that all services are involved and should be done in a
manner that would satisfy everybody. It should be done in manner that all
of the R20 million allocated for it should be used. There must be no
rollover, whatsoever.

With regard to the exit policy, we as members of the portfolio committee
have a problem with it. We still maintain that the position is not the same
for statutory members as it is for non-statutory members. At this stage we
are still talking about non-statutory members and statutory members,
because of the agreement that is the one used by the department. I
therefore request that the department and the leadership of the department,
especially the army, should work out proper contracts for people.
Especially the non-statutory members should not find themselves fired
unknowingly.

Last year we dealt with the Auditor-General’s report. In that report there
were internal control weaknesses resulting in not all losses and damages
being reported to the department. In that report we found that there is no
rectification of weaknesses over internal control of machinery and
equipment. In that report we find discrepancies between the stock
registered and the actual stock on hand, as well as poor storage
facilities. There is defective internal control around the security and
administration of weapons.  The Secretary of Defence should therefore take
note of what the Auditor-General is saying and make sure that these
discrepancies are corrected. If they are not corrected, the Secretary of
Defence will not be doing his job in the manner it is supposed to be done.

The policy directives set by the Minister of Defence appear in all the
documentation presented to the portfolio committee. Some of these policy
directives are not followed. That begs the question: Who directs the
department, if the political policies and political directives are not
followed? Who then directs the department? We all believe that the people
who sit behind the desks should direct the department and the political
head who knows about the politics of the country does not direct that. The
Minister’s direction should be taken into account, whenever we are dealing
with the budget.

Lastly, I want to urge the Members of Parliament, that there are statements
that we can talk about when we are in the committee and some that we can
express in this House. Such statements should take into account that we are
not talking about ourselves. We are talking about the people, the country
and other people, some of whom like us and some of whom don’t like us.
[Applause.]

We must not be seen as if we are saying: We are the weakest country in the
world. It is very important on humanitarian grounds that when we talk about
the budget, we should include the people who live in the country. As a
member of the IFP I urge members to make sure that they grow up when they
debate a matter such as this. [Applause.]

Ms M L MATSEMELA: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister of Defence, hon members, all
dignitaries present ...

... baša ba rona ba ba kgabileng ka mebala ya rona ya sesole sa kgololosego
[... our youth dressed up in our democratic military colours ...]

... the prescripts of the Constitution in Chapter 11, section 200, are
clear and unambiguous about the role of the SANDF in our democracy. It
says, inter alia, that the defence force must be structured and managed as
a disciplined military force. Secondly, the primary objective of the
defence force is to defend and protect the Republic, its territorial
integrity and its people in accordance with the Constitution and the
principles of international law regulating the use of force.

At its 51st national conference in Stellenbosch, the ANC reiterated its
resolve for a speedy transformation of the state machinery and the SANDF is
key to this project. The main aim of the Department of Defence’s human
resource strategy 2010 is to ensure that the right quantities and quality
of human resources are available in the right places timeously and that
they are effectively, efficiently and economically managed and
administered.

The strategic goals of the human resource strategy are to rejuvenate the
SANDF’s human resources composition with young, fit and healthy members who
fulfil operational utilisational needs, achieve an affordable HR
composition, adequately resource and utilise the regular and the reserve
force, replace the current SANDF system with a new service that will
improve human resource service delivery and retain the required operational
and functional expertise.

The integration of the former statutory and non-statutory forces, which
were once polarised, is a powerful illustration of the government’s
commitment to national reconciliation, unity and transformation. To be able
to achieve this, the department needs the funding to retain, reorientate
and provide bridging and supplementary programmes for these forces.

The aforementioned perspective derives from our Constitution. The
overarching goal is to establish a new institution that is professionally
efficient, effective and broadly representative. The postapartheid era saw
the positioning of women on a pedestal of equality, human dignity and
freedom. This programme is not an event but a patient, steadfast and
determined goal of our armed forces.

Since 1994 the department was seen as a key vehicle for transforming
unequal relationships in the broader society, concerned that gender equity
should continue to define the success in our armed forces have achieved our
democratic society.

In the SANDF the substantive progress continues towards enhancing female
representivity by means of military skills development recruits. Currently
30% of MSDS members are women. This is the result of focused marketing and
recruitment drives that will continue apace into the future. As the size of
the MSDS intakes expands, the number of women per intake will also
increase.

Tshwarang jalo bomme gonne mosadi mooka o nya le mariga. [Keep it up women,
because a woman always has a plan no matter how difficult the situation
might be.]

A woman is seasonal. The representivity of women in all domains of the
department is becoming more and more pronounced with women being found in
the combat sections of the army, the air forces and the navy. The presence
of women actively involved in our armed force was illustrated during
Exercise Seboka, conducted at the army combat training centre at Lohatla in
2005.

Despite men making up the gender majority in the department, women occupy
many senior positions too. Within the SANDF’s regular force there are 13
female brigadiers general. There are also 796 female sergeant majors or
warrant officers. The department’s mainstreaming project is currently
underway and will result in more opportunities opening up for women in the
department.

Representivity refers to the racial and gender composition of the army and
to the fair integration and equitable representation of the constituent
integration forces in all ranks.

The way we deal with the past must carry us into the future, a future that
offers something better for everyone indeed, with the seeds of a prosperous
society being planted today. Hence today is better than yesterday and
tomorrow will be better that today.

The department’s affirmative action plan and various career management
initiatives are continuously implemented to address the challenges of our
divided past in which Africans in particular and blacks in general have not
as yet reached the critical levels of seniority and specialised knowledge
and skills in the military.
The composition of the MSDS intakes is indicative of the department’s
intent in this regard. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr G T MADIKIZA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and Deputy Minister and
hon members, the Department of Defence is in the enviable position that the
regional security situation is stable and South Africa is at peace with its
neighbours. We are not faced with any significant foreseeable threats
against the sovereignty of our state. Nevertheless, force readiness is a
constant requirement. It is a demand placed upon any defence force to be
ever vigilant and to look windward as members of the navy might say. The
foreseeable future might look peaceful, but we must be able to address
unforeseeable threats and demands should they arise.

It is therefore imperative that our defence force, during this period of
peace, is kept in readiness and that the necessary investments in equipment
and personnel are made. An example of an unforeseen demand is the current
deployment of defence force members in external peace support missions. We
currently have a presence in the DRC, Côte d’Ivoire, Burundi, Sudan and, to
a lesser extent, in Liberia and the Horn of Africa, which now exceeds the
defence review estimates by 300%. As the AU grows from strength to
strength, we can only expect that the peacekeeping demands on our defence
force will increase.

Reports regarding discipline issues concerning some of our soldiers
deployed in these missions abroad indicate problems with morale, troop
management and preparedness. Whilst individuals must be held accountable
for their behaviour, the high rate of such incidents must reflect on the
defence force’s decision-makers.

Looking at the budget, the question arises: How much are we actually
investing in people? Here we are advocating equitable budget balances
between the two extremes, that is, sophisticated weaponry and ordinary
soldiers. The UDM supports the Budget Vote. [Time expired.][Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Members of
Parliament, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Secretary for Defence, Chief of
the SA National Defence Force, chiefs of services, distinguished guests,
friends and comrades, I take this opportunity to greet you and those in the
gallery - the young deserving South Africans we have recruited and that are
undergoing training in terms of our training programme, the Military Skills
Development System.

They are young people – 50 from the South African army members, 50 from the
South African navy members, 50 from the air force members, and 50 from the
SA Military Health Service members. There are also members of our Siyandiza
project.

This morning the Minister of Defence, the hon Mosiuoa Lekota, set the tone
for the 2006 Department of Defence Budget Vote, with a clear and
unequivocal message that the SA National Defence Force continues to be
ready and fully prepared to carry out its constitutional mandate to defend
all the people, the territorial integrity and the democracy of the Republic
of South Africa.

I want to say to Shah again, because he does not listen ...

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: The hon Shah.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: The hon Shah. There is no crisis in the
SANDF. [Applause.] It is highly irresponsible to suggest that there is a
crisis and that we cannot do our core business. It is a pity that he reads
the same speech in every Budget Vote. [Interjections.]

The Minister went further to suggest that the department and the people of
South Africa need to re-establish consensus on the current terms of
reference of the concept of the state of readiness in the context of
government direction and foreign policy in particular. In this regard, a
key consideration for the Department of Defence is the extent to which we
audit our performance with regard to human resource management.

Thus, the transformation agenda of the Department of Defence, as it relates
to representivity, gender equality, improved management and the principles
of Batho Pele, remains central to the achievement of any of the
department’s long-term objectives for sustained military preparedness.

A key initiative to sustain the department’s state of readiness in the
context of people-centred transformation in the department is the human
resource 2010 strategy. The aim of HR 2010 is to ensure that the department
has the most effective, efficient and economical human resource composition
of both uniformed and civilian members to deliver on our mandate and
support for government.

Further, the Department of Defence core service system, introduced in
January 2005 as the first step for Military Skills Development System
recruits to be taken into regular forces, currently stands at 5 804, a
significant increase of 4 864 as compared to 940 members in 2005.

Another integral part of the MSDS initiative is the placement of qualified
recruits. This year two major milestones were achieved. Firstly, the joint
operations division has, for the first time, deployed 299 MSDS trained
members in operations outside the country. Secondly, in November 2006 the
SA Army will place 200 MSDS members in full-time employment in four private
companies, while securing 30 days per annum for each of them for reserve
force duty.

The service continues to open doors to young women recruits in highly
specialised skills areas. In this regard, the SA Navy has recently
appointed three women officers commanding to the SA Navy combat platforms,
including an appointment to a navy fast-attack craft, the SAS Makhanda.
[Applause.]

The acquisition of the strategic defence packages has opened new doors for
further transformation of the Department of Defence. In this regard, 20
officers have had new opportunities for submarine training in India and
Germany. Consequently, the SA Navy will shortly have two qualified women on
the Type 209 submarines, a first in Africa. [Applause.]
Similarly, the SA Air Force will qualify 12 women pilots by the end of
2007. Six of them are black and three have so far been earmarked for the
combat line via the new Hawk lead-in fighter trainers. A further 13 women,
six black and seven white, have been identified for training as navigators
and engineers in 2007. [Applause.]

It is important to note these achievements against the backdrop of ongoing
challenges in the Department of Defence as a whole. I say challenges, Shah,
and not crisis because you’ve got a crisis in your head. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.]

The main challenge to the MSDS rejuvenation of the SANDF, however, is to
ensure a balance in the inflow of recruits with the outflow of departmental
personnel in excess of requirements. [Interjections.] Will you please keep
quiet, old man? Please! [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: You’re talking about the SDPs. How many people
make money out of them?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Hon Deputy Minister, please
continue with your speech.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF DEFENCE: With this in mind, the mobility exit
mechanism, a voluntary severance package for uniformed members of the SA
National Defence Force, was introduced in July 2005 as a tool to facilitate
the rightsizing of the department’s human resource composition, although a
process of realistic succession planning was guarding against an exodus of
scarce skills and special knowledge.

For a new initiative, the department is quite pleased with the initial
indications that the mobility exit mechanism is, albeit slowly, delivering
on its objectives by creating space for rejuvenation, whilst addressing the
challenges of how to deal with stagnation and the transformation agenda for
representivity in areas targeted by the department.

The challenge for the department has been to at least sustain and then
increase the numbers of people taking the MEM so as to open further
opportunities for a greater number of young, deployable and employable
members.

Progress in this regard so far has been quite encouraging. The 2005-06
targets for the MEM were 500, and the department achieved 553. The target
for the 2006-07 financial year stands at 750, and the department already
has 209, with a target range of 700 to 1 000. On the cumulative total of
762, there are clear indications that those taking the MEM are primarily
from the key target areas of concern with regard to representivity and
career stagnation.

Gender equality is still a major issue, especially as it relates to
progression to middle and senior management. In this regard, it is clear
that in the services and divisions of the SANDF, the attainment of a 30%
threshold recruitment of women through the MSDS has been achieved all
round. However, the progression of a significant number of women to
specialised fields and higher ranks remains a challenge.

At the strategic level the Department of Defence has complied with the
government requirement for a gender forum and gender focal point budget for
gender programmes, developed clear prescripts for 50:50 representation of
women in all decision-making bodies, developed a departmental gender-
mainstreaming strategy, and developed policies on the elimination of sexual
harassment and on the advancement of women.

However, whether at service level or as an integrated department, the
department as a whole has not yet achieved any significant progression with
the representation of women in middle and senior management. This is the
area the department is looking at very seriously.

The health status of the SANDF is a key determinant of our combat and
deployment capabilities. The SA Military Health Service has identified the
HIV and Aids pandemic as a potential force preparation risk and continues
to prepare appropriately for the prevention, management and treatment of
this disease. In this regard, the SAMHS Masibambisane awareness prevention
campaign continues unabated.
The treatment focus continues through Project Phidisa, a joint initiative
between the SAMHS and the United States National Institute of Health,
seeking to research the efficacy of antiretrovirals in a military
environment and their impact on combat-readiness. Further, the department’s
pending alignment with the Department of Health’s antiretroviral roll-out
and the Khomanani campaign will further boost our capacity for treatment.

Support for the future and welfare of military veterans is a priority of
the Department of Defence. In June 2005 the National Skills Fund and the
defence and trade education and training authority signed a memorandum of
understanding to ensure support for the training and upskilling of military
veterans.

Since then we have embarked on the issuing of identity cards for registered
military veterans, whilst implementing the MOU which has now yielded
approximately 1 276 jobs across the country in fields such as private
security, driver training, metro policing, traffic wardens and in the
construction industry. There are many more jobs and skills training
opportunities in the pipeline.

The central challenge to progress with the implementation of military
veterans’ benefits, however, is fragmentation. In 2003 we launched the SA
Military Veterans Association with the understanding and hope that there
would be agreement on a single nodal point for all issues relating to
veterans. The current Military Veterans’ Affairs Act, unfortunately,
provides for this fragmentation of the military veterans’ association,
which is against the spirit of a single national defence force and a united
nonracial country. [Interjections.]

On a practical level fragmentation also works against the proper co-
ordination and administration of military veterans’ issues, as there are
often blurred lines of responsibility and authority. The Department of
Defence, as one of a number of role-players with regard to military
veterans’ affairs, will continue to canvas the various stakeholders on the
benefits of a unitary approach.

It is imperative, however, for me to stress that the issues relating to NSF
and special pensions are the responsibility of the Department of Finance.
The role of the Department of Defence in this regard is that of a
facilitator.

The military justice system also remains a challenge for us. As already
alluded to in our last Budget Vote, a ministerial task team was appointed
to look into the transformation of this system. The task team recommended
significant changes with constitutional implications. The implementation of
these recommendations, however, requires that the Act would have to be
revised. For now, we are aiming to have a new bid in place shortly. By next
year the new Act would have been promulgated.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the people-centred approach of the
Department of Defence is aimed at ensuring that we have the requisite
skills base, discipline, motivation and direction to continue to deliver
our service to government and the people of South Africa. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the ACDP is of the opinion
that this budget represents a considerable improvement in the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. The ACDP particularly welcomes the increased
allocation for the SA Army and for the expansion of the antiretroviral roll-
out programme. Not giving priority attention to combating HIV and Aids
would be like an army waging war against itself.

The priority given to the landward defence programme indicates a
willingness to address the shortcomings within the SA Army. With the navy
and the air force having benefited from an influx of new equipment, the
additional funds for the army hold positive implications for much-needed
modernisation within the SA Army.

By making provision for general upliftment in terms of infrastructure,
equipment and personnel, the Defence budget makes a valuable contribution
to improving state capacity and strengthening the infrastructure projects.
The ACDP acknowledges that these developments provide a strong foundation
for second economy participation.
Areas of concern include the delay in the redrafting of the White Paper on
Defence - the hon Minister referred to this earlier in his speech – and
what is described as manufacturing delays in the operational launch of the
Rooivalk helicopter.

In the 2005 budget, R65 million was set aside for the disposal of obsolete
ammunition in accordance with environmental concerns, thus there is a need
for further clarity with regard to the progress in this endeavour.

The ACDP salutes the South African forces for the duties they perform
nationally and on the African continent, and therefore we will support this
budget. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S B NTULI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present,
Secretary for Defence Mr Masilela, the Chief of the SA National Defence
Force Gen Ngwenya, our guests in the gallery, hon members, ladies and
gentlemen ...

... bafowethu nodadewethu, sanibonani! Ukwethula inkulumo yami namuhla,
ngizozama ukuthi sikhumbuzane kancane ngamalungelo abantu. Ngicela ukuba
kesithi ukubuyisela imiqondo yethu emuva kumhla ka-21 Mashi 1960 e-
Sharpville lapho kwafa khona futhi kwalimala odadewethu nabafowethu
ezandleni zombuso wobandlululo nencindezelo.

Lokhu phela ngikusho ngenxa yokuba namuhla lolu suku selwaziwa ngokuthi
uSuku lwamaLungelo, yingakho sithi inyanga kaMashi yinyanga yamalungelo
abantu bonke jikelele ngaphandle kokukhetha ibala. Ngakho-ke umbutho wethu
wezokuvikela uyawahlonipha amalungelo abantu nesizwe jikelele. Ngizonikeza
isibonelo esiphilayo sokubuyiselwa komhlaba kubantu. Ngethemba ukuthi
nisakhumbula ukuthi ezinyangeni ezimbalwa ezedlule ikomidi lezombutho
wokuvikela liye lanibikela nge-Wallmansthal loco inspection report
ngesikhathi livakashele ukuyobheka kuqhubeka kanjani.

Lo mbiko uchaza ngokuthathwa komhlaba wabantu ababehlala kuwo
ngendlov’iyangena obizwa ngokuthi yi-Wallmansthal eduze naseTshwane.
Ukubuyiselwa kwalo mhlaba ongama-hectra angama-400 eMnyangweni wezoLimo
nezoMhlaba ukuze ubuyiselwe kubantu base-Wallmansthal kuyinqubekela
phambili futhi kuyisibonelo esihle sokuhlonipha amalungelo abantu yilo
mbuso wethu kaKhongolose.

Manje  indaba  isiphakathi   koMnyango   yezeMisebenzi   yoMphakathi   kanye
nowezoLimo nezoMhlaba. Ngizama ukunikhumbuza ukuthi lo mhlaba wathathwa ngo-
1954  kwathi  ingxenye  yokugcina  yazothathwa  ngo  1974,  nakuba   kukhona
izinkinga kodwa siyabonisa ukuthi lo  mbuso  kaKhongolose  uzimisele  ukuthi
ukhulule abantu bakithi  futhi  ubuyise  nesithunzi  sabo.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... good morning brothers and sisters! In delivering  my  speech  today,  I
will try to remind you about human rights. I would like us to think back  to
21 March 1960 in Sharpville where our brothers and sisters were  killed  and
injured at the hands of the oppressive apartheid regime.

I am saying this because today is known as Human Rights Day. It is for  this
reason we are saying that the month of March is the month  of  human  rights
for all people, irrespective of colour. The Department of  Defence  respects
the rights of people and the whole nation. I will give the example  of  land
redistribution. I hope you still recall that a few months ago,  the  Defence
Force committee gave you feedback about the Wallmansthal in loco  inspection
report where they visited to check the progress.

This report talks  about  Wallmansthal  near  Tshwane  where  the  land  was
forcefully taken  from  people.  Returning  400  hectares  of  land  to  the
Department  of  Agriculture  and  Land  Affairs  so   that   it   could   be
redistributed to the people of Wallmansthal is good progress and is  a  good
example of respecting human rights by the government of the ANC.

The issue is now between the Department of Public Works and  the  Department
of Agriculture and Land Affairs. This land was taken in 1954  and  the  last
portion  was  taken  in  1974.  Although  there  are   some   problems,   it
demonstrates that the government of the ANC is prepared to free  people  and
bring back their dignity.]

Secondly, the budget for the Department of Defence empowers our Defence
Force to adhere to the values of democracy by practising democratic rules
of engagement, such as respect for human dignity, patriotism, integrity,
leadership and accountability. They observe the Geneva Convention and are
further guided by our Constitution, that of the OAU and the UN Protocols.
But how does the Department of Defence do this?

This question leads me to another subtopic, namely the Military Skills
Development System. In terms of this programme and the annual call-up,
young matriculants of all races are invited to enlist with the SANDF. The
MSDS is a military programme earmarked to inject young blood into our
Defence Force, as its members gradually get older.

Issues of demographic representation are a constitutional imperative for
all departments. It is at this entry point that these young men and women
get moulded and trained as members of the SA National Defence Force in
various forms, be it the navy, the air force, the army, intelligence,
military health and so on and so forth. As a result of this programme, our
Defence Force currently has four companies with a capacity strength of 150
each, with two companies capable of deployment at any time. Therefore there
is no crisis.

The Military Skills Development System enables the programme for commandos
to be converted into conventional reserve force members to remain on
course. A junior leadership group, that is, of lieutenants, is also in
progress. Of course, there are challenges, such as an inadequate
operational budget. You will find with the commando units that most of them
are, at the moment, a bit far from the conventional reserves. You will
still find most of them in urban areas. Therefore you find that the rural
areas are left out, and that poses a security threat.

But through this MSDS and other programmes of the Defence Force that we
have undertaken, we are phasing out the commandos. The security factor here
is certainly being addressed, hence a need for consideration by the
Ministry to decentralise these training sector units.

Linked to the MSDS is the long-standing matter regarding the service corps.
The decision by the Department of Defence to revitalise the service corps
unit within its establishment, Minister, is welcome. The service corps
programme is aimed at equipping military personnel with alternatives
skills, which they can apply when they leave the SANDF and enter civilian
life.

Hon Minister and the Secretary for Defence, this programme is vital for
current serving members of the SANDF. It should not wait or be applied
after members have left the Defence Force. It is better and appropriate to
empower SANDF members that are still serving now so that they are empowered
as and when they opt out of the Defence Force. This will also ease the
consideration of the currently planned Defence Force exit mechanism.

Therefore the budget should be structured such that this is implemented.
This will, in turn, bring some leverage to the Defence Force exit mechanism
as it will provide reskilling for members of the SANDF to cope better in
life beyond their period of serving the nation, as it is the culture of the
ANC-led government to care for our soldiers. The exit mechanism should
therefore not be equated with severance packages.

Lastly, hon Minister, I wish to draw your attention to the procurement
policy. Spares and other replenishments hinder the SANDF’s operations
abroad. This we picked up during our visit to the Democratic Republic of
Congo. A vehicle that does not meet UN standard requirements results in our
Department of Defence not being able to recoup moneys spent on that
vehicle, owing to a lack of serviceability. Hence, it becomes a loss. In
conclusion, the ANC supports this budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Adjunkspeaker, ek wil aan die begin, in my beperkte
tyd van twee minute, vir die agb Minister sê dat ons die aankondiging
verwelkom van die 1 200 kommandolede. Maar, daar is ook nog meer as 50 000
lede daar buite wat u, as Minister, in die steek gelaat het en wel om
verskeie redes.

Agb Minister, u is die politieke hoof van die SANW en moet in dié Raad kom
verslag doen oor die belastingbetaler se geld, en ek wil vandag vra: agb
Minister, ek het u 'n vraag gevra in hierdie Huis oor die byna R200 000 wat
gespandeer is deur die vorige hoof van die SANW, genl Nyanda, vir 'n
medaljeparade in Frankryk - R200 000 van die belastingbetaler se geld om sy
vriendin saam met hom te neem om 'n medalje te gaan kry wat die Franse vir
hom gee, hoe regverdig u dít? Wat is u antwoord daarop?

'n Ander saak wat ek wil aanraak, is die aspek van die Adjunkpresident wat
'n mediese dokter van die Weermag moet saamvat, maar die dokter moet op 'n
ander vliegtuig vlieg. Dis belastingbetalers se geld. Die agb Minister is
op rekord waar hy gesê het dat die Weermag staan net in as dit 'n amptelike
reis is. Hierdie was nie 'n amptelike reis nie. My vraag aan die agb
Minister vanmôre is: wat het u, as Minister, gedoen om dit te voorkom en
watter stappe het u gedoen om te verseker dat die belastingbetaler se geld
ingevorder en teruggegee word vir die belastingbetaler?

Die laaste aspek: ek wil die agb Minister vra, en ek het hom ook amptelik
'n vraag gevra, oor 'n militêre regter wat in effek na Afrikaans verwys het
asof dit walglik is. Ek wil vandag vir die agb Minister vra: Minister, as
iemand verwys na 'n verklaring wat in Sesotho is, en hy sê dit is vir hom
walglik dat 'n verklaring nog in Sesotho is, sal u daarop trots wees? Sal u
daarmee tevrede wees? Nee, ek wil vir die agb Minister sê hy moet kyk na
dié saak; hy moet optree en vinnig optree. Baie dankie. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD:  Hon Deputy Speaker, I would like, at the outset, in my
limited time of two minutes, to say to the hon Minister that we welcome the
announcement regarding the 1 200 commando members. But there are still more
than 50 000 members out there whom you, as Minister, have left in the
lurch, for a variety of reasons.

Hon Minister, you are the political head of the SANDF and you have to come
and report to this House about the taxpayers’ money, and I would like to
ask today: Hon Minister, I asked you a question in this House about the
nearly R200 000 that was spent by the former head of the SANDF, Gen Nyanda,
for a medal parade in France - R200 000 of the taxpayers’ money to take his
lady friend with him to go and receive a medal that the French were
awarding him; how do you justify this? What is your answer to this?

Another matter that I would like to touch on is the issue of the Deputy
President having to take a Defence Force doctor with on a trip, but the
doctor has to fly on another aircraft. This is taxpayers’ money. The hon
Minister is on record as having said that the Defence Force would only pay
if it were an official journey. This was not an official journey. The
question I wish to put to the hon Minister this morning is: What did you as
Minister do to prevent this and what steps have you taken to ensure that
the taxpayers ’ money is recovered and given back to the taxpayer?

The last aspect: I want to ask the hon Minister, and I also asked him an
official question in this regard, about a military judge who in effect
referred to Afrikaans as if it were disgusting. I would like to ask the hon
Minister today: Minister, if someone refers to a statement in Sesotho, and
he says that it is disgusting to him that a statement is still made in
Sesotho, would you be proud of that? Would you be satisfied with that? No,
I want to tell the hon Minister that he has to look into this matter; he
has to act, and act fast. Thank you. [Time expired.]]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Agb Voorsitter, Minister, kamerade, kollegas en lede van
die Nasionale Weermag ... [Hon Chairperson, Minister, comrades, colleagues
and members of the National Defence Force ...]

... before I begin with my speech, I want to respond to the input made by
the hon Shah of the DA. Firstly, he does not listen to the speech of the
Minister on the future of the SANDF, but he just delivers a prepared speech
under the instructions of his bosses. Secondly, he praises members of the
SANDF, but then he opposes the Budget Vote, which means that there is no
money to pay the salaries of the members that he praises. Thirdly, he
criticises the expensive weaponry of the department, but then he goes on a
trip in Cape Town harbour to enjoy looking at that expensive weaponry.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] This is the way the DA deals with a national asset
like the SANDF – I hope the people see this.

It’s an honour and a privilege to participate in the Budget Vote on
Defence. Let me say at the outset that we as the ANC are proud of the
Department of Defence, which is doing a sterling job under difficult
circumstances. I want to single out especially our men and women in uniform
who are assisting to promote peace, security and stability in the region,
the continent and still support the people of South Africa. [Applause.]

Two years after our first democratic election the White Paper on Defence
was approved in 1996, outlining the transformation of the defence policy
and of the SANDF. It was followed by the Defence Review in 1998, which
elaborated on matters such as posture, force design, force levels,
armaments, human resources, and funding, to name but a few. Both these
documents are now dated and are under review by the department.

Both Parliament and all its stakeholders are eagerly awaiting the outcome
of this defence update. I trust that this update or review of the review,
will be properly titled, Mr Minister, like “The South African National
Defence in the 21st Century”, because it can become the benchmark for a
modern defence force in the region, on the continent and even
internationally.

The outcome of this review will, in a nutshell, indicate what the SANDF
must do and what it is supposed to do. As it is a government and a
Commander in Chief that deploys the SANDF, it follows logically that the
SANDF will be funded for the activities which it is requested to perform.

It is therefore not a matter of increasing the defence budget to fund the
needs, but rather to identify the needs of the SANDF, what it is mandated
to do, and then to fund that. Therefore, the approach should be to cost the
needs or objectives, to assist the allocation of resources.

We in the ANC are looking forward to the outcome of this defence review
process late in this year, as it will hopefully move away from the current
situation where the budget of the department is under continuous pressure.
The past 18 years have seen a real decrease in the defence budget with some
unfunded mandates and the problem that not all policy proposals could be
funded.

A matter related to defence activities and funding is maintenance of
defence facilities. The Portfolio Committee on Defence recently visited
Thaba Tshwane to oversee the state of facilities. The committee has
submitted its report with recommendations to Parliament.

In many instances the facilities are buildings, hospitals and bases that
have deteriorated to such an extent that maintenance is urgently required.
[Interjections.] At the same time some facilities are underutilised. The
question arises whether different force structures should not be considered
to create an own capacity to maintain its own facilities. [Interjections.]

The decision taken seven years ago to acquire strategic defence packages,
Mr Shah, turned out to be a good decision. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, please take
your seat. Hon members, let us respect those that are on the podium because
they have a right to be heard. You can rise on a point of order if you have
a problem but I think we need to contain ourselves. Please proceed hon
member.[Interjections.]

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Chair. I think the hon member has a permanent
problem. [Laughter.] The decision taken seven years ago to acquire
strategic defence packages, turned out to be a good decision, as we now are
witnessing a newly equipped navy taking to the seas to fulfil their
mandated role, and a soon to be newly equipped air force. Systems are being
integrated and personnel are being trained to operate the new equipment.
Even young soldiers who joined the SANDF through the military skills
development system are preparing to operate these new systems and
equipment.
The ANC welcomes the recent announcement of the SA Army Vision 2020. It is
a timeous pronouncement by the Chief of the Army to position this arm of
service for any possible future challenges. The mandate of the army is
twofold. Firstly, it is to provide a combat ready land force for the
future; secondly, to contribute towards the development and upliftment of
South Africa, its people and the African continent.

The challenge for our land forces is that future involvements in UN or AU
operations may be related to peace enforcement needing war fighting
capabilities as opposed to current peace support engagements, or that the
current UN Chapter 6 responsibilities may convert to UN Chapter 7
responsibilities, the use of force.

These challenges are unpredictable and our land forces have no option but
to prepare for possible peace enforcement operations and the conversion to
UN Chapter 7 operations. This means that they must be structured, staffed,
equipped and trained to meet future challenges.

For our land forces to fulfil their mandate, it is of vital importance to
give attention to the prime mission equipment of our land forces. Equipment
projects will have to be developed, and older systems must be adapted for
less demanding jobs.

   Een van die steunpilare in ons Nasionale Weermag is ons konvensionele
   reserwemag. In 'n onlangse brief aan 'n militêre tydskrif skryf Skutter
   Pepeta, 'n lid van die Durban Regiment, met sy terugkeer ná 'n
   dienstydperk van ses maande uit die Demokratiese Republiek van die Kongo:
   “I am proud to be known as a South African National Reserve Force member
   from the Republic of South Africa.”


Dit is dié positiewe gesindheid van ons man- en vrouesoldate wat diens vir
ons land doen ver buite ons landsgrense wat gestalte gee aan Pres Mbeki se
uitspraak dat Suid-Afrika nou 'n era van hoop betree wat van ons 'n
wennasie maak.

Ek bepleit dat die volgende drie aspekte ten opsigte van ons konvensionele
reserwemagte dringend aandag kry: eerstens, die voedingstelsel uit die
military skills development system [militêre
vaardigheidsontwikkelingstelsel] na die reserwemageenhede moet bespoedig en
versterk word; tweedens, leiergroepopleiding vir beide offisiere en onder-
offisiere, en die behoorlike finansiering daarvan in ons reserwemageenhede
voorkeur kry; en derdens, dat voorkeur gegee word om gevegsgereed-
reserwemageenhede op die been te bring.

Daar is by my geen twyfel dat die leër se Visie 2020 vir sy sukses in die
toekoms swaar gaan steun op ons konvensionele reserwemagte se bydra tot
nasionale verdediging nie.
Ek sluit af deur te bevestig dat die ANC trots is op ons Nasionale Weermag
en sy lede. Dit is merkwaardig om te sien hoe die bemanning van ons nuutste
Corvette – waarvan mnr Shah lid of deel was – die SAS Spioenkop, ten volle
verteenwoordigend van ons bevolking, dié skip bedrewe hanteer. Dit is
betekenisvol wanneer die spesiale verteenwoordiger van die Sekretaris-
Generaal van die VN in die DRK vir die portefeulje komitee sê Suid-Afrika
is “the father of transition in the DRC”, en hoe internasionale waarnemers
die optrede van ons soldate in vredesoperasies prys.

Ons is trots om te sien hoe die SANW professioneel voorberei vir 'n
staatsbesoek en trotse uitstalvenster vir Suid-Afrika is, soos wat ons
vandag hier buite gaan sien met die besoek van die President van Palestina.
Die ANC steun die Verdedigingsbegrotingspos. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[One of the pillars of our National Defence Force is our conventional
reserve force. In a recent letter to a military magazine, Rifleman Pepeta,
a member of the Durban Regiment, wrote the following on his return from six
months’ active service in the Democratic Republic of Congo: “I am proud to
be known as a South African National Reserve Force member from the Republic
of South Africa.”

It is this positive attitude of our male and female soldiers serving our
country far beyond our borders that gives credence to President Mbeki’s
pronouncement that South Africa has now entered an era of hope that makes
us a winning nation.

I appeal for urgent attention to be given to three aspects in respect of
our conventional reserve forces: Firstly, the feeding system from the
military skills development system to the reserve force units must be
accelerated and strengthened: secondly, group leadership training for both
officers and non-commissioned officers, and the proper funding thereof in
our reserve force units, must receive priority: and, thirdly, priority must
be given to the establishment of battle-ready reserve force units.

There is no doubt in my mind that the army’s Vision 2020 will rely heavily
for its success in the future on the contribution of our conventional
reserve forces to national defence.

I conclude by confirming that the ANC is proud of our National Defence
Force and its members. It is remarkable to see how skilfully the crew of
our latest Corvette, the SA Spioenkop - of which Mr Shah was a member or to
which he was a party – is operating that ship, the crew being fully
representative of our population. It is significant when the special
representative of the Secretary General of the UN in the DRC tells the
portfolio committee that South Africa is: the father of transition in the
DRC” and that international observers are praising the conduct of our
soldiers in peacekeeping operations.
We are proud to take note of the professional way in which the SANDF
prepares for a state visit and serves as a proud showcase for South Africa,
as will be seen today during the visit by the President of Palestine. The
ANC supports the Defence Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chair, hon Minister, hon Deputy Ministers, the Department of
Defence has over the past 10 years opened its doors to a more democratic
system, inviting women and physically challenged persons to join its ranks.
The MF hopes that this process continues to attract a true representation
of the variety of South Africans, and the department has the appreciation
of the nation for their dedication to and sacrifice for South Africa.

The MF takes this opportunity to applaud all members of the Defence Force
who are committed to protecting and defending South Africa. Beyond these
heroic sacrifices, our troops dedicate their lives to achieving world peace
by engaging in foreign-policy initiatives through Nepad, SADC, the AU and
the UN. A peace-support operation by our troops continues in the DRC,
Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and Liberia.

The MF is concerned about the conditions members of the Defence Force have
to live in. The MF feels that it is incumbent on us to ensure that Defence
Force members’ needs at these ports are maintained appropriately,
considering that they are placing their lives on the line for us.

With regard to the budget, the MF notes that the Department of Defence’s
budget has decreased for this year and is set to continue decreasing over
the next two financial years. We express our concern as to how this
decrease will affect the operation of the department. Further concern is
expressed over the R3,3 billion allocated for maintenance, property rates,
and municipal services and leasing.

A number of issues regarding the decreases for various programmes exist,
but the MF is willing to give this new divisional plan a chance to manage
the department’s affairs affectively and efficiently. The MF supports the
Defence budget, Budget Vote 21. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr O E MONARENG: Hon Chair, hon Minister of Defence and Deputy Minister,
all Ministers and Deputies around, the Defence Secretary, the Chief of
Defence, allow me this opportunity to join whoever was part and parcel of
this debate. I want to start by saying that I will not embark too much on
what the hon Shah said. I just want to say: “I pity you, Mr Shah. You
belong to the wrong party. If you were part of the ANC, you could have been
happier.” [Laughter.]

The defence strategy has been clearly set out and defined in this year’s
strategic business plan as a key element that will lay the basis for the
defence function during this year and during the entire Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework. It outlines the strategic intent of government, and
encompasses the military strategy the objectives of which are to enhance
and maintain comprehensive defensive capabilities; promote peace, security
and stability in the region and on the continent; and provide support for
the people of South Africa.

The defence strategy cannot be operationalised without support strategies,
mainly the human resource strategy including the reserve force strategy,
the capital renewal strategy, the joint logistics strategy and the defence
information management system.

Having set out the defence strategy, it is incumbent upon the defence
establishment to make it alive and ensure that they act within the
guidelines provided therein. Furthermore, the defence strategy must be seen
in the context of the overarching national strategy of which it is a
component.

The evolution of the defence strategy is derived from the country’s already
set national security framework, and needs to be enhanced by ensuring that
there are concrete elements made visible in the operationalisation thereof.
These include, for the purposes of today’s budget debate, ensuring that
Defence acts in conformity with other entities within the national security
framework, be it the Presidency, Foreign Affairs, policing, the
intelligence services, etc.

The defence intelligence services of our country need to ensure that the
capabilities that they have are further enhanced within the framework set
out in the law. This is important, as recent incidents that have been
published have not projected the intelligence services in general in a
positive light. As we have said previously, accountability for the
functioning of the intelligence services must be strengthened and we must
ensure that they act within the law.

We have also stated in the past that the conditions of our defence
intelligence headquarters are unbearable, and the sooner the occupational
health and safety hazards for the members occupying that building are
attended to the better, as already emphasised in the certificate of
noncompliance issued by the Department of Labour well over a year ago. We
therefore need to see concrete plans and timelines for this to happen
during the current session of Parliament.

I just want to say that we in the portfolio committee had the opportunity
of paying a visit to the intelligence headquarters and we were not very
impressed with the state of the building. We have recommended that
intelligence services be relocated elsewhere. I’m sure that the Department
of Defence is looking into that matter.

An ever-increasing challenge to which defence intelligence must rise is
ensuring that its capabilities, both human and material, are not negatively
affected and that it remains at the cutting edge of fulfilling its mandate
in accordance with the law. This means that defence intelligence has to
become a sound and creditworthy decision-support mechanism and not be
tempted to go astray.

Although it reports regularly to the Joint Standing Committee on
Intelligence, there needs to be a further tightening of similar reporting
to the parliamentary defence committees, of course through the Minister of
Defence. It will therefore become incumbent on us to strengthen these
reporting lines not only in terms of accountability to Parliament but also
in terms of the executive function.

A growing challenge, which needs to be amplified, is ensuring that a
requisite repository of skills is acquired, maintained and retained in
order to ensure that the products of defence intelligence form a sound
basis for decision-making in the defence establishment. A plan will
therefore need to be put in place to ensure that the high level of training
and professionalism that defence intelligence has acquired is not lost to
other sectors of the community or even beyond. It must be a place of first
choice of employment within Defence.

Defence intelligence will also need to ensure that as we are involved in
peace-support operations and become more involved, there is requisite
intelligence operations capability and defence intelligence support. The
current elements, which are part of the SA National Defence Force
deployments, must therefore be enhanced and ensure that, typical of what
they should do, they become the eyes and ears of the command structures on
the ground.

I just want to thank and congratulate the Minister of Defence on doing a
good job in making sure that he and his department convert our Defence
Force into a professional and efficient organisation, which today enjoys
respect on the continent, in the region and in the world.

We want to say that when we visited SAS Spioenkop, DA member Shah was
reeling with excitement, saying that the DA has been opposed to this
beautiful and advanced technology. He was actually saying this to me,
because he was very excited. I’m saying that even if we go for the fifth
Corvette ...

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: On a point of order ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Monareng, please take
your seat. [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: Hon Chairperson, I would advise the speaker to
stop putting ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Are you rising on a point of
order? [Interjections.]

Moulana M R SAYEDALI-SHAH: He is misleading this House. I never said the
things he is saying, nor did I say the things that were said before.
[Interjections.] He is misleading the House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! Hon Monareng, you
know what your discussion was with Mr Shah, but we leave that to your
discretion.

Mr O E MORANENG: What I can say, hon Chair, is that he can deny what he
said, but he cannot deny the excitement because he was very, very excited.
[Laughter.] So I want to say without further ado that the ANC supports
Budget Vote 21. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I don’t think it’s appropriate for
the Chair to be seen to be smiling, but the debate is quite enjoyable.
[Laughter.]

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Hon Chairperson, from listening to the debate so far, it
is disconcerting to hear that the same problems continue to exist year
after year, which still need to be addressed and resolved. That is an
indictment against this government.

On behalf of the men and women sitting in the gallery - I wish we were all
proud, Minister - we will continue to raise these issues until they are
dealt with satisfactorily.

Die totale gebrek aan logika van die agb Koornhof staan vanoggend hier uit
soos ‘n seer vinger. [The hon Koornhof’s total lack of logic sticks out
like a sore thumb this morning.]

It is totally illogical to think that any member of any committee who, in
the execution of his committee duties, participates in a visit to a new
frigate is thereby demonstrating support for the arms deal and the current
Budget. If that is the logic of a member of this committee, then that
explains precisely why they have problems with the arms deal, because,
immediately, anything which is ethical goes by the backdoor; anything which
has a reference to how you do business, apparently also goes the same way.
Because you have gone to look at the boat, you are then bound to support
the arms deal; you are bound to support their budget.

If that is what Mr Monareng and Mr Koornhof are saying, then I understand
why we have had this fiasco; why we have had a chief whip of the majority
governing party being found guilty in a court of law while the name of the
Minister who signed that arms deal has not yet been cleared, because he
unfortunately passed away.

I understand then why we have these problems. I understand this morning
exactly why we understand it, but you have a more positive perspective.

The modernisation of this defence capability and the funds spent on the
Military Skills Development System and antiretroviral roll-out are in line
with the appropriate spending patterns by the SA National Defence Force.

Whilst the infrastructure is to receive R1 billion for the next financial
year, it is clearly not adequate to address all the outstanding neglect by
this ANC government on buildings, roads, bungalows, stores, hangars and
runways. Ask those people in the gallery under what conditions they have
lived and continue to live.

And then Mr Monareng, you talked about loyalty. [Interjections.] Human
resource strategy 2010, which intends rejuvenating the human resources of
the SANDF is based on the military skills development system. With due
respect, until December 2005, 7 626 school-leavers have been trained in
terms of this programme.

We are all proud of that, and we congratulate the department on that, but
it doesn’t mean we have to support the budget. It doesn’t mean we do not
have to criticize. We will do so. We will do so fearlessly.
[Interjections.]

The continued withdrawal of the commando system from the rural areas,
despite a note of caution from various nongovernmental organisations, not
only the DA, has done nothing to ensure a decrease in crime levels in those
affected areas.

In fact, the withdrawal thereof has left thousands of members, black,
white, coloured and Indian, who were previously gainfully employed albeit
for a specified time period, totally without income, or any hope of
providing financially for their families.

When the cost-saving measures of withdrawing the commando system are
compared to the advantages in favours of the continued implementation
thereof, consideration should be given to reversing such a poor, uninformed
and far-reaching negative decision.

Taking into consideration the state of the nation address by the President
earlier this year, it is clear that high demands are placed on the Defence
Force and its structures in setting up all kinds of different measures. I
do not intend mentioning them here due to time restrictions.

It is thus clear in my view and our view that the crux of the task intended
for the SANDF seems to be more of an outbound nature than of a national
nature. Currently, more than 3 000 soldiers have been deployed continuously
at any given point in time to fulfil undertakings made by the President and
Cabinet, which are to the detriment of the continued maintenance and upkeep
of the Defence Force in general. Various alternatives and policy directives
had to be reformulated and put on hold by the department in light of the
short supply of funds spent on nothing less than international image-
building exercises.

In stark contrast thereto, we have submissions by the department to
National Treasury for funding for, inter alia, the readiness and
serviceability of operational vehicles, Mr Koornhof, being reduced from
R495 million to R150 million, and remodernisation of the Department of
Defence information and communication systems being reduced from R213
million to R99 million. That is the kind of defence force that you want to
go and do an international image-building exercise.

More importantly, we have the meagre amount of R3 million to be allocated
to the rebuilding of the entire conventional reserves. That’s just R3
million, Mr Minister. This amount probably does not even suffice for the
running of one company of 120 men for a year, let alone the entire
conventional reserves!

Dit is lagwekkend. Dit is ‘n skreiende skande! [It is ludicrous. It is a
crying shame!]

The amount of R6 million allocated for the 2007-08 financial year does not
improve the situation at all. It is a true reflection of the saying: “Too
little, too late”.

Another area of concern is the fact that the allocation for administration
has increased by an enormous amount to R1,7 billion, a totally excessive
figure in light of other competing demands faced by the Defence Force. Mr
Chair, if I may end ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon member, you are way
over time.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Thank you, Mr Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M S BOOI: Hon Minister, let me congratulate you on the delivery of such
a good speech today; not just on the speech, but also for being able to
show the progress and the professionalism that has grown in the SA National
Defence Force. We also congratulate our new members who came through the
programme of the military skills development system, the Secretary for
Defence, all the generals we have here today and hon Deputy Ministers.

I must say that I am always amazed about the way the DA conducts itself.
But because I live in the Western Cape, I have learned a few lessons in the
last week that their conduct reflects what Zille does in my province. So,
it does not surprise me when hon Sayedali-Shah forgets most of the things
we tell him in the committee. And the way he conducts himself does not
surprise me. So, I have decided not just to revamp the business strategy
but to outline for him in English that is quite simple for him to
understand what we mean and what the SANDF is doing, because if one has not
understood the business strategy of the SANDF, it’s always difficult for
one to be able to understand the role of the SANDF.

Just to help you hon Sayedali-Shah. I hope you have the book in front of
you because it is important for me to be able to assist you because you
talked about the defence strategy. That is on page 11, under Force
Preparation Strategy. I do not understand where hon Sayedali-Shah gets his
information on maintenance from, because the SANDF is not about
maintenance. It does not do maintenance. Its core business is to defend and
protect the country.

With regard to the Force Preparation Strategy the SANDF says:

  The defence capabilities of the SANDF will only be fully used in the
  event of a general war, which threatens the nation’s sovereignty.


There is no national threat, and there is therefore no reason for the SANDF
to ready and gear itself for preparation as if there is a war. So, there is
no crisis within the SANDF.

The second part of the national strategy of the SANDF within the Strategic
Business Plan - that is in the office of hon Sayedali-Shah and he did not
look into it - refers to its own missions. Missions are combinations of
tasks that should be performed to achieve the military strategic
objectives. This is the second point we are making and emphasising. That is
what we are looking for.

You are saying that the SANDF is spending most of its time outside South
Africa withdrawing from conflict areas, or from what you presume to be
areas of conflict. Wherever the commandos are deployed, those areas are
definitely areas of concern to us, as people who were fighting against
apartheid. For you it could not be areas of concern because the commandos
were doing things that were quite important to you. But for me, who has
been fighting for the liberation of this country, those were areas of
concern. They were areas of battles and where people have been infiltrating
in order to enter South Africa.

Today they are not really natural areas that need to be defended. Against
whom are you defending yourself? You cannot be defending yourself because
Umkhonto we Sizwe doesn’t exist anymore. So, it is an internal arrangement.
It is a domestic matter of how we resolve our conflicts, and Comrade
Koornhof has been very outstanding in explaining to you how good we as
South Africans are at getting into negotiations and being able to resolve
our differences.

This has been proved in a number of capacities. We have just given Helen
Zille a good lesson last night, when we resolved with her the 2010 World
Soccer differences and lectured her on how governments budget, because she
has never budgeted for any government. So, she doesn’t understand what is
going on in budgeting for a city. So, that is the difficulty we are going
to have with her. I know Comrade Nomatyala is around; she will always help
Helen Zille to achieve some of the goals she is now ``misperforming’’ in
the city.

With regard to the Force Employment Strategy, maybe that is one other thing
that I must help you to understand because it is also in the business
strategy. You know we have to have the DA member. The SANDF is increasingly
called upon to support the foreign policy requirements of government. These
requirements primarily lie in supporting our continent in peace and
humanitarian missions as well as military co-operation. The Force
Employment Strategy directs the SANDF on the conduct of operations in this
domain.

Now it does really mean that this government will not be able to deploy and
apply the strategy of saying, let the SANDF participate in a conflict or
intra-party infighting where the DA and the ANC are having differences. You
cannot deploy the SANDF there. So, that means it is not its responsibility
or core function.

So, what we are beginning to do is to leave the SANDF. That is a proactive
action we are taking to be able to say: How do you make sure that we are
continuously stabilising South Africa? How do you build confidence among
South Africans so that they are able to know that their government is there
for them?

So, there is no way you can come to the podium and say that the SANDF is
unable to carry out the constitutional obligation that it has guaranteed
and put forward. The SANDF is doing that. We are getting involved in peace
missions on the African continent. The SANDF is defending the
constitutionality of African countries.

The SANDF is not a politician. Politicians have decided that it is
important to stabilise the African continent to ensure that Africans are
able to govern themselves properly. This is what the SANDF is doing and it
is what you are continuously missing, hon Sayedali-Shah. I really
sympathise with you on that particular matter. I also sympathise with you
when you are continuously repeating an issue that we have spoken about -
that we are aware that it is not the responsibility of the SANDF to build
military hospitals. That is the sole responsibility of Public Works. You
cannot continuously blame the leadership of the SANDF that is sitting here.
That is not their responsibility.

The next part that you want to explain is that it seems as if people are
continuously confusing and continuously working on the morale of the SANDF
and keep on praising themselves that they are supporting the SANDF. But our
concern as ANC is that people continuously keep on picking up wrong facts.
We have been able to go together to the DRC. We have interacted with the UN
and we are leading that particular delegation.

The discipline of our own soldiers is one thing that we are proud of. The
report that the Chief of Defence has brought from the DRC on different
visits around the African continent is an agreed report that we all
support. We have never investigated allegations that have been made by the
UN against our own soldiers. Sometimes the media is making these
allegations. We have never investigated exactly what the circumstances
were, what the influences were and what was happening with our own soldiers
there.

We have been trying to get information and trying to establish exactly what
the situation is that is confronting our soldiers, because it’s not that
our soldiers, when they arrive in these different African countries, don’t
understand their role. These are disciplined soldiers.

Allegations that we have asked the UN to present the report on alleged
misconduct to us are untrue. I have personally spoken to Swing and pointed
out to him that it is all very well for OIOS to make all these allegations,
but there is a difficulty of balance. What the UN defines as sexual abuse
is not in line with the South African definition - unless and until we are
able as South Africans and the UN to get down and re-define it so that
within the African continent there is an understanding of what is meant by
sexual abuse. This is where some of the soldiers were caught up, and it is
where some of their own problems started.

We have expressed that to OIOS and said that as we are preparing this
report and taking it to the UN, it should ensure that it highlights to us
what exactly it meant by sexual abuse. We have not yet received a response
because that should help us to establish whether our soldiers were wrong.

As South Africans and Africans, we know that sometimes a soldier may greet
a person but be misunderstood. There may be a totally different
interpretation of what he may have said. Soldiers are paid by the UN and
they get paid in dollars and they wear very nice suits - like mine.
Sometimes it may happen that some of the clothes are very outstanding. So,
what happens in the environment? It is then said that these soldiers,
because of the material goods that they have, are beginning to influence
women in the areas surrounding their bases. Now, that is very difficult
because it is their outlook.

South Africans sometimes buy these suits that make them to look very
outstanding from others on the African continent. Now, when they are in
those environments it is said that because of the dollars these are very
poor people that you are engaging, these are the women that you are talking
to. So, it is very difficult for these poor fellows to decide what is best
and what is not best for them to do, because they are not going to say it.
When they take off their uniforms and put on their civilian clothes they
are definitely going to look very nice and beautiful because those soldiers
are very beautiful fellows.

So, this is the type of thing we wanted to clear ourselves of. And, these
are the type of understandings we have. The UN must give us an insight of
its own definitions of abuse, so that when we deal with this environment we
know exactly what we are talking about. We are not saying that there is
nobody running after the prostitutes. We do say that there are such
problems but what we are asking is whether there can be real definitions
from the UN so that when we deal with this thing within the South African
environment there is clearly understanding of what we mean. We don’t say
that our soldiers don’t misbehave.

There is definitely a lot of explanation that has been provided by the
SANDF in presenting to themselves and to the UN that these are the
circumstances and these are the areas of sexual abuse that sometimes
confront our people, not to say that they don’t do anything.

Sometimes, in the cases that I have in front of me that I want to
continuously raise, they accuse one of our persons there of having removed
some property from one particular person whom they refer to as a
prostitute. Now, this being an engagement between these two people, the
South African media doesn’t listen nor ask what exactly has happened and
what the circumstances are. Has the poor soldier been engaged in a love
affair with this person? They say they don’t ask those questions. They
assume that because these two people have been engaged in this type of
situation or have had a love affair, that these are sexual abuse cases, and
South African soldiers are ill-disciplined.

We have been saying as a committee that it is very much so. I put it to the
Ministry that it is very much so that whatever the UN has come up with and
presented as a report and put in front of you, you should continuously make
sure that that report is being shared with the South African public so that
all these malicious media reports that are being made about our soldiers’
conduct in the DRC are corrected because it’s vital to their morale that
you are able to give a correct interpretation of exactly what is going on.

That has been our feeling as people who have been able to be part of that
committee, because we have exercised and listened to what exactly is
happening as members of that multiparty delegation. Even hon Sayedali-Shah
himself can’t dispute that. He knows as a matter of fact that that report
has not been presented to us as a Defence Committee and that the UN has not
been able to substantiate all the allegations made against our soldiers.
For us that is important, because if you don’t get that report then it
means that there are people who are outside agencies, even intelligence
officers, who continue to play a game against our own forces to try to make
sure that they destroy the image of the SANDF.

As the Chief of Defence said, our soldiers are well accepted in all African
countries. That is why we are saying to them, as you go to prepare for the
DRC elections, be confident that South Africans are behind you because the
responsibilities you have, your own performance and your own readiness, and
how you have conducted yourselves within the African continent, have shown
us that. That’s why we say the peacekeeping mission will always remain
important.

Thank you, House Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, just to deal with some loose ends ...

Agb Groenewald, die kommandos was maar altyd deeltydse personeel en nie
voltyds in diens nie. Ek dink mens moet maar aanvaar dat die meerderheid
van hulle nie sou kon deel wees van die Weermag nie, want dit kom neer op
voltydse indiensneming.

Ek het net genoem dat ons daardie mense wat beskikbaar was om voltyds in
die Weermag te wees, ingeneem het, maar dis onmoontlik met mense soos boere
op hul plase en besigheidsmense wat deel was van die kommandos want hulle
is net nie beskikbaar om daar te help nie. Ek dink hulle is beskikbaar as
deel van die intelligensie om die polisie te steun.

Tweedens, in verband met die reis van genl Nyanda Parys toe: ek dink daar
is 'n groot misverstand. Hy het saam met sy dogter Parys toe gereis. Ek
weet sy is baie pragtig, maar sy is darem sy dogter en is nie 'n vriendin
wat hy saamgeneem het nie. [Gelag.][Tussenwerpsels.]

Wat die taalkwessie betref: ek is hier in die Huis 'n vraag gevra, en ek
het skriftelik geantwoord en verduidelik dat die vraag wat deur die regter
gevra is, te make het met die feit dat daar tolking vir Afrikaans sowel as
ander tale moes gewees het, en hy kwaad was nie oor die feit dat Afrikaans
getolk is nie, maar omdat dit net gedeeltelik gedoen is net vir Afrikaans
onderwyl daar behoefte in die hof was om vir ander mense ook te tolk. Dít
was die vraag en dis in my antwoord wat ek aan die Huis probeer oordra het.

Ons kan die saak nog opvolg, as u miskien nie tevrede is nie, maar ek is
heeltemal tevrede daarmee. Ek weet die regter is tans in Burundi, maar hy
sal ook terug wees en ons sal die saak dan verder neem.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, is die agb Minister bereid om 'n vraag
te antwoord? [Tussenwerpsels.]

Dankie, agb Minister. Agb Minister, ek aanvaar u verduideliking dat dit die
generaal se dogter is. My vraag aan die agb Minister is, is dit binne die
reëls en praktyk dat belastingbetalers se geld dan aangewend kan word as 'n
persoon sy familielid wil saamneem vir so 'n medaljeparade?

Die MINISTER VAN VERDEDIGING: Ja, my begrip is dat die antwoord ja is in
hierdie instansie. U sien, hy is geskei en het nie 'n vrou nie en hy het sy
dogter in die plek van sy vrou geneem, en die reëls laat dit toe.
[Applous.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Verskoning, agb Minister. Ons vra om verskoning vir  die
misverstand. Baie dankie vir die verduideliking.  [Gelag.]  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Groenewald, the commandos have always  been part-time  staff  and  were
never employed full-time. I think that we can accept that  the  majority  of
them would not have been able to be part of the Defence  Force,  because  it
amounts to full-time employment.

I mentioned that we took in those people who were available  to  be  in  the
Defence Force on a full-time basis, but it is impossible  with  people  like
farmers  on  their  farms  and  business  people  who  formed  part  of  the
commandos, because they are just not available to help.  I  think  they  are
available as part of the intelligence to support the police.
Secondly, with regard to the trip of Gen Nyanda to Paris: I think  there  is
a big misunderstanding. He travelled to Paris with his daughter. I know  she
is extremely beautiful, but at least he took his daughter with him  and  not
a girlfriend. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Concerning the language issue: I was asked a  question  in  this  House,  to
which I gave a written reply and explained that the question  asked  by  the
judge concerned the fact  that  there  should  have  been  interpreting  for
Afrikaans as well as the other languages, and that his anger was  not  about
the fact that Afrikaans was interpreted, but because there was only  partial
interpretation - only for Afrikaans - while there was a  need  in  court  to
interpret for other people as well. That was the question and  this  was  in
my reply that I tried to convey to the House.

We can still follow up on this matter, if you are not satisfied,  but  I  am
totally satisfied with it. I know  that  at  the  moment  the  judge  is  in
Burundi, but he will be back and we will then take the matter further.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, is the hon Minister prepared to  take  a
question? [Interjections.]

Thank you, hon Minister. Hon Minister, I accept  your  explanation  that  it
was the general’s daughter. My question  to  the  hon  Minister  is,  is  it
within the rules and practice that taxpayers’  money  can  be  used  when  a
person wants to take a family member to a medal parade?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Yes, my understanding is that the  answer  in  this
case is yes. You see, he is divorced and took his  daughter  in  his  wife’s
place, and the rules allow it. [Applause.]

Mr  P  J  GROENEWALD:  Apologies,  hon  Minister.  We  apologise   for   the
misunderstanding. Thank you for your explanation. [Laughter.]]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, quite correctly the hon Ndlovu raised
the issue of the conditions at Thaba Tshwane, which are very
unsatisfactory, and I think that portfolio committee members visited the
place. I’d like to, immediately, say that the department itself is very
concerned. Until recently the maintenance of the facilities of Defence and
other departments were done by Public Works. We are fortunate now that
there has been a change at Cabinet level and various departments are now
assuming responsibility for the maintenance of their own facilities.

So, I may now indicate that this year, starting next month with our budget
for this year, we have already set aside R10 million for the upgrading and
improvement of the conditions in which our people live. We will, in the
coming year, put aside another R136 million – it’s already in the medium
term that R136 million is projected and dedicated for the further
improvement or ongoing improvement of our facilities. Then, finally, in the
2008-09 budget we have provisionally set aside R285 million to address and
improve those conditions.

Now, there is an issue that hon Ndlovu raised that relates to the question
of recruitment, and that it appears as if in our recruitment drive we do
not make information as widely available to people as is possible. First of
all, I must say that we have recruiters that go out all the time and mostly
we receive applications that by far exceed the number of available
positions, because, ultimately, we are guided by the budget.

Last year we had some 75 000 applications. Out of these 75 000 we could
only take in, I think, up to about 6 426. But the situation is improving.
It is for that reason that Defence, together with Education and Labour, is
now working on plans to expand our capacity for intake and therefore thanks
for the input. I’m also disappointed that the issue has not ... Minister
Mdladlana is not with me, all right. [Laughter.]

May I say that if indeed the impression was left that we do not make
information available to all the people in terms of recruiting, we would be
in contravention of the law because we would then be violating the equality
clause in the Constitution. We must make information available to
everybody.

I must say that I shall now deal with the last question which I think
requires attention in this debate. If hon Shah were listening to my Budget
Vote speech earlier on he would have heard me say, and I quote: “National
security is a function first of diplomacy, and secondly of the military.”

Let me unbundle that. Nations of the world conduct diplomacy via
departments of foreign affairs or foreign relations. The reason for the
foreign relations exercise is to cultivate friendly relations with as many
nations as is possible, particularly those in your immediate surrounds.
When, therefore, there are friendly relations between countries, the
possibility of war, or of being attacked, is cut down. That’s the first
line of defence – diplomacy.

So, in Southern Africa, after we destroyed apartheid, we joined together
with the nations of our region in the Southern African Development
Community. Once, therefore, we were working together with them, we
cultivated an atmosphere of a friendly South Africa with friendly
neighbours. They therefore have no reason to contemplate plotting and
planning to attack us. Why? Because we have good relations with them.

Secondly, we then said: This is not enough. Let us negotiate a mutual
defence pact with the countries of our region so that they see us as a
potential support to ward off enemies, not only for us but also for them.
So now we have a Mutual Defence Pact with the countries of our region,
which means they know when they go to bed at night that South Africa has
signed an agreement – mutual defence - with them and the SANDF is not
getting ready to attack them by night, as the SA defence force of apartheid
used to do.

So what are we doing? We are defending ourselves by cultivating an
atmosphere of confidence, winning the confidence of our neighbours and,
indeed, being available for that. This is defence.

When, therefore, there are problems in the DRC and there is conflict there,
the SANDF, the SA Defence ministry supporting Foreign Affairs and other
departments, go into the DRC. We work with our neighbours in the region of
the DRC and assist them to do all the preparations that are being made for
presidential elections, to be held next month.

We are investing in the goodwill of the people of the DRC – a very big
country – so that even tomorrow, and for generations to come, when
democracy and peace have come to their country, they will always remember
that the people of South Africa were there with them when they needed it
most. Their democracy must serve them, their peace must serve them as
Congolese, but it must also serve the people of the country. That is
defence. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Debate concluded.

         PASSING AWAY OF THE MOTHER OF THE MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House -


   (1)      notes the passing away on 31 March 2006 of Ms Zoe Ida Mapisa,
        mother of the Minister of Home Affairs, the honourable Nosiviwe
        Mapisa-Nqakula;


   (2)      recalls that Ms Mapisa was born on 1 January 1928 at Butterworth
        and worked as a matron at St Matthew’s Teachers’ Training College
        for many years;


   (3)      further recalls that Mama Mapisa was a pillar of strength to her
        children and the people of South Africa during the darkest days of
        apartheid and that her unwavering support to the cause of freedom
        left an indelible mark in our quest for democracy and a better life
        for all;


   (4)      recognises that her life was characterised by a silent
        determination to carry the burden of motherhood and that her ability
        to extend the frontiers of mercy, compassion and love far beyond her
        family to the broader South African democratic family, will never be
        forgotten; and


   (5)      expresses its heartfelt condolences to the hon Minister Nosiviwe
        Mapisa-Nqakula, Minister Charles Nqakula, their family, relatives
        and friends.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 11:45.


