---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 22 August 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-08-22
---

TUESDAY, 22 AUGUST 2006

                                    ____





              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

House Chairperson Mr T S Setona took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                         (The late Mr S R Mdletshe)

USOSWEBHU OMKHULU WOMKHANDLU: Sihlalo ohloniphekile, ngiphakamisa
ngaphandle kwesaziso:

   Ukuthi lo Mkhandlu –


   (1)      uzwakalisa ukudabuka nokushaqeka ngokudlula ngokukhulu ukuzuma
        kukaSonto Richard Mdletshe odlule emhlabeni ngenkathi eshayelela
        amalungu oMkhandlu wale Ndlu ngesikhathi uMkhandlu uhambele eFilidi,
        njengoba bekuyisonto lalo Mkhandlu lokuvakashela izifundazwe;


   (2)      uthi kulo mndeni kaMsindazwe, kaNgomane, ikakhulukazi uMaNgobese
        ongumkakhe: lalani ngenxeba, uNkulunkulu akavumi ukuba ulingwe
        ngaphezu kwamandla akho;


   (3)      udlulisa ukudabuka kwawo esifundazweni saKwaZulu-Natali
        nakuNdunankulu, umhlonishwa uMazankosi, ngokuthi akwehlanga
        lungehlanga ngokushiywa umsebenzi obezimisele kangaka; futhi


   (4)      ngakho-ke uthi lala ngoxolo, Msindazwe, sizokukhumbula njalo
        ngomsebenzi wakho obukade uwuthanda futhi uwukhonzile. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu motion of condolence follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I move without notice -

   That the Council:


   (1)      expresses its utmost shock at the unexpected passing away of
        Sonto Richard Mdletshe, who died while driving for members of this
        Council who were visiting Vryheid, during the Council’s provincial
        visit week;
   (2)      says to the family, particularly his wife, MaNgobese: be
        comforted, God provides means for coping with adversities that are
        thrust upon you;


   (3)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to the province of KwaZulu-
        Natal and the Premier, hon Ndebele, and says what has happened must
        be accepted as the loss of a worker who did his work very
        diligently; and


   (4)      would therefore like to say: Rest in peace, Mr Mdletshe, we will
        always remember you for your work that you loved and valued so
        much.]

I thank you.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


                       SOCIAL SERVICES AND GOVERNANCE


                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:


                            Clinics in townships


14.   Mr M A Mzizi asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   Whether clinics in townships (a) are adequately equipped and (b)
           have enough (i) doctors, (ii) medicines and (iii) qualified
           staff on hand to properly and timeously deal with the needs of
           their respective communities; if not, why not;

      (2)   whether there are standard operating times for these clinics; if
           not, how are the hours of operation determined; if so, what are
           the relevant details?        C23E

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, ingxenye yokuqala yombuzo ibuza
ngemitholampilo. Ukuze nabanye abantu bezwe kahle ngizophendula ngesiNgisi
namhlanje, hayi njengoba bengenzile kwi-Asikhulume. Namhlanje ngizophendula
ngesiNgisi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, the first part of the question is
about clinics. To make sure that everybody understands, I will respond in
English. I will not do what I did at Asikhulume. Today I will respond in
English.]

The response to question (1)(a) is that clinical supervisors visit clinics
on a regular basis and monitor staffing, equipment, medicines and care.
Primary health care clinics in the townships are equipped with basic and
essential primary health care equipment.

Primary health care services are rendered by primary health care
professional nurses with support from doctors. The majority of patients –
90% - are seen by primary health care nurses. In some cases doctors visit
clinics once a week – which is what I used to do when I was still
practising as a doctor. The majority of doctors are placed in the community
health care centres – CHCs - which are large primary health care clinics
with extended primary health care services, but some render outreach
services to clinics where there is no CHC. Each CHC services about five to
six clinics in a health subdistrict of approximately 250 000 citizens of
our country. A family physician programme has been launched and specialists
are being placed in the CHCs and district hospitals to ensure support to
the district health system, primary health care and primary health care
services.

The answer to (1)(b)(ii) is that medicine stock-outs in clinics are less
than 2%. I think, as South Africans, we must be very proud of this. Of
course, we would want to ensure that there is 100% availability of
medicines in stock. But if you compare us with any other country, honestly,
I think we are doing very well. Therefore clinics have adequate supplies
and stock of essential drugs.
Maybe I should explain as well, because sometimes people query why the
clinics don’t have these medicines. Of course, we grade these as to which
stocks are available in which clinic. So we wouldn’t have 100% of medicine
in each and every clinic, because some of the medicines have to be
monitored very closely. For example, in a village clinic we wouldn’t have
the medicines that we would have in a district clinic. But I dare to say
that in district clinics the stock-outs are less than 2%.

All primary health care clinics have qualified primary health care
professional nurses. Where there is a staff shortage due to absenteeism,
the supervisor is notified and a nurse is deployed from an adjacent clinic
to assist. Waiting times are monitored on a monthly basis, and queue
monitors are being introduced to all facilities to ensure the reduction of
waiting times.

Let me just explain what happens. If you would require medicines that are
not available at a village level, they are transported from the district
hospital so that people can then access them at a village hospital or a
community health care centre. It is not that we are not cognisant of the
fact that it might cost people a lot of money for transport to go and get
those medicines from a district hospital. We are doing everything to ensure
that those medicines are accessible even at a local level.

The response to the second part of the question is that the standard
operating times of primary health care clinics are at least eight hours per
day and five days a week – that is, Monday to Friday. In provincial
clinics, the times are from 07:30 to 16:00. Many clinics have extended
their hours to accommodate communities after hours and on Saturdays.
Community health centres have extended clinic services and they operate
until 19:00. Some of them operate until 22:00, depending on the need. All
community health care centres have 24-hour midwife obstetrics units. New
settlements are serviced by mobile clinics.

I would just like at this point in time to remind colleagues why some of
the clinics had to close and not operate for 24 hours. You will recall, for
example, that in some parts of our country ...

... kwakunodlame. Ngakho-ke abahlengikazi nodokotela bethu babesengozini
ngoba umphakathi qobo lwawo wawungafuni ukuyobasiza ukuthi baphephe ukuze
bangahlaselwa ngesikhathi sodlame. Ngakho-ke bayivala-ke leyo mitholampilo.
Ikhona siqala manje ukuyivula ukuze bakwazi nabo ukuthi basebenze lesi
sikhathi okufuneka basebenze ngaso. Ngiyethemba-ke ukuthi umbuzo ozolandela
ngeke ungibuze lowo mbuzo. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[... there was violence. Therefore, our nurses and doctors were in danger;
at the time of the violence, the public was not prepared to protect them
from attacks. As a result, those clinics were closed. We are starting to re-
open them now so that they will be able to work at the times that they are
supposed to work. I hope that the next question won’t be about that.]

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, ngingaqinisa nje kuNgqongqoshe ukuthi, cha, umbuzo
olandelayo ngeke uye koshaya lapho ebheke khona kodwa uzoya ngakhona.

Okuvuka-ke lapha empendulweni kaNgqongqoshe ukuthi ngiyezwa ukuthi, cha,
kungelingane kungemadlebe embongolo. Mina-ke ngiqhamuka laphaya eGauteng.
Umtholampilo wami iThokoza. Zonke izinto asezibalile uNgqongqoshe sengathi
impela zinciphile, azikho. Asazi-ke ukuthi yisiphi isizathu salokho.

Mhlawumbe abantu basakhumbula lolo dlame olwalukhona kodwa mina ngokwami
ngibona ukuthi alusekho. Mina ngingumhlali walaphaya, alusekho dlame.
Angikaze ngibone udokotela evakashela lowaya mtholampilo. Okuyinkinga
kakhulu ukuthi uma uya esibhedlela esikhona, iNatalspruit Hospital ...
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, I can at least confirm that the next question
would not be exactly what she expects it to be but it would be more or less
what she has predicted.

I understand that the Minister, in her reply, is implying that certain
people are more equal than others. I am originally from Gauteng and my
clinic is in Thokoza. All the things that the Minister has mentioned are
either scarce or virtually not there. We do not know the reason for that.

Maybe the scars of the violence are still fresh in people’s minds, but as
far as I am concerned there is no violence there any more. I am a resident
in that place and there is no violence. I have never seen a doctor visit
that clinic. What further worsens the situation is that if you go to
Natalspruit Hospital ...]

... If go there you will wait hours on end before you can see a doctor. You
will be asked, “Why don’t you go to the private clinics? Why don’t you have
your medical aid?”

Yilezo zinto-ke ezidala sibuze-ke phela ukuthi uma ngabe imitholampilo
iyingqalasizinda sokuqala lapho kufanele siye khona, kungani zingatholakali
lezi ezingcono ... [It is for these reasons that we ask why, if clinics
provide basic necessities, where we should get first aid, we are not
offered the best ...]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, your time for the
question has expired. Can I also equally impress upon hon members that in
order to be effective, questions must be couched quite precisely and to the
point. We don’t want statements. We are not debating here.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Mhlawumbe uqinisile, angazi lapho ehlala khona
eThokoza. Kodwa-ke ngeke kuthi ngesikhathi esifushane kangaka zibe
seziphelile zonke izinkinga zaseThokoza, ngokwami ukwazi.

Uyazi ubaba uMzizi ukuthi ngempela ngempela sinezinkinga lapha eNingizimu
Afrika zabantu abasebenza emitholampilo nasezibhedlela. Uyazi futhi ukuthi
zinto zini esizenzayo. Angifuni ukuziphinda. Ngimbuzile ngaphandle ukuthi
uzobuza mbuzo muni wathi, cha, wazi kahle ukuthi siyasebenza. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Well, maybe he is telling the truth, I do not know
where in Thokoza he stays. But as far as I am concerned, it is virtually
impossible to resolve all Thokoza’s problems in such a short space of time.

Mr Mzizi knows very well that we have many problems here with people
working in South African hospitals and clinics. Mr Mzizi is also aware of
the measures that we are taking to address these. I do not want to repeat
them. I specifically asked him outside what kind of question he would ask
and he said none, and that he was aware that we were working. Thank you.]

 Submission of mid-year budget and performance assessments by municipalities

15.   Mr Z S Kolweni asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:


      Whether all municipalities have submitted their mid-year budget and
      performance assessments as required by section 72 of the Local
      Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, Act 56 of 2003; if not,
      why not; if so, what are the relevant details?

                       C28E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
answer to the question is: The issues raised by the hon member fall within
the Minister of Finance’s portfolio whose department is a custodian of the
Municipal Finance Management Act, and to which municipal budgets are also
submitted. Accordingly, you are therefore advised to direct the question to
the Minister of Finance. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you. I’ll take it as a ruling
that the question must be redirected by hon Kolweni to the Ministry of
Finance.

 Progress with the construction of the hospital in Khayelitsha and financial
                       resources available for project
16.   Mr N J Mack asked the Minister of Health:


      (1)   What progress has been made with the construction of the
           hospital in Khayelitsha, Cape Town;

      (2)   whether financial resources in the form of conditional grants or
           equitable shares are available for this project; if so, what are
           the relevant details as at the latest specified date for which
           information is available?         C34E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Sihlalo, engikuzwile-ke ngomnyango wezempilo
wesifundazwe saseKapa ukuthi ... [Chairperson, what I heard about the
provincial department of health in the Western Cape, is that ...]

... the development of the Khayelitsha District Hospital is currently in
the concept of design phase, with involvement in the design by the
Departments of Health and Public Works from the Western Cape as well as an
input from the National Department of Health.

Engikuzwile-ke futhi nabangitshele khona ukuthi, cha, impela sesibufakile
ubufahlalalana bezimali ezicishe zifike kwizigidi ezinga-R260. Ngokwami
ukubona-ke sisendleleni, siyasebenza. [What I heard, and what was in fact
conveyed to me, is that we have indeed contributed by allocating an
additional almost R260 million. As far as I am concerned we are on track,
we are working.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I am equally informed that Question
17 has been extensively replied to, and the hon member who has posed the
question to the relevant Minister has been accordingly notified of that
reply.

  Permitting of Barkley East medical practitioners to complete application
                         forms for disability grants

18.   Mr M O Robertson asked the Minister of Social Development:
      [Interdepartmental Transfer]

      Whether any provision can be made for general medical practitioners in
      Barkley East to be permitted to complete application forms for
      disability grants, thereby avoiding transporting persons with
      disabilities from Barkley East to East London for such purpose; if
      not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
      details?               C72E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: The answer to the question is
yes, there is a doctor in Barkley East who completes the medical forms for
social grants applicants. He operates from Sonwabo Zandile Clinic on
Mondays, Thursdays and Fridays. Thank you.

Mr M O ROBERTSON: Chair, to the Deputy Minister, there are a Dr Olivier and
a Dr De Villiers there who, as far as I know, do perform those duties. They
do see the patients and send them to East London for final confirmation.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Is that a comment or a question, hon
member?

Mr M O ROBERTSON: It’s a comment, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Thank you very much.


                Legislation planned for intervention in sport


19.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      Whether he intends introducing legislation that will enable him or his
      department to intervene in sport, if necessary; if so, when?
                                                                    C123E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the reply to the
question is yes, we intend introducing the legislation and we intend having
it promulgated in 2006 already. We have introduced it via a provision of
the National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill that is already in
Parliament and I’m sure, with time, it will also reach this House.
The Bill has two basic objectives. The first one is to comply with the new
dispensation where the SA Sports Commission has been replaced by SASCOC -
the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee. The other objective,
especially in clause 8 of that Bill, is to provide the Minister of Sport
and Recreation, rather than the department, with an instrument to intervene
in sports disputes when it becomes necessary.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chair, let me thank the Minister for the concise
response. I just want to find out from the Minister, arising from his
reply, whether Safa, having seen the manner in which they at times handle
some issues – irresponsibly, I must say – are willing to come on board to
assist in this fiasco, because, really, it is a concern for such a sport-
loving country to have an organisation that at times behaves as if it
subscribes to the homeland mentality.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Thank you, Chairperson. You see, Safa
is the sole authority on football matters in this country, and like other
federations, it is a voluntary association. At the moment, legislation does
not give us an instrument to intervene in the ``happenings’’ that the hon
member is alluding to. With the assistance of the two Houses of Parliament,
the National Assembly and this august House, we should be able to make
those kinds of interventions. You see, our dilemma at the moment is that in
the absence of such legislation we have to rely on persuasion and nice
words and so on. There is no legal framework which provides us with that
intervention mechanism.

  Treatment of substance–dependent youth in Central Karoo District, Western
                                    Cape

20.   Mr N J Mack asked the Minister of Social Development:

      Whether, with reference to the document entitled “Model for the
      Treatment of Substance-Dependent Youth in Residential Facilities”, his
      department will commence with the implementation of this model in the
      rural areas of the Western Cape, such as the Central Karoo District;
      if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                       C144E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: The answer to the question is
that the department will not commence with the full implementation of this
model in the rural areas of the Western Cape such as the Central Karoo
District, but will pilot it in one of the treatment facilities in the
Southern Cape. The Model for the Treatment of Substance-Dependent Youth in
Residential Facilities is intended for in-patient treatment. During April
2006, representatives from funded and government treatment centres, places
of safety and secure care facilities in the Western Cape attended a three-
day workshop on the application of the youth treatment model. As you may be
aware, the Central Karoo District does not have an in-patient treatment
facility, but the department intends buying bed space in one of the
treatment facilities in the Southern Cape in this financial year, where
this model will be piloted. Thank you.




       Telephone interpreting service for Public Service institutions


21.   Mr B J Tolo asked the Minister of Arts and Culture:

      Whether a full-scale telephone interpreting service for public service
      institutions has been implemented; if not, why not; if so, for how
      many?                                                         C147E

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The answer is
exceedingly long, it runs through three pages. I was wondering whether the
hon member would mind awfully if we tabled it, but it’s at your discretion,
Mr Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Minister, the question seemed to
be quite interesting. Much as I am sensitive to time, can you perhaps just
mention the highlights instead of reading the whole answer, because I think
it’s of interest.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Okay, we’ll answer the question as far as
we can.

The roll-out for telephonic interpreting services is meant for all
government departments and other state organs. This means that all public
service institutions, where government interacts with the public for
services and/or government information, should adopt TISSA for
communication with their clients.

Last year the department wrote to all heads of government departments and
chief executive officers of public service institutions to introduce TISSA,
that is, the Telephone Interpreting Service of SA, and invited them to
participate in the project. Since then several government departments and
associated public institutions have adopted TISSA. The following Public
Service institutions and government departments are stakeholders in the
project: The Nelson Mandela Metro in the Eastern Cape, which has 14
operational sites; the Tshwane Metro, which has 13 operational sites and
three in the process of installation; Radio Atlantis in the Western Cape,
which has one fully operational site; Ngwathe Municipality in the Free
State, which has five operational sites; the Department of Agriculture,
which has one operational site; the South African Police Service (SAPS) in
all the nine provinces has a total of 83 sites operational; the South
African Post Office (SAPO), with sites at the Johannesburg International
Airport and in seven of the nine provinces of the Republic; the Government
Communication and Information System (GCIS) has three fully operational
sites in the Western Cape, with their Multi-Purpose Community Centres
(MPCCs) having two operational sites. The Department of Social Development
(DSD) is the one government department that has embraced TISSA with
overwhelming enthusiasm. Earlier this year, they launched TISSA in
Kimberley. Their enthusiasm and commitment to the service assures us that
we are on the right track in terms of rolling out the service to the people
of South Africa. The Department of Social Development has a total of 196
operational sites. The Tshwane Metropolitan Council has also adopted the
service with over 20 sites, mainly in clinics in and around Tshwane. The
Western Cape Legislature has one operational site. This brings the total
number of fully operational TISSA sites to 328 plus the three that are in
the process of being installed.

The number of sites per province is as follows: Eastern Cape 23; Free State
19; Gauteng, 36; KwaZulu-Natal 92; Limpopo 29; Mpumalanga 42; Northern Cape
31; North West 24 and the Western Cape 32.

The target of registering 300 sites has been achieved and as we speak, we
now stand at 331 fully operational sites in all nine provinces of South
Africa. Be that as it may, we are not satisfied with the use of the service
despite this achievement. The call volumes for the service are still low
despite a recent report that there has been a slight improvement. We are
looking at raising awareness through campaigns about the service and its
benefits. In this regard, concerted marketing campaigns will be undertaken
to profile TISSA.

The prevailing negative perceptions about using the African languages are
not helpful in ensuring maximum utilisation of the service. Such
perceptions include the following myths: Firstly, that if you request the
interpreting service you are illiterate. I think that’s something that has
to be dispelled, because a person might be proficient in one language and
illiterate in another, and the fact that you might want to have service in
one language rather than another is no indication of illiteracy. Secondly,
the officials at the sites are indifferent or are not adequately sensitised
to proactively assist people who may be struggling to articulate their
inquiries in a language other than their own. This is a big problem which
the TISSA service is precisely aimed at addressing: that we want a
situation in which people can speak to government in the language they feel
easiest in using - the language they’re most proficient in so that they
don’t have to struggle with a second, third or fourth language in order to
get their message across.

Before the end of the year, we will have added a few sites dedicated to the
deaf community. We are currently considering various technological
solutions that would ensure that the service is rendered cost-effectively
to this community. The TISSA service has currently employed 31
interpreters. However, the employment of interpreters is an ongoing
exercise, mainly determined by the increase in the call volumes and the
number of additional sites. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: Chair, I just want to congratulate the department and
government in general for introducing this very important service. I think
we all agree that it’s a very, very important service. I also congratulate
them on the campaigns that they want to undertake to actually popularise
the service. The question is – it’s a mammoth task, we are aware of that –
whether we have timeframes as to when we think we’ll be able to say we’ve
realised our ultimate goal in connection with implementing this service in
all the government departments and everywhere else where it’s necessary.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: I wish I could answer that question. It’s
a very tough question to answer. One would only be able to say that we have
fully realised our goal when every South African who needs to access
government service feels satisfied that they are able to reach government
without any let or hindrance and without the impediment of having to use a
language they’re not proficient in. That’s when I think we’ll be able to
say we have realised our goal. In terms of timeframes, that’s also very
difficult to calculate. The rate at which various government departments
have been taking up the service also determines that. As you will notice,
hon member, it is the Department of Social Development that has used this
service most extensively, and that is, I suppose, precisely because of the
sort of clientele that they have to deal with. One would like to see other
departments that deal with the general public out there, such as the
Department of Justice, for example, and others such as Education, Home
Affairs, etc, with which people need to communicate easily with the
government, taking up the service, because it is there and it is available
precisely for that. I am sorry that I cannot put a timeframe on it at this
point in time.

Mr B J TOLO: I just want to find out, Chair, through you, if the department
has any leverage to actually see to it that those departments that are not
following suit are compelled to do so. Does the department have any
leverage or do you just rely on persuasion?

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Presumably we would have to, when we run
our advertising campaign – the one that I mentioned in my first answer –
again address the various departments of national, provincial and municipal
government to make them aware of the availability of the service and its
utility as well. Beyond that, I cannot see how we would persuade
departments and various components of government to access the service.
They should be aware that it is there. Perhaps we haven’t given it as high
a profile as we need to, but we’ll have to do that again when we run this
advertising campaign.

                         Schools affected by floods


22.   Mr B J Tolo asked the Minister of Education:

      (a) How many schools are regarded as inaccessible or difficult to
      access during rains and floods across the country, (b) what is the
      total number of learners affected and (c) what plans is her department
      putting in place to deal with this problem?  C148E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, with regard to the recent
flooding and damage in the Southern and Eastern Cape the provincial
governments, including the provincial departments of education, are
currently assessing the damage and the information required is not
available. As soon as a report is received, this will be made available to
the hon member. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: The question does not necessarily refer to the recent floods.
It refers to the problem that we have of the accessibility of schools
throughout the country, not necessarily after the recent floods, but in
general. As you know there are schools that are inaccessible and there are
areas where children have to take off their trousers when they have to go
to school. So, it was just a general question and did not necessarily refer
to the recent floods.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, my own reading of the
question, although English is my second language, is that the question was
within the context of rain and floods in general and not the recent ones.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: I agree with your interpretation of the
question. However, the matter that has been raised by the hon Tolo is
certainly a matter of great concern to us. The provincial departments of
education are continuously assessing the conditions of buildings. There are
many unsafe schools and these have either to be rebuilt or remedied. What
we do have, for the first time, is a wonderful initiative in terms whereof
all schools are being audited. Quite different from the register of needs
that we had previously. We have information on schools, incorporating a
satellite photograph, an actual photograph, the number of classrooms,
whether there are access roads to that particular school whether such roads
are tarred, what the condition of the toilets is, etc. More than 15 000
schools have been completed and, hopefully, by March 2007 we will have an
assessment of every school in the country. This would be a wonderful
initiative and would enable us to respond appropriately to either hon Tolo
or any other member who has any concern about any school in a particular
area. But thank you for your time.

                   Measures to address violence at schools

23.   Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Education:


      Whether her department has put any measures in place to address
      violence at schools, given reports about incidents of violence, crime
      and ill-discipline in some schools; if not, why not; if so, what
      measures?
      C150E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: In response to the question from the hon
Sulliman from De Aar, the answer is: Yes, the school safety project was
launched in 2001. It aimed to create a safe and tolerant learning
environment that celebrates innocence and the value of human dignity. This
project included a campaign that mobilised communities, government
departments, political leaders, service providers, parents, learners,
educators and other decision-makers to participate. Our schools must become
centres of care and support.

Legislative frameworks and national policies have also been developed to
provide mechanisms and procedures to address safety and security
imperatives in schools. These include regulations for safety measures at
public schools in terms of the SA Schools Act, codes of conduct for schools
as provided in that Act, the national drug policy framework, also
pronounced in terms of the Act, guidelines for the prevention and
management of drug use or abuse by learners in all public schools and the
norms and standards of educators. I may add that we are currently busy with
an amendment of the regulations to ensure that random searching could occur
in relation to drugs that may be found in possession of learners. This
would mean that schools would effectively have to be publicly displayed as
drug-free and gun-free zones.

The department, in collaboration with the SA Police Service, has introduced
Captain Crime Stop and Adopt a Cop in school. These programmes enable
police officers to address schools on matters related to crime, safety and
security and also enable officers to intervene where a need arises. The
collaboration between the Department of Safety and Security and the
Department of Education is extremely good in all provinces and in fact,
will be expanded. Provincial school safety co-ordinators have been
requested to identify schools with the highest levels of crime and
violence, as well as the individual needs of these schools, to address
crime and violence. The identified needs can be categorised into two
groups, namely infrastructural and developmental. Infrastructural refers to
fencing and lighting, whereas developmental refers to various processes
associated with the safety of learners within the school. The department
will investigate to what extent each province can be assisted and supported
to address these identified needs of schools in order to stop the
incidences of crime and violence.

In partnership with the Open Society Foundation of South Africa, a baseline
study has been conducted in two provinces, namely Limpopo and the Eastern
Cape, to look at issues of crime and violence in schools. The results of
this baseline study led to the development of a model on procedures and
mechanisms for reporting crime and violence in schools, as well as
providing basic interventions for addressing crime and violence in schools.
The department is awaiting the final report of the pilot in order to
consider expanding the programme to other provinces, prioritising schools
located in areas with a high prevalence of crime and violence.

The department, in partnership with the Centre for Justice and Crime
Prevention, has piloted the Hlayiseka project in Limpopo, the Eastern Cape
and in the Western Cape. The project is at present being evaluated and the
preliminary report is included for consideration of implementation across
all provinces. The final report will be submitted to the department at the
end of September 2006.

In conclusion, Chairperson, may I say that a further partnership that
occurred between the Department of Education and the Department of Safety
and Security was a wonderful resource manual, which we really encourage our
members, as well governing bodies, educators and parents, to read, namely
the Signpost for Safe Schools, which has been developed and distributed to
all schools. Some of the areas covered by this manual include understanding
the causes of violence within schools; intervention strategies to address
bullying, gangsterism, racism, the carrying of dangerous weapons and
truancy in schools; interventions to address sexual and child abuse in
schools, strategies for developing skills that build resilience towards
social crime and abuse; and strategies for promoting schools as centres of
care and support, including interventions for dealing with stress and
suicide among learners.

I see the hon Deputy Minister of Social Development is here. There is also
Programme Kemoja, which is implemented in all schools to ensure that we try
to prevent drug abuse in our schools.

Mr M A SULLIMAN: If random searching takes place at schools, can the
educators do that or must they call in the police? If so, is it necessary
to get a warrant to search the learners?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Thank you very much, Mr Sulliman from De
Aar. [Laughter.] It is a very difficult question. It has legal implications
and therefore we had to look at the amendment of the regulations for safety
measures within public schools. One of the things that has to occur is that
a prominent notice must be displayed in the school indicating that the
particular school is a drug-free zone and gun-free zone. The person who
enters the school is alerted about that. Secondly, in terms of notices,
parents must consent to the search of learners, where reasonable suspicion
exists that the learner may be in possession of either a dangerous weapon
or drugs. Thirdly, the search must be conducted in a dignified manner. You
will not have a male educator searching a female learner, so it does not
violate the dignity of the person. The principal of a school could
designate responsible people to conduct that in privacy, so that at no
stage whatsoever will the dignity of the learner be compromised. This
depends largely on the response of the parents of the learners within an
institution. The indications that we have received thus far, Mr Sulliman,
are that parents are quite happy to ensure that their schools are free of
drugs and dangerous weapons and therefore would, under reasonable
circumstances, permit responsible searches by authorised personnel of the
school designated by the principal or responsible persons by the senior
management staff. Thank you.

Mr B J TOLO: I just want to find out if there is any buy-in from the
teachers in this regard, because I think at some stage I heard the
secretary-general of Sadtu saying that teachers are not actually members of
the police services and they are therefore not keen to search the kids.
What is the situation now? Are they able to help when there is a need?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: We are busy with the draft of the
particular regulations. We would obviously have to consult with the various
unions and ascertain what their concerns are in relation to this task. I
would assume, though that given the responsibility in terms of creating a
safe environment for educators and learners alike, there would not be
resistance. It would also obviously mean that the persons who conduct such
searches would have to be trained to do so in a responsible manner. So,
discussions would take place between the Department of Education and the
union. The amendments have not been promulgated yet; they are in draft
stage, awaiting adoption and a decision from the Minister. Once we have
that kind of decision, then obviously further consultations would take
place in terms of ascertaining what the concerns of the educators are. But
the sense that I would have is that certainly they would want to fulfil a
particular role, because they are also caregivers in an institution such as
a school.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, in response to what the Deputy Minister has said
about the draft, they always say that prevention is better than cure. Is
there any regulation in the draft that police would be allowed to go and
address the children at school, probably during assembly? That would help
the children to understand the nature and the danger of drugs and guns
carried into the schools.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Mzizi, in the interest of the
House, I think I need to make a ruling on some of the questions. The Deputy
Minister in his response has outlined the role-players as part of the Adopt-
a-Cop strategy. That involves the police. I think he has alluded to
elements in his initial response, and that has addressed all the elements
of the supplementary raised by you. In the interest of time, I would prefer
that the Deputy Minister give you the copy of his response.

  Procedures and guidelines for teachers and schools to deal with learners
                         infected or affected by HIV

24.   Mr M A Sulliman asked the Minister of Education:

      (1)   Whether her department has established any referral procedures
           and guidelines for teachers and schools to deal with learners
           infected or affected by HIV; if so, what are the relevant
           details; if not,

      (2)   whether her department envisages such procedures and guidelines
           in the near future; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                        C151E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chair, I see Mr Sulliman from De Aar has
indeed banked on keeping me very busy today. [Laughter]. The response,
again, is yes, the department, through the National Policy on HIV and Aids
for Learners and Educators, has made provision for the establishment of
referral structures within schools and the provincial education
departments. These are school-based support teams and the health advisory
committees. We work very closely with the Department of Health in the
establishment of these committees.

A school-based HIV/Aids Life Skills Programme supports this referral system
within schools, and educators, learners and parents are informed of and
educated on the referral procedures. The programme consists of a curriculum
component, which integrates HIV and Aids and other health-related issues
within the National Curriculum Statement. A care and support component,
which includes educator training and development on referral and support
structures within school communities, does indeed exist.

Advocacy and other learner and educator support material also include
information on other various referral systems, including those supported by
government, NGOs, faith-based organisations, community-based organisations
and businesses. These resource materials, dealing with referrals for
infected and affected learners, are distributed on an ongoing basis to
parents, educators, officials and learners.

With regard to the second part of the question, the response has already
been outlined under the first paragraph above. Thank you very much.

 Sport and Recreation funding for Mangaung Municipality to meet 2010 Soccer
                               World Cup needs

25.   Mr C J van Rooyen asked the Minister of Sport and Recreation:

      What funding from his department will be made available to the
      Mangaung Municipality to meet its required funding needs in respect of
      the 2010 Soccer World Cup tournament?                    C152E

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, the question of whether
money will be allocated to Mangaung for the construction and related
purposes, and for the stadium to be refurbished for the Fifa 2010 World Cup
in South Africa, is to be answered in the affirmative.

Funding for the 2010 Fifa World Cup venues and infrastructure is located in
the Treasury, and on the basis of the MTEF budget processes, tranches of
this funding are transferred to the Department of Sport and Recreation,
from where these resources can be accessed by host cities and host venues,
including Mangaung, which is, as a matter of fact, the host city of the
Mangaung Stadium.

Treasury announced in Parliament not so long ago the allocation of R241
million to assist cities and stadia with the preliminary design and
planning of these facilities. The conclusion of this planning and designing
process will produce the actual cost of the construction of each facility,
including Mangaung.

Mangaung is very fortunate in this respect in that it is one of the
existing facilities that do not need a lot of work to be done to make it
suitable for the 2010 World Cup. To this end, we have already allocated an
amount of R1 million to assist that municipality with preliminary design
and planning work, which must produce the final budget for that facility
that is needed to complete the work that must make it compliant with Fifa.

The other section of the question is requesting information as to who will
be financing the overall construction works for these facilities. The whole
of government must make a contribution, but because the guarantees have
been signed by the national departments of the state, the bulk of that
funding will come from the national sphere of government.

Already, though, provincial and local government spheres of government are
engaging in the process of the budget. A classical example is the Mayor of
the City of Cape Town, who has already indicated that the City of Cape Town
can only pay one-tenth of the total costs. So, all three of us will make a
contribution, but the bulk, of course, will come from the national
department.


                Municipalities with acting municipal managers


26.   Kgoshi M L Mokoena asked the Minister for Provincial and Local
      Government:


      (a) How many municipalities still have acting municipal managers and
      (b) what steps is his department taking in this regard?
                                              C154E

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, the
answer to question 26(a) is as follows: In the aftermath of the recent
local government elections, municipal councils are strengthening their
administration components. Out of the 283 municipalities a total of 206
have already appointed municipal members and 77 have acting municipal
managers.

The details per province are indicated as follows: The Eastern Cape has 12
municipalities; Gauteng has 8; Free State has 6; KwaZulu-Natal has 15;
Limpopo has 5; Mpumalanga has 6; the Northern Cape has 13; North West has 5
and the Western Cape has 7 municipalities.

The answer to 26(b) is as follows: The filling of core posts such as those
of municipal managers is an integral part of institutional capacity
building for municipalities. In accordance with the local government five-
year strategic agenda, adopted by government at the beginning of the year,
MECs for local government have already embarked on programmes to support
the new municipal councils as they build municipal capacity to speed up
recruitment and selection processes in municipalities where vacancies
exist.

Lastly, on 1 August 2006 the Ministry and the Department of Provincial and
Local Government published performance regulations for municipal managers
and senior managers directly accountable to them. This is a decisive legal
step on the part of government to ensure that there is an improvement in
the performance of full-time managers and finalisation of employment
contracts and agreements. I thank you.

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Chair, I thank the Deputy Minister for the encouraging
reply to this question. Arising from that, can I find out from my hon,
dynamic and wonderful Deputy Minister as to whether there are mechanisms in
place to try and address the problem where the delay of the appointment of
these managers is simply because of petty differences within the said
particular municipalities?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chair, with due
respect to the hon Kgoshi Mokoena, we agree that there are, at times,
differences at local level in these municipalities, which, in fact, result
in delays in service delivery. We fully agree with that, but I think that
the buck stops with the parties involved.

What we are saying is that as from 1 August 2006, as I said earlier on,
there won’t be blank cheques any more. There has to be some kind of
performance agreement and contracts entered into so that we make sure that
the appointment of all these managers takes place, and there is also
performance in terms of service delivery or improvement in terms of service
delivery. Thank you.

Mnu Z C NTULI: Sihlalo, ngifuna ukwazi nje ukuthi inani lazo izimenjenja
lingakanani. Kungenzeka ukuthi mhlawumbe kuhlale kunabantu abangamabamba,
ngoba singenabo abantu abanezimpawu nezinga lemfundo elifanele ukuze
baqashwe noma mhlawumbe kungabe indaba ingakomasipala yini maqondana
nokuthi abakwazi ukukhetha abantu abakufanele kahle ukusebenza?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr Z C NTULI: Chairperson, I want to know generally what the number of
managers is. Is it a possibility, perhaps, that there are always people in
an acting capacity as a result of the shortage of suitably qualified people
who can be employed, or is the problem with the municipalities who are
unable to make a selection of suitable candidates to take up those
positions?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Chairperson, it
would be very difficult to say how many managers are there or how big or
small the pool is. It depends on how we attract skilled people to the
municipalities.

There has been talk that municipalities have been overpaid. We have to
attract highly skilled persons to the municipalities. To give you an
example of what used to happen at local level, you would find, at times, a
teacher who did not have managerial skills going to be a manager of a
municipality. We cannot afford to operate in that manner.

Therefore, what’s important is how best we attract these highly skilled
individuals to the municipality. However, it would be difficult to
determine how big the pool is. It depends on the interest of individuals.
Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, I just would like to know from the hon Deputy
Minister if he agrees with me that it would be something good if we fill
all these positions before the end of this year. Deputy Minister, I would
like to hear your comment on that. Thank you.


         Shortage and training of social workers in Lehurutshe area


27.   Mr A L Moseki asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   Whether he has been informed of the shortage of social workers
           in the Lehurutshe area; if so, (a) what plans are in place to
           address this shortage and (b) when will these plans be
           implemented;

      (2)   whether his department has any plans to train social workers in
           customer service skills, owing to complaints regarding the
           attitude of some social workers; if not, why not; if so, what
           plans?                                       C165E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Chairperson. The
reply to the question is: Yes, there is an overall shortage of social
workers in all provinces and also in Lehurutshe. From the approved staff
establishment, there are 17 posts in Lehurutshe and 6 posts have already
been filled and 11 posts are vacant.

With regard to part (a) of the question, a recruitment and retention
strategy for social workers has been drafted and is being consulted. Career
fairs are also being conducted in provinces to recruit learners to study
social work. These fairs have already been held in the North West, in
Rustenburg and in the Phokeng areas from 31 May to 2 June 2006 and from 15
to 16 August 2006, respectively.

About 190 scholarships have been awarded as a start for students who are
studying towards social work in 2006. Students have signed contracts to
serve the department on completion of their studies.

The answer to part (b) of the question is that plans have been made to
increase the number of scholarships to 3 000 per annum with effect from
2007.

The answer to the second part of the question is: Yes, the capacity-
building programme for the social service profession was embarked upon.
More than 1 000 social service professionals were trained in various
modules, including human rights supervision, etc. The second phase of the
roll-out to these training programmes is in progress. It will be
implemented before the end of December 2006.

The issue of the negative attitudes of social workers should be viewed as a
management issue, which warrants disciplinary action, rather than as a
skills deficiency issue. However, it should also be seen against the
reality of the inability to meet the demand for services and a highly
stressful work environment, which leads to burnout.

The department is working towards increasing the number of social work
trainees and recruiting more social workers.

Ms J M MASILO: Chairperson, I would like to complain about the attitude of
some officials. I think there is a principle or policy that officials
should wear their name-tags but most of the officials do not wear those
name-tags. When we are doing oversight or constituency work, they say we
complain because of this and that, but when we ask them who those people
are, they don’t know because they don’t wear those name-tags.

In our cluster, it is only Home Affairs managers and officials who wear
visible name-tags but we have a problem with the other departments.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: We take note of the comment, Mr
Chairperson.

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, may I please know from the hon Deputy
Minister if there are plans to train assistant social workers in view of
the workload that is facing them with the advent of the HIV/Aids pandemic?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, yes, there are
auxiliary social workers, home-based care workers and child and youth care
workers that are being trained. In fact, they are already active in the
field.

Mr A L MOSEKI: Chairperson, I thank the Deputy Minister for such a detailed
response to the question. However, I want to make a quick follow-up on the
basis of what the Deputy Minister said: namely that the staff establishment
makes provision for additional staff. Can the Deputy Minister throw some
light on the timeframe as to when these people are likely to start, because
even last week when we were doing oversight there, there wasn’t much
improvement with regard to the staff shortage. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think that the
member should be aware that these things happen at the level of the
provinces and that at national level we focus mainly on the implementation
and development of legislation and policies. So, I think the question
cannot be answered by me as to when people in a certain province should
have their staff establishments filled. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon member, the Provincial
Departments of Social Development are the ones who determine when they are
going to advertise, to employ and set those targets. I think the response
of the Deputy Minister is quite legitimate. Maybe we need to make some
follow-up with the provinces in that respect, because policy, legislation
and co-ordination is at central level, but the actual implementation in
term of the nuts and bolts resides with the provinces.

                Ambulance shortage in Lehurutshe/Zeerust area

28.   Mr A L Moseki asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   Whether she has been informed (a) of the ambulance shortage in
           the area of Lehurutshe/Zeerust and (b) that this shortage
           resulted in unnecessary death during car accidents; if not, what
           is the position in this regard; if so,

      (2)   whether her department has a comprehensive plan in place to
           deliver quality health services closer to the disadvantaged
           communities in this area; if not, why not; if so, what plan;

      (3)   whether her department has budgeted for this plan; if not, why
           not; if so, where has it been budgeted for?              C168E

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZEMPILO: Sihlalo, angibonge ukuthi ungiphe ithuba
lokuphendula lombuzo. Bengise-North West izolo ngikhuluma nozakwethu
wezempilo, uRasmeni, siludidinga lolu daba. Uthi-ke kimina uma engitshela
kukhona ama-ambulense amane eLehurutshe e-Zeerust njengoba sikhuluma nje.
Uthi lama-ambulense akhona enele kuleso sifunda kodwa uthi ngempela
ngempela kufanele enezezelwe. Kusho ukuthi-ke sizobheka ukuthi kulo nyaka
imali sizoyithola na yokwenezezela.

Mayelana nombuzo 1(b) obuza ngenani lezimoto ezishayisene– ama-ambulense,
uthi ngo-Ephreli 2006 kwashayisana izimoto ezingama-31 kwashona abantu
abathathu. NgoMeyi, kwashayisana ezingama-20 kodwa akushonanga muntu.
NgoJuni kwashayisana ezingama-29 kodwa akushonanga muntu. Okusho ukuthi-ke
kusuka ku-Ephreli kuze kufike kuJuni kushayisane izimoto ezingama-80
kwashona abantu abantu abathathu. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, let me thank you for giving me the
opportunity to respond to this question. I was in the North West yesterday
to discuss this issue with my colleague on health, Ramsamy. He indicated to
me that there were four ambulances in Luhurutshe, Zeerust, as we talk. He
said these ambulances were enough in that region, but he added that indeed
they must be beefed up. This means that we shall ascertain whether we would
have the money to beef them up this year.

With regard to question 1 (b), which refers to cars that have been involved
in collisions, meaning ambulances, he said in April 2006 that 31 ambulances
had been involved in collisions and three people had died. In May, 20
ambulances were involved in collisions, but no one died. In June, 29
ambulances were involved in collisions but no one died. This means that
from April up to June, 80 ambulances had been involved in collisions and
three people had died.]

Recently, a new community health centre was opened at Lehurutshe, and this
facility has an ambulance base. At present, there are ambulances from
Zeerust satellite at this base, which results in the ambulances being
closer to the community they serve.

Asimhalalisele-ke ukuthi wenza umsebenzi omuhle naye. Unohlelo-ke lokuthi
ezosizo oluphuthumayo zithuthukiswe e-North West nakuyona lendawo
esikhuluma ngayo. Sesinohlelo futhi size sabona ukuthi ukuthi luzofuna
imali engakanani. Sekufanele siyolunika usiKhwama kaZwelonke ukuze abone
ukuthi angasinika na leyo mali. Lokhu-ke sikwenza ngoba silungiselela
ukuthi ngo-2010 uma sekufika iNdebe yoMhlaba yebhola lezinyawo kube ukuthi
ngempela ngempela sizimisele ukuthi umsebenzi esavuma ukuthi sizowenza
ngaleso sikhathi siyobe sesiwenzile. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Let us also congratulate them on doing a good job. They have a programme
regarding the issue of speeding up the emergency services in the North West
and even in this area that we are talking about. We also have a programme
and we have even identified how much it will cost. We have to submit it to
the National Treasury so that it can make a decision on whether it will be
able to give us the money. We are doing this in preparation for 2010 so
that when the Soccer World Cup arrives, indeed we shall have accomplished
the work we set out to accomplish. Thank you.]

Rre A L MOSEKI: Ke a leboga Tona. Ke lebogela karabo e e nang le tlhaloso e
e tletseng, e Tona a sa tswang go neelana ka yona le go bontsha gore re
bone tshedimosetso e e maleba. Bothata jo re bo tlhagisang fa ke gore nako
ya go tsiboga ya diambulense fa go na le dikotsi jaaka Tona a sa tswa go
bontsha ka dintsho tse di tlhagileng. Ka nako nngwe o fitlhela gore ...
(Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Mr A L MOSEKI: Thank you, Minister. Let me commend you for providing us
with a comprehensive response and relevant information. By highlighting the
problem that relates to time, we are showing how ambulances take time to
respond to accidents, as the Minster has just indicated with the accidents
that occurred. It is noted that at certain times ...]

... response could have been 10 minutes, but it takes more than 10 minutes
- up to one hour. We would like the Minister to comment about that. Thank
you very much.

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA BOITEKANELO: Le nna ke a leboga gore o botse potso eo.
Totatota re a leka gore nako ya go tsiboga e tshwanetse go nna khutswane.
Ke ka moo fa ke araba ke reng, re leka thata go oketsa palo ya diambulense
mo tikologong e re buang ka yona e. Ke a leboga. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you for asking that question. In actual
fact, we try to keep our responses short. It is against this background
that we are trying to increase the number of ambulances in the area under
discussion. Thank you.]

Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. Go ya ka tlhlalošo ya
motlhomphegi Tona le tshedimošo yeo a e filwego ke mošomišani-ka-yena
profenseng, a dikotsi tše dintšintši tša diamalanse e ka be e le mabošaedi
a baotledi ba diamalanse goba a eng? Ge e ba phošo e ka be e le go baotledi
ba diamalanse, a e ka ba Kgoro e ikemišeditše go ba hlahla gore ba se ke ba
hlola dikotsi, ka gore gantši ba hlola dikotsi e le gore ba rwele balwetši
ka diamalanseng tšeo. Motlhlomphegi! (Translation of Sepedi paragraph
follows.)

[Kgoshi M L MOKOENA: Thank you, Chairperson. According to the explanation
that the hon Minister has given, as well as the information given to her by
her provincial counterpart, are the many ambulance accidents the result of
the recklessness of the drivers? If not, what, then, is the cause? If the
mistake lies with the ambulance drivers, is the department prepared to
train these drivers to curb such accidents, as most of them happen in the
process of transporting patients? Thank you.]

LETONA LA TSA BOPHELO BO BOTLE: Le nna ke a e leboha potso eo. Ke itse, re
le Lefapha la tsa Bophelo bo Botle, re a leka ho etsa bonnete ba hore
bakganni ba dikoloi tsa bakudi ba na le mangolo a ho kganna, mme ba sebetsa
ka tsela eo re batlang hore ba sebetse ka yona. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you for the question. I said, as the
Department of Health, we try to ensure that drivers of ambulances have
driving licences and that they do their work according to the department’s
expectations. I thank you.] [Applause.]]


             Poor workmanship by contractors laying water pipes


29.   Rev P Moatshe asked the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry:

      (1)   Whether her department will take any steps to remedy the loss of
           revenue due to communities being unwilling to pay as a result of
           poor workmanship by contractors laying water pipes; if not, why
           not; if so, what steps;

      (2)   whether her department will provide statistics on reported cases
           and poor workmanship in the current financial year; if not, why
           not; if so, what are the relevant details?   C171E

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS (for the Minister of Water
Affairs and Forestry): Thank you, Chairperson. The reply to the first part
of the question is no. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is a
national department responsible for policy and regulation issues, and it
acts as a leader in the water sector. Local government is constitutionally
bound to deliver services such as water supply and sanitation.

Where local government opts for the private sector to undertake work on
their behalf, for instance the laying of pipes for water reticulation, it
is the sole responsibility of local government to administer the services
of the contractor or contractors. Should the contractor or the contractors
fail to comply with its or their mandate, local government has certain
legal remedies and financial instruments such as performance bonds, sites
insurance and guarantees at its disposal to have the work done to the
specified standards.

Local councillors have the responsibility to look after the needs of the
electorate and should address failures of the contractors in their local
councils. Should the local council and/or the district municipality fail to
address the problem, there are further avenues of redress such as the
provincial departments responsible for local government in provinces and
the Department of Provincial and Local Government at national level.

Following the establishment of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant – MIG –
programme under the Department of Provincial and Local Government with
effect from 1 April 2004, the role of the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry in the laying of pipes is now limited to giving support to
municipalities to execute water services projects according to
specifications, as well as monitoring implementation thereof. The
department is busy, through Project Consolidate, developing a strategy to
provide direct support even at execution level to address the current
problems around the implementation of water projects by municipalities.

Ebang Ntate Moruti ana le masepala ya itseng eo a mo tsebang ya nang le
mathata ana, re eletsa ka hore a e latelle moo le masepala kapa a kanna ae
latella le Lefapha la Mmuso wa Diprofensi le Selehae e ho sechaba le yona e
ho profense. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[If there is a municipality that Mr Moruti knows has this problem, we
advise him to pursue this matter with that municipality, or he could pursue
it with the Department of Provincial and Local Government nationally and
provincially.]

With regard to Question 2, since the responsibility of providing water
services lies with the municipalities, it is their mandate and
responsibility to provide statistics on reported cases and poor
workmanship. I thank you.
Rev P MOATSHE: Yes, Chairperson, I understand that it is the sole
responsibility of the municipalities to provide statistics on reported
cases and poor workmanship. But would the Minister agree with me that the
communities are justified in refusing to pay their revenues as a way to
apply pressure, due to the fact that the workmanship is poor in that pipes
laid underground are leaking all over, and as a result of that they have to
bear the brunt of this by paying for water they never utilised. Therefore,
it becomes extremely important, even if national departments are co-
responsible, because budgets are flowing from the national and provincial
levels to local government. This is a very serious matter, because these
pipes are laid underground, and they are leaking. What do you do then? Does
it mean that the pipes should be unearthed so that they can be rectified?
Obviously, that has a bearing on the inspectors who have okayed the laying
of the pipes underground, in that they have been placed underground not
having been connected properly?

LETONA LA TEMO LE DITABA TSA MOBU: Ke leboha ntate. Haho ka tsela e nngwe,
mathata ana re tshwanetse hore re a ise ho Masepala, ebang a hloleha ho
arabela, re a fetisetse Profensing, Lefapheng la Ditaba tsa Selehae. Le nna
ha fela ntate a ka mpolella hore mathatha a kae, ke tla bua le Letona la
Ditsamaiso tsa Diprofensi le Mebuso ya Mahae.

Empa ke hanana le hore setjhaba se se ke sa lefella, hobane mmuso o keke be
wa ba le tekanyetso ya ho lokisa mathata ana a ho se lefelle. Ha eba ba
ntse ba fumana metsi a tswang ditepeng, ke eletsa setjhaba hore se tswelle
ka ho lefella. Hobane tjhelete eo ke yona e tla re thusang hore re lokisa
mathata ao.

Taba enngwe ke hore re shebe hore ke bomang bo rakontereka ba neng ba etsa
mosebetsi oo, hore e tle ere le rona ha re tlaleha ho Letona la Profensing,
re be re na le tlaleho e felletseng, hore ditshalomorao ditle di be teng.
Empa ke re, bothata bo boholo bo tlameha ho shejwa ka ho Masepala, mme le
mekga ya rona, e na le seabo seo e senkang ho kgalemela bo-Masepala le
Makhanselara ebang ba sa etse mosebetsi wa setjhaba hantle. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Thank you, Sir. There is no other way; we have to refer these problems
back to the municipality, and if no reasonable explanation is forthcoming,
then we proceed to the Department of Provincial and Local Government. If
only he tells me where the problem lies, I can speak to the Minister for
Provincial and Local Government.

But I do not agree with the issue of nonpayment on the part of the
community, because government won’t have enough money in the budget to fix
these problems that are a result of nonpayment. If they continue to receive
water from the tap, then I would advise the community to continue paying.
Because that money is the money that will help us to resolve those
problems.

Another issue that we have to look at is who those contractors were who did
that task, so that when we give a report to the Premier, we’ll have a full
report, so that action that will have consequences can be taken. But I
would like to say that the main problem lies with the municipality, and our
parties have a role to play in reprimanding the municipalities and
councillors if they do not perform their duties well.]

Mr Z C NTULI: Thank you, Chairperson, I just wanted to find out from the
Hon Minister whether it is legal for municipalities to cut water if people
are not paying for services. Sometimes you find that they take out the
pipe. Now, let’s say these people are challenging the municipalities in
court - because I believe water is a right. If one digs out the pipe, can
one not be sued by the residents if these municipalities take out even this
free water which is supposed to be given to pensioners?

The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Ke potso e ntjha eo. Ha ke na
tsela ya ho e araba. [That is a new question. I cannot answer it now.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon members, I bring to your
attention that members are alerted before every Question Time. I know it’s
human and natural for people to be tempted to pose new questions in the
name of follow-up questions. I don’t think that is in the interests of our
time. I am very hesitant to make a ruling against a new question, but when
a Minister says that it’s a new question, that doesn’t augur well for us.
However, I’m just drawing members’ attention in that we must really stick
to the standards that are expected of us.

 Banks and Post Offices used as means to prevent pensioners’ being robbed at
                                payout points

30.   Rev P Moatshe asked the Minister of Social Development:

      Whether his department intends using banks and post offices as a means
      of avoiding pensioners being robbed at payout points; if not, what is
      the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   C172E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, the reply is yes,
banks and the Post Office are already being utilised. This sector currently
accounts for 20% of the grant payments. The SA Social Security Agency’s
objective is to incrementally grow this percentage to at least 80% of the
total grant payments. Sassa deems this sector to be a key role-player in
the crystallisation of the future payment model. High-level initial
preparatory engagements in this regard are being held with these role-
players.
The process of engaging the formal financial services sector was initiated
in June 2005, when the Minister called a meeting with the Banking
Association SA. One outcome of this meeting was the drafting of a
memorandum of understanding, which was meant to guide the interaction
between the Department of Social Development, the SA Social Security Agency
and the Banking Association SA on how the formal financial services sector
would be assisting in this regard. Thank you, Chairperson.

Rev P MOATSHE: Chairperson, I am asking this question because it has become
so dangerous in my constituency for a pensioner to go to a pension paypoint
to receive the money. There are guys waiting there and, in the evening,
they go to her home and collect the pension. They say to her, “If you say
who these people are, we will kill you.” This shows how dangerous it is.
Therefore, if other pensioners are able to receive their pensions through
banks and the Post Office, this means that this person can go to the bank
when she wishes to. She is not compelled to go on a particular day, when
all the pensioners are converging at one place, and there are people who
are monitoring and saying which people they will visit that night. When it
goes on to the extent that ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): No statement, hon member. What is
your follow-up question?

Rev P MOATSHE: The question is: Is it not possible for all pensioners to go
to banks and the Post Office?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Can you respond to that, Deputy
Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I think at the
moment there are some problems in that some banks are charging interest and
so pensioners prefer not to have to pay that interest. That is why there
are continual consultations going on in that regard. There are some banks
that agree. But this also depends on the pensioners. There are pensioners
who choose not to go and receive their pensions there. But, in principle
there isn’t a problem. Thank you.


              Low-cost housing projects’ slow rate of roll-out


31.   Mr N D Hendricks asked the Minister of Housing:

      What is being done to address the slow rate at which low-cost housing
      projects are being rolled out, given reports that some banks intend
      pulling out of these schemes in the light of viability considerations?
                                                   C179E

The MINISTER OF HOUSING: Chairperson, please allow me to read this question
because then the follow-up will address itself to this and the resultant
problem I have in answering it: What is being done to address the slow rate
at which low-cost housing projects are being rolled out, given reports that
some banks intend pulling out of these schemes in the light of viability
considerations?

I have no idea what the question means. Firstly, I am not aware that there
has been any slowdown in the delivery of low-income housing. In fact, over
the last two years, we have reached the highest roll-out point that this
government has ever produced. We have now in total produced two million
houses. On average, between the years 1994 and 2000, we have produced
something like 145 000 houses per year. But, in 2004 and 2005, we produced
an average of 217 000 and 252 000. We have not reached this kind of
delivery before. So, I cannot align myself with the kind of thought
processes that would have talked about the low rate of low-cost housing.

The other matter that I thought I should draw to the member’s attention is
perhaps the terminology problem here. Low-cost housing is that kind of
housing which the state provides in total through the subsidy. This the
states provides through the municipalities, if the municipality is a
developer, or through normal developers, and the state provides a subsidy
for this. Banks are not normally involved with this.

Secondly, there is a category, which is called ``affordable housing’’. That
is a category that would be for people earning R3 500 to R7 000 a month.
This is the category that we have tried to attract the banks to go back to
by funding a bond. This is what the banks have committed themselves to -
providing R42 billion, which they are now increasingly rolling-out, because
the deadline for production is 2008.

So, in fact we are really at our peak, both the banks and ourselves. I am
therefore not able to answer the question. There is no slowdown. We have
never produced as much as we are producing now. The banks have never
produced as much as they are producing now. I thank you very much.


       Financial management of, and employment equity in Home Affairs


32.   Mr N D Hendricks asked the Minister of Home Affairs:

      (1)   Whether there has been any improvement in the financial
           management of her department; if not, why not; if so, what are
           the relevant details;

        2) what steps have been taken to address employment equity?

                       C180E

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, the answer to the question is
yes. There has indeed been an improvement in the financial management of
the Department of Home Affairs, as reflected in the audit report for the
2005-06 financial year, which we probably have not seen as yet.

As hon members will recall, the department received a disclaimer opinion
from the Auditor-General in the 2004-05 financial year. However, in the
2005-06 financial year, and after several initiatives to improve financial
management in the department, we took two giant steps forward, with the
result that we improved from a disclaimer to a qualified audit report
opinion, which is on a better level.

As part of his comment in the most recent audit report, which I received
last week, the Auditor-General indicated that the financial systems of the
department fairly represented the financial position and financial
management of the department, except for issues that require the attention
of the department’s senior management.

Furthermore, you will also recall that I solicited the support of the
Department of Finance and the Department of Public Service and
Administration to assist us to further improve on our state of finances and
human resources. I am certain that through the assistance of this
intervention task team, our financial management will improve
significantly.

With regard to the second part of your question, hon member, I am pleased
to report that the department has responded adequately to the directive
issued by the Department of Public Service and Administration to the effect
that all senior management service levels in the Public Service must ensure
a 50% representation of women by 31 March 2009 to address employment
equity.

As part of our effort to address this critical challenge, we have taken the
following steps. Firstly, we are adjusting the current employment equity
levels regarding women in senior management service levels in the
department from their current level of 36% by an additional 14% to meet the
50% representation target by 31 March 2009. Secondly, in respect of
employees below the senior management service level, a workforce analysis
has been conducted and we are currently revising the employment equity
targets for this category of employees. I thank you.

Ms J M MASILO: There was a delay in your department with the issuing and
implementation of the smart-cards for which R1,2 billion was budgeted. We
just want to check if the financial management is up to scratch. What are
the delays? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Delays on the smart-cards are not a result of
financial matters. There haven’t been problems relating to that. You will
recall, if you look at the Home Affairs National Identification System,
HANIS, that it is not a smart-card. There are some elements of HANIS which
have been implemented by the department. However, the issue of the smart-
cards has had some hitches because we still need to agree on the model of
the smart-card, and that is the only reason which delayed the
implementation of the smart-cards. We hope to resolve that.

I just want to say that with regard to money which was allocated and
budgeted for the smart-card, that money has been frozen. So, we are not
using that money in any way.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Any further follow-up question? In
the absence of any, hon members, I must inform the House that we are not
going to deal with question 33 as printed on the Order Paper. The question
has been posed by the hon Lamoela. I don’t see her in the House, most
unfortunately. Indeed, a question has been put to the Minister, but because
it deals essentially with fraud, which is the domain of another department,
the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development, the hon member is
advised to redirect the question to the relevant Minister in question,
meaning the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development.

With regard to statistics of how many civil servants are involved, the
question must be redirected to the relevant Minister, and that is the
Minister of Public Service and Administration.

The Council adjourned at 15:31.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                           THURSDAY, 22 JUNE 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 21 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
         the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 75).


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the South African delegation to the 114th Inter-
        Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Nairobi, Kenya 7-14 May 2006.
CREDA PLEASE INSERT – T060622E-insert1 – PAGES 1559-1577


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

      The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 13
    June 2006 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
    informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South African
    National Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
    INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

      This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
    authorised the employment of the South African National Defence Force
    (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in
    fulfillment of the international obligations of the Republic of South
    Africa towards the DRC in support of the electoral process. Elections
    in the DRC are scheduled to take place on 30 July 2006.


    This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
    section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
    1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of
    2002).


      A total of thirty nine (39) members are employed until 15 July 2006.
    The total cost to be borne by the Department of Foreign Affairs from
    the African Renaissance Fund for the deployment of the personnel is R
    49, 547, 145.

      I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
    and request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention of the
    National Council of Provinces.

      Yours sincerely,


      signed
      THABO MBEKI

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

CREDA PLEASE INSERT – T060622E-insert2 - PAGES 1580-1586

CREDA PLEASE INSERT – T060622E-insert3 – PAGES 1587-1608


National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
  the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the
  Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, dated 20 June 2006:
     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
     briefed by the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry on its Annual
     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 34 for 2004-2005, including the
     Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 34
     for 2004-2005 [RP 130-2005], referred to it, reports that it has
     concluded its deliberations thereon.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs on
  the Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2004/2005 of the
  Department of Agriculture dated 20 June 2006:

     The Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having been
     briefed by the Department of Agriculture on its Annual Report and
     Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2004-2005, including the Report of
     the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Vote 25 for 2004-
     2005, referred to it, reports that it has concluded its deliberations
     thereon.


                            FRIDAY, 23 JUNE 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

        1) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
           Bill [B 32F – 2005] – Act No 3 of 2006 (assented to and signed
           by President on 19 June 2006).

                            MONDAY, 26 JUNE 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

    1) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act,
       2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


    2) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act,
       2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

    1) The following statement has been submitted to the National Council
       of Provinces by the MEC for Local Government, Housing and
       Traditional Affairs in Kwazulu-Natal, in terms of section 106(3) of
       the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
       2000).

        Investigation in the Umsunduzi Municipality.


        The statement is referred to the Select Committee on Local
        Government and Administration.


        Copies of the statement are available from the office of the Clerk
        of the Papers.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
   Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having considered the
   request from National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to
   further consider its report dated 2 June 2006 as published on the ATC of
   5 June 2006 (page 1152) with regard to recommending the appointment of
   commissioners to the President for the filling of vacancies on the
   National Youth Commission reports as follows:

   The Committee has previously reported that it had invited the public to
   nominate persons for consideration and recommendation to the President
   for the filling of vacancies on the Commission. Nominations and
   applications were received from 54 candidates. The Committee met on 12
   May 2006 to consider the nominations, and agreed that the following
   persons be shortlisted and interviewed on 24 and 26 May 2006
   respectively.

   Mr Xolile Majola, Ms Nobulumko Degracia Nkondlo, Mr Elroy van Rooyen,
   Mr Magic Nkhwashu, Ms Vuyiswa Gladys Tulelo, Ms Ntombikayise Nomawisile
   Sibhida, Mr David Xolile Kham, Mr Khululekani Ntshangase, Ms Lefika
   Chetty,
   Mr Sithembele Africa Peter, Mr Olwethu Sipuka, Mr Mothupi Phaladi Modiba,
   Ms Nonkululeko Mohomane, Mr Mntuwekhaya Sheperd Daki, Ms Rene Alicia
   Smith and Mr Donald Kubayi. Out of the 16 short listed candidates, Mr D
   Kubayi was not allowed to exchange his opportunity for the interview with
   Mr V Mukharhi, a friend and was subsequently disqualified.


   Having further considered its report of 2 June, the Committee, in terms
   of section 4 of the National Youth Commission Act, advises that the
   President appoint the commissioners from the following list of
   recommended candidates:


         Mr Modiba Mothupi
         Ms Nkondlo Nobulumko
         Mr Ntshangase Khululekani
         Ms Sibhida Ntombikayise
         Mr Sipuka Olwethu
         Ms Tulelo Vuyiswa
         Mr Van Rooyen Elroy

CREDA PLEASE INSERT – T060626E-insert1 PAGES 1616-1617


                             MONDAY, 3 JULY 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

    (1)     International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
        Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.


    (2)     Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     1) Government Notice No R.385 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of chapter 5 of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     2) Government Notice No R.386 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent authorities
        identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     3) Government Notice No R.387 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent authorities
        identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

CREDA PLEASE INSERT – T060703E-insert1 – PAGES 1619-1635

                            TUESDAY, 4 JULY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

     1) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29D – 2005] – Act No 4 of 2006
        (assented to and signed by President on 27 June 2006).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit completed at
        the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development – May 2006
        [RP 92-2006].

2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     1) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa as represented by the Department of Safety and
        Security and the Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) as
        represented by the Ministry of Interior on Police Cooperation,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

     1) Submission by the Association for Community and Rural Advancement
        (AnCRA) regarding the Vlakfontein/Ganghae Land Restitution Claim
        (Northern Cape).


        Referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


                            MONDAY, 10 JULY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)     The JTM on 26 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
        classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13 –
             2006 (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson


1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance  and  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration:

          a) Government Notice No 416 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28795 dated 12 May 2006: Setting out particulars  of  the  area
             demarcated  by  the  Municipality  of  Emalahleni  which  shall
             constitute as an urban development zone, in terms of section 13
             quat of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    2.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 357 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of,  design  for,  and
             compilation of, the year 2006 Natura pure gold coin series,  in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).

          b) Government Notice No 358 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of,  design  for,  and
             compilation of the year 2006 Protea coin series,  in  terms  of
             the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

          c) Government Notice No 359 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of,  design  for,  and
             compilation of the year 2006 R1 and R2 pure gold  coin  series,
             in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90
             of 1989).

          d) Government Notice No 360 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of,  design  for,  and
             compilation of the year 2006 Crown size 2½ ct  sterling  silver
             coin series, in terms of the South African  Reserve  Bank  Act,
             1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

          e) Government Notice No 361 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of,  design  for,  and
             compilation of the year 2006 sterling silver  coin  series,  in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).

          f) Government Notice No 602 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28798 dated 12 May 2006: Listing and classification  of  public
             entities, in terms of the Public Finance Management  Act,  1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999).

          g) Government Notice No 403 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
             28771 dated 26 April 2006: Notice to  be  issued  in  terms  of
             section 18A to determine public benefit activities for purposes
             of   deductible   donations   to   certain    public    benefit
             organisations, in terms of the Income  Tax  Act,  1962  (58  of
             1962).


     1. The following papers are referred to the Select Committee  on  Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


        (a)      General Notice No 657 published in Government  Gazette  No
            28854 dated 19 May 2006: Proposed guidelines  as  part  of  the
            implementation of Environmental Impact  Assessment  Regulations
            in  terms  of  section  24(5)  of  the  National  Environmental
            Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


        (b)      Government Notice No R494 published in Government  Gazette
            No  28869  dated  2  June  2006:   Regulations:   Qualification
            criteria, training and identification of and forms to  be  used
            by  environmental  management  inspectors,  in  terms  of   the
            National Environmental Management Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
            1998).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.385 published in Government Gazette
            No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of chapter 5
            of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No  107
            of 1998).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.386 published in Government Gazette
            No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and  competent
            authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D  of  the
            National Environmental Management Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
            1998).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.387 published in Government Gazette
            No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and  competent
            authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D  of  the
            National Environmental Management Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
            1998).

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs:

          a) Convention  on  the  Conservation  and  Management  of  Fishery
             Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO),  tabled  in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    5.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration:

        a) Draft Local Government: Municipal  Performance  Regulations  for
           Section 57 Employees, 2006 in terms of  section  120(7)  of  the
           Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,  2000  (Act  No  32  of
           2000).


    6.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Education  and  Recreation,  the  Joint  Monitoring  Committee   on
        Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of  Children,  Youth  and
        Disabled  Persons  and  the  Select  Committee  on   Security   and
        Constitutional Affairs for consideration:


          a) Report of the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC)  on
             the Public Hearing on the Right to Basic Education, 2005.


    7.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services for consideration and report:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the  Auditor-General  on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 34-2006].

    8.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security  and  Constitutional  Affairs  and  the   Joint   Standing
        Committee on Defence:


          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 13  June
             2006 to the Chairperson of the National  Council  of  Provinces
             informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South
             African National Defence Force in the  Democratic  Republic  of
             Congo.


    9.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

        a) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Access  to  Information
           Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


        b) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Administrative  Justice
           Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (1)    Report of the Auditor-General on a performance  audit  completed
        at the South African Local Government  Association  (SALGA)  –  May
        2006 [RP 93-2006].


     (2)    Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  submission  of
        financial statements by municipalities  and  the  status  of  audit
        reports as at 31 March 2006 for the financial year  ended  30  June
        2005 [RP 100-2006].


                            TUESDAY, 11 JULY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker

1.    Withdrawal of International Convention


    A letter dated 6 July 2006, was received from the  Minister  of  Safety
    and Security, requesting the withdrawal of the International Convention
    for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism  and  the  Explanatory
    Memorandum to the International Convention for the Suppression of  Acts
    of Nuclear Terrorism, tabled on 3 July 2006 in terms of section  231(2)
    of the Constitution, 1996.
2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Finance  and  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Provincial  and  Local
        Government:

        a) Government Notice No 416  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           28795 dated 12 May 2006: Setting out  particulars  of  the  area
           demarcated  by  the  Municipality  of  Emalahleni  which   shall
           constitute as an urban development zone, in terms of section  13
           quat of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:

        (a)      Government Notice No 357 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension  of,  design  for,
             and compilation of,  the  year  2006  Natura  pure  gold  coin
             series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank  Act,  1989
             (Act No 90 of 1989).
          b) Government Notice No 358 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design  for,  and
             compilation of the year 2006 Protea coin series, in  terms  of
             the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


        (c)      Government Notice No 359 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension  of,  design  for,
             and compilation of the year 2006 R1  and  R2  pure  gold  coin
             series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank  Act,  1989
             (Act No 90 of 1989).
        (d)      Government Notice No 360 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension  of,  design  for,
             and compilation of the year 2006 Crown  size  2½  ct  sterling
             silver coin series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank
             Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

        (e)      Government Notice No 361 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension  of,  design  for,
             and compilation of the year 2006 sterling silver coin  series,
             in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989  (Act  No
             90 of 1989).

        (f)      Government Notice No 602 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28798 dated 12 May  2006:  Listing  and  classification  of
             public entities, in terms of  the  Public  Finance  Management
             Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

        (g)      Government Notice No 403 published in  Government  Gazette
             No 28771 dated 26 April 2006: Notice to be issued in terms  of
             section  18A  to  determine  public  benefit  activities   for
             purposes of deductible donations  to  certain  public  benefit
             organisations, in terms of the Income Tax  Act,  1962  (58  of
             1962).

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:


        a) General Notice No 657 published in Government Gazette  No  28854
           dated  19  May  2006:  Proposed  guidelines  as  part   of   the
           implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations in
           terms of section 24(5) of the National Environmental  Management
           Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


        b) Government Notice No R. 494 published in Government  Gazette  No
           28869 dated 2 June 2006:  Regulations:  Qualification  criteria,
           training  and  identification  of  and  forms  to  be  used   by
           environmental management inspectors, in terms  of  the  National
           Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

        (c)      Government Notice No R.385 published in Government Gazette
           No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of chapter  5
           of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act  No  107
           of 1998).

        (d)      Government Notice No R.386 published in Government Gazette
           No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities  and  competent
           authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and  24D  of  the
           National Environmental Management  Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
           1998).

        (e)      Government Notice No R.387 published in Government Gazette
           No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities  and  competent
           authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and  24D  of  the
           National Environmental Management  Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
           1998).


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

        a)  Convention  on  the  Conservation  and  Management  of  Fishery
           Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean  (SEAFO),  tabled  in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration:

        a) Draft Local Government: Municipal  Performance  Regulations  for
           Section 57 Employees, 2006 in terms of  section  120(7)  of  the
           Local Government: Municipal Systems Act,  2000  (Act  No  32  of
           2000).

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Education, the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality
        of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons and  the
        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional  Development  for
        consideration:


        a) Report of the South African Human Rights Commission  (SAHRC)  on
           the Public Hearing on the Right to Basic Education, 2005.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the  Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is  referred  to  the  Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund  (RAF)
           for 2004-2005, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General  on
           the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 34-2006].

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio  Committee  on
        Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:


        a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated  13  June
           2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly  informing  Members
           of the Assembly of the employment of the South African  National
           Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo.


    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

        a) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Access  to  Information
           Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


        b) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Administrative  Justice
           Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

    10.     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee  on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


        a) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Marine Living Resources Fund for 2001-2002.
        b) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Marine Living Resources Fund for 2002-2003.

        c) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Marine Living Resources Fund for 2003-2004.

        d) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Marine Living Resources Fund for 2004-2005.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry

     1) Amendment to the Water Boards pricing structure, tabled in terms of
        section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management
        Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting documents required  in
        terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

                            FRIDAY, 14 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM  on  23  June  2006  in  terms  of  Joint  Rule  160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special  Measures  Bill
             [B 16 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 667 published in Government  Gazette  No  28847
        dated 26 May 2006: Listing and Classification of public entities, in
        terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


     b) Government Notice No R.491 published in Government Gazette No  28884
        dated 29 May 2006: Pension Funds Amendment Regulations for 2006,  in
        terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
     a) Government Notice 611 published in Government Gazette No 28945 dated
        19 June  2006:  Consultation  process:  Blyde  River  Canyon  Nature
        Reserve and indigenous forest management  areas,  in  terms  of  the
        National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No
        57 of 2003).


     b) Government Notice No R.612 published in Government Gazette No  28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Commencement of Environmental Impact  Assessment
        Regulations  for  2006,  in  terms  of  the  National  Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     c) Government Notice No R.613 published in Government Gazette No  28938
        dated 23  June  2006:  Notice  in  terms  of  section  24  and  24D:
        Amendment, made in terms of the  National  Environmental  Management
        Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     d) Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette No  28938
        dated 23 June 2006: List of  activities  and  competent  authorities
        identified in terms of Sections 24 and 24D, made  in  terms  of  the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     e) Government Notice No R.615 published in Government Gazette No  28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Repeal notices in terms of  Sections  21(1)  and
        22(1), made in terms of the  Environmental  Conservation  Act,  1989
        (Act No 73 of 1989).


     f) Government Notice No R.616 published in Government Gazette No  28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Repeal of regulations,  made  in  terms  of  the
        Environmental Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).


CREDA PLEASE INSERT 060714E-insert1 – PAGES 1649-1702



                            TUESDAY, 18 JULY 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

    a) Protocol to the OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
       Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
       1996.


    b) Explanatory Memorandum of the Protocol to the OAU Convention on the
       Prevention and Combating of Terrorism.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


    a) Proclamation No 23 published in Government Gazette No 28825 dated 12
       May 2006: Referral of matters to existing Special Investigating Unit
       and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special Investigating Units
       and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).


                           WEDNESDAY, 19 JULY 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road Transport
       Agency (C-BRTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
       General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 195-2005].


                            TUESDAY, 25 JULY 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. The Minister of Transport

   a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
      the Government of the Republic of Botswana regarding the Co-ordination
      of Aeronautical Search and Rescue Services, tabled in terms of section
      231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


   (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
      of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic of
      Botswana regarding the Co-ordination of Aeronautical Search and Rescue
      Services.

                           THURSDAY, 27 JULY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

    (1)     Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] – Act No 5 of 2006
        (assented to and signed by President on 14 July 2006)
     2) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] – Act  No  6  of  2006
        (assented to and signed by President on 20 July 2006)
     3) Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2006] – Act No 7 of 2006 (assented to and
        signed by President on 14 July 2006)
     4) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment  of  Certain  Laws
        Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2006] – Act No 8 of 2006 (assented  to  and
        signed by President on 20 July 2006)
     5) Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws  Bill  [B
        14 – 2006] – Act No 9 of 2006 (assented to and signed by  President
        on 20 July 2006)
     6) Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment  of  Taxation  Laws
        Bill [B 15 – 2006] – Act No 10 of 2006 (assented to and  signed  by
        President on 14 July 2006).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill,  2006,  submitted
         by the Minister of Sport and Recreation on 18 July 2006.

3.    Withdrawal of tabling and referral to Committees

    (1)     A letter dated 18 July 2006 was received from the Minister for
        Justice and Constitutional Development, requesting the withdrawal
        of the Draft Rules made in terms of section 79(1) of the Promotion
        of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000), and the
        Draft Rules made in terms of section 7(3) of the Promotion of
        Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000), tabled on 26
        June 2006.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     General Report of the Auditor-General on the Provincial Audit
        Outcomes for 2004-05 [RP 99-2006].

National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Letter dated 18 July 2006, received from the President  of  the
        Republic of South Africa informing Parliament of the employment  of
        the South African National Defence Force for service in fulfillment
        of the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa:


        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN
        DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE
        INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH TOWARDS THE
        DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        authorised the employment of South African National Defence Force
        (SANDF) personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in
        fulfillment of the international obligations of the Republic of
        South Africa towards the DRC in support of the electoral process.
        The Elections in the DRC are scheduled to take place on 30 July
        2006.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002). A total of twenty seven (27) members are employment as
        from 19 July 2006 to 15 August 2006. The total estimated cost to be
        borne by the Department of Foreign Affairs from the African
        Renaissance Fund for the deployment of the personnel is R 3, 131,
        937.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
        wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the attention
        of the National Council of Provinces.
        Regards


        TM Mbeki

                            MONDAY, 31 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159 referred to
    Committees

    (1)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted
         by the Minister of Sport and Recreation on 18 July 2006 (see ATC 27
         July 2006, p 1709) is hereby referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation.


TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


    a) Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the South
       African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December 2005.


    (b)     Government Notice No 797 published in Government Gazette No
        28937 dated 23 June 2006: Listing and classification of public
        entities in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No
        1 of 1999).


     c) Government Notice No R.621 published in Government Gazette No 28953
        dated 23 June 2006: Determination of limit on amount of
        remuneration for purposes of determination of contribution in terms
        of section 6 of the Unemployment Insurance Contributions Act, 2002
        (Act No 4 of 2002).


     d) Government Notice No R.609 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Determination of amounts in terms of sections 1
        and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of 1976).


2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     a) Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2005-2006 [RP
        108-2006].


                           THURSDAY, 3 AUGUST 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)     Children’s Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the  Minister  of
         Social Development on 27  July  2006.  Referred  to  the  Portfolio
         Committee on Social Development and the Select Committee on  Social
         Services.

2.    Membership of Committees

    1.      The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees, viz:


        Budget Committee


        Appointed: Van Dyk, Dr S M

National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

          a) Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
             Republic of South Africa as represented by  the  Department  of
             Safety and Security and  the  Government  of  the  United  Arab
             Emirates (UAE) as represented by the Ministry  of  Interior  on
             Police Cooperation, tabled in terms of section  231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.


    2.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services:

          a) Agreement between the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Botswana regarding
             the Co-ordination of Aeronautical Search and  Rescue  Services,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government
             of the Republic of South  Africa  and  the  Government  of  the
             Republic   of   Botswana   regarding   the   Co-ordination   of
             Aeronautical Search and Rescue Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


    a) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources  Fund
       for  2001-2002,  2002-2003,  2003-2004,  2004-2005,  including   the
       Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2001-
       2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005 [RP 41-2006].


                            FRIDAY, 4 AUGUST 2006
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


          (a)    National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 27787 of 22 July 2005.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport
             and Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral
             to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in
             terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.



                           TUESDAY, 8 AUGUST 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 671 published in Government Gazette No 29004
        dated 14 July 2006: Exemptions of 1.1 (IDC and its subsidiaries –
        Findevco (Pty) Ltd, Konoil (Pty) Ltd, Impofin (Pty) Ltd, Export-
        Import Finance Corporation of SA (Pty) Ltd, 1.2 (Foskor Limited.),
        1.3 (Debt Restructuring subsidiaries of the IDC.), in terms of
        section 92 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises

     a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited (Eskom)
        for 2005-2006, including the Reports of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     a) Government Notice No 682 published in Government Gazette No 29027
        dated 14 July 2006: Natal National Botanic Garden: Change of Name,
        made in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).


                           FRIDAY, 11 AUGUST 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit  completed
             at the Department of Justice and Constitutional  Development  –
             May 2006 [RP 92-2006].


    2.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:

          a) Proclamation No 23 published in Government  Gazette  No  28825
             dated 12 May 2006: Referral of  matters  to  existing  Special
             Investigating Unit  and  Special  Tribune,  in  terms  of  the
             Special Investigating Units and Special  Tribunals  Act,  1996
             (Act No 74 of 1996).

          b) Memorandum of  Understanding  between  the  Government  of  the
             Republic of South Africa as represented by  the  Department  of
             Safety and Security and  the  Government  of  the  United  Arab
             Emirates (UAE) as represented by the Ministry  of  Interior  on
             Police Cooperation, tabled in terms of section  231(3)  of  the
             Constitution, 1996.
    3.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:


        a) Protocol to the OAU Convention on the Prevention  and  Combating
           of  Terrorism,  tabled  in  terms  of  section  231(2)  of   the
           Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum of the Protocol to the OAU Convention  on
           the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism.

    4.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Local Government and Administration for consideration:

          a) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit  completed
             at the South African Local Government Association (SALGA) – May
             2006 [RP 93-2006].

    5.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance  and  the  Select  Committee  on   Local   Government   and
        Administration for consideration:


        a) Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General  on  the  submission  of
           financial statements by municipalities and the status  of  audit
           reports as at 31 March 2006 for the financial year ended 30 June
           2005 [RP 100-2006].


    6.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:


          a) Amendment to the Water  Boards  pricing  structure,  tabled  in
             terms of section  42(4)  of  the  Local  Government:  Municipal
             Finance Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting
             documents required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.


    7.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance:


        (a)      Government Notice No 667 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 28847 dated 26  May  2006:  Listing  and  Classification  of
            public entities, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act,
            1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


        (b)      Government Notice No R.491 published in Government Gazette
            No 28884 dated 29 May 2006: Pension Funds Amendment Regulations
            for 2006, in terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of
            1956).


        (c)      Government Notice No 797 published in  Government  Gazette
            No 28937 dated 23 June  2006:  Listing  and  classification  of
            public entities in terms of the Public Finance Management  Act,
            1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).


    8.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Land and Environmental Affairs:

        (a)      Government Notice 611 published in Government  Gazette  No
            28945 dated 19 June 2006:  Consultation  process:  Blyde  River
            Canyon Nature Reserve and indigenous forest  management  areas,
            in terms of the National  Environmental  Management:  Protected
            Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).
        (b)      Government Notice No R.612 published in Government Gazette
            No 28938 dated 23  June  2006:  Commencement  of  Environmental
            Impact  Assessment  Regulations  for  2006,  in  terms  of  the
            National Environmental Management Act,  1998  (Act  No  107  of
            1998).


        (c)      Government Notice No R.613 published in Government Gazette
            No 28938 dated 23 June 2006: Notice in terms of section 24  and
            24D: Amendment, made in terms  of  the  National  Environmental
            Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


        (d)      Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette
            No 28938 dated 23 June 2006: List of activities  and  competent
            authorities identified in terms of Sections 24 and 24D, made in
            terms of the National Environmental Management Act,  1998  (Act
            No 107 of 1998).


        (e)      Government Notice No R.615 published in Government Gazette
            No 28938 dated  23  June  2006:  Repeal  notices  in  terms  of
            Sections 21(1) and 22(1), made in terms  of  the  Environmental
            Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).


        (f)      Government Notice No R.616 published in Government Gazette
            No 28938 dated 23 June 2006: Repeal  of  regulations,  made  in
            terms of the Environmental Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of
            1989).


    9.      The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the  Cross-Border  Road
            Transport Agency (C-BRTA) for 2004-2005, including  the  Report
            of the Auditor-General on the Financial  Statements  for  2004-
            2005 [RP 195-2005].


    10.     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance for consideration and report:


        (a)      Annual Report of the Bank Supervision  Department  on  the
            South African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December 2006.


    11. The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on  Finance
        and the Select Committee on Labour and Public Enterprises:


        (a)      Government Notice No R.621 published in Government Gazette
            No 28953 dated 23 June 2006: Determination of limit  on  amount
            of remuneration for purposes of determination  of  contribution
            in  terms  of  section  6   of   the   Unemployment   Insurance
            Contributions Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).


    12.     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Finance and the Select Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
        Affairs:

        (a)      Government Notice No R.609 published in Government Gazette
             No 28938 dated 23 June 2006: Determination of amounts in  terms
             of sections 1 and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act  No
             84 of 1976).

    13.     The following paper is referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs and the Select Committee on Labour and
        Public Enterprises for consideration:

        (a)      Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2005-
             2006 [RP 108-2006].

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) International Convention for the Suppression  of  Acts  of  Nuclear
        Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of  the  Constitution,
        1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to  the  International  Convention  for  the
        Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
      the Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill [B 34B-2005],  dated
      8 August 2006:

      The  Select  Committee  on  Land  and  Environmental  Affairs,  having
      considered the Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Bill  [B  34B-
      2005] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and  classified  by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75  Bill,  reports  the  Bill
      without amendment.


2.    Report of the Select Committee on Land and  Environmental  Affairs  on
      Joint Strategic Planning Workshop with the Department of Environmental
      Affairs and  Tourism,  Public  Entities  and  Portfolio  Committee  on
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism, dated 8 August 2006:

      1. Introduction


      The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and its Public
      Entities (namely; South African Tourism; Grading Council; Weather
      Services; National Parks, Botanical Institute; Tourism Hospitality and
      Sport Education and the Greater St Lucia Wetland Park) held a
      Strategic Planning session on the 13 – 14 March 2006 reports as
      follows:

      The Committee with the aim of engaging in discussions with the
      Department and its entities when they presented their Strategic Plan
      for 2006/07 invited Members of the Select Committee and Portfolio
      Committee, looking at issues such as achievements, challenges and
      priorities, reports as follows:


      2. Opening Remarks:


      2.1 Hon, Minister M van Schalkwyk
      In his opening remarks, the Minister of Environmental Affairs and
      Tourism, Hon, M van Schalkwyk made reference to the emerging tourist
      markets of China, India, Japan and Africa. He was also pleased to
      announce that the Business and Leisure Tourism Campaign that was
      launched in India was a success.
      After the 2006 German World Cup, the department will be focusing on
      events tourism within South Africa, as South Africa is currently rated
      27th in the world as a country of destination for hosting events.


      The Minister highlighted the following programmes:


      • Biodiversity and Conservation
        - TransFrontier Conservation Areas (TFCA): Challenges of various
        levels of co- operation and progress with other partner countries.
            - Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO): Consultation with
        Department of Agriculture on the impact of GMO’s to the
        environment.

      • Environmental Quality and Protection
        - Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA’s) Capacity in dealing with
         EIA’s and publishing new EIA regulations.
        - The Publishing of new Ambient Air Quality standards.

      • Marine and Coastal Management
         - Finalising the development of the fisheries policy and the
        appeals process.

      • International Work
         - The Department continued its participation in international
        negotiations.


       The Minister further highlighted five priorities of the Department,
       in terms of resource allocation, communication planning, management
       guidance and overall co-ordination, which were: as follows

         • Finalising the new Environmental Impact Assessment regulation
           and capacities;


         • Keeping climate change and our national responses at the centre
           of the domestic and international agenda;


         • Further strengthening compliance and enforcement capacity


         • Unlocking the immense potential of the TransFrontier
           Conservation Areas; and


         • Building on the major growth achievements in the tourism sector
           – especially in the preparations for the 2010 Soccer World Cup.

      2.2 Director-General: Ms Pam Yako


      In her opening remarks she stated that 2006 marks the first of the
      formal annual reviews of the Department’s five-year strategic plan for
      the period 2005/06 – 2009/10.


      The revised plan focuses on addressing the need to accelerate
      sustainable economic growth for the benefit of all South Africans,
      taking into account the demands of our developmental state and
      challenges with regard to the delivery of basic services at local
      government level.


      In addition she stated, that the revised plan recognizes the need for
      the revitalization of Batho Pele in Public Service as well as the
      importance of the participation of social partners in the rollout of
      government programmes, in order to effectively contribute towards
      narrowing the gap between the first and second economy. The overall
      focus of the revised plan is the maximization of the impact of
      government programmes on the economy and people from designated
      priority groups, such as; women; youth; people with disabilities and
      the poor.


      She also highlighted a few key priority areas that the Department will
      be focusing on during the next 4 years:

       • Tourism products and skills development targeted at hosting a
         world class 2010 FIFA World Cup


       • Promote the sharing of benefits from the Tourism Industry through
         the implementation of the Tourism Black Economic Empowerment
         Charter and Scorecard as well as the transformation of the sector.


       • Refine processes and enhance national capacity around
         Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA’s) to meet the demands of
         our development state.


       • Continue to assess the impact of biotechnology on the environment.
       • Working closely with industry and the local sphere of government
         through Project Consolidate, in the delivery of environmental
         services such as waste management.


       • Continue to rollout Expanded Public Works Programmes (EPWP) in the
         Environment, Tourism and Culture sectors aimed at alleviating
         poverty.


       • Increasing corporate compliance with environmental laws as well as
         stepping up enforcement efforts to protect the environment from
         illegal activities.

      3. Presentations by the Department and its Public Entities


      The presentation of both the department and its entities focused on
      their achievements, challenges, commitments and priorities for the
      2006/07 financial years.


      The report of the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
      will highlights the 2006/07 strategic priorities, as presented to both
      committees by the Department and its entities. The purpose of
      highlighting the strategic priorities is so that members, when
      conducting oversight can use this information to monitor and ensure
      that the department and its entities commit themselves to the
      priorities submitted before both houses.


      3.1 Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism Strategic Plan
      Priorities for 2006/07


      3.1.1 Administration and Support Programme


      The Director General, Ms P Yako presented the strategic plan of the
      administration programme. The presentation focused on the vision,
      mission, 2005 achievements, challenges as well as the 2006/07
      strategic priorities. According to the Director General, the 2006/07
      strategic priorities of the administration programme will include:

    • Implementation of black economic empowerment scorecard;


    • Investment in skills development;


    • Development of staff retention strategy and stakeholder engagement;
      and


         • An increase of the representation of people with disability to
           at least 2% and women in Small Medium Enterprise (SME) to 26%.


      3.1.2 Environmental Quality and Protection Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Ms J Yawitch, presented 2006/07 strategic
      plans of environmental quality and protection programme. According to
      the Deputy Director General, the following strategic priorities will
      be pursued in 2006/07:


         • Establishment of comprehensive programme to support provincial
           and local government in capacity;


         • Impact evaluation of plastic bag legislation;


         • Strategic enforcement actions directed at major polluters or
           dangerous pollutants;
         • Finalisation of Waste Management Bill and publication public
           comment;


         • Finalisation of tyre and asbestos regulations and ambient air
           standards;


         • Delegation of landfill permits to provinces on basis of agreed
           implementation plan and capacity building support;


         • Permits review of major polluting industries and long term
           scenario planning on climate change; and


         • Improvement of air quality management training for provincial
           and local government


      3.1.3 Marine and Coastal Management Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Dr M Mayekiso presented the 2006/07
      strategic plan of the marine and coastal management programme. The
      presentation focused on 2004/05 achievement and challenges. In order
      to address the compliance, research development, resource management
      and integrated management challenges, 2006/07 strategic priorities of
      Marine Coastal Management include:

         • Promulgation of coastal management act;

         • Finalisation of aquaculture policy;

         • Allocation of shark cage diving and boat based whale rights;

         • Development of skills development strategy and research output
           through collaboration;

         • Filling of new and vacant positions and Increase number of
           inspector;

         • Develop financial and procurement system and cost recovery
           framework; and

         • Development of recreational permit system.

      3.1.4 Tourism Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Dr P Matlou presented the 2006/07
      strategic plan of the tourism programme. The presentation focused 2005
      achievements and challenges as well as the 2006/07 strategic
      priorities. According to the Deputy Director General, the 2006/07
      strategic priorities of the tourism programme will include:


         • Addressing tourism skills demands;


         • Facilitating tourist safety and security and building a tourism
           friendly nation;


         • Improving movement of tourist to and within South Africa;


         • Supporting local government to grow the tourism sector in 9
           priority areas;


         • Developing and entrenching accurate research instruments; and


         • Implementing broad based black economic empowerment.

      3.1.5 Biodiversity and Conservation Programme


      The Deputy Director General, Mr F Mketeni, made presented 2006/07
      strategic plan of the biodiversity and conservation programme.
      According to Deputy Director General, the 2006/07 strategic priorities
      of the biodiversity and conservation program will include:


         • Finalisation of the management framework for Genetically
           Modified Organisms (GMO);


         • Development of the biodiversity framework;


         • Listing ecosystem in terms of NEMBA;


         • Development of the norms and standards for the regulation of
           hunting industry and the management of elephant in South
           African;


         • Regulations for threatened, protected, aliens and invasive
           species; and


         • Declaration of new National Parks in Wild Coast and Blyde River
           Canyon.

      3.2 The Department’s Public Entities Strategic Plan Priorities for
      2006/07

      This section provides an overview of the 2006/07 strategic priorities
      of the public entities accounting to the Minister of the Department of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism. As indicated in the introduction of
      this report, this section will focus only on the 2006/07 strategic
      priorities presented respectively by the Chief Executive Officers all
      public entities.

      3.2.1 South African Tourism


      The Chief Executive Officer, Mr M Mosola presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of South African Tourism. The presentation focused on
      2005 achievements and challenges as well as the 2006/07 strategic
      priorities. According to the CEO, the 2006/07 strategic priorities of
      South African Tourism will focus on:


         • Building a Skills Partnership in Tourism


         • Building an enabling and sustainable Public Transport
           Environment for Tourism


         • Tourism Safety and Security


         • Enhance resources for Tourism Marketing Efforts


      3.2.2 South African National Biodiversity Institute


      The Chief Executive Officer, Professor B Huntley presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of the South African National Botanical Institute. The
      presentation focused on the 2005 achievements and challenges as well
      as the 2006/07 strategic priorities. According to the Chief Executive
      Officer, the 2006/07 strategic priorities of the South African
      Botanical Gardens will include:


         • Developing network of national botanical gardens;


         • Ensuring legislative coherence in relation to genetically
           modified organism and bio prospecting, threatened species and
           ecosystems;


         • Gap analysis of national capacity in biodiversity;


         • Collection of taxonomy and future of natural history;


         • Developing biodiversity knowledge management system; and


         • Conducting research that focuses on global change and risk
           assessment, land degradation and adaptation to climate change,
           threatened and ecosystem.


      3.2.3 South African National Parks


      The Chief Executive Officer, Dr D Mabunda presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of the South African National Parks. The presentation
      focused on 2005 achievements and challenges as well as the 2006/07
      strategic priorities. According to the CEO, the 2006/07 strategic
      priorities of the South African National Parks will focus on:


         • Implementation of infrastructure development programme;


         • Finalization and implementation of tourism model and brand
           strategy D;


         • Rolling out park management plan and reporting on the state of
           the park;


         • Mapping of cultural resource in all the parks and Implementation
           of balance score card; and


         • Development of scientific and biodiversity research strategy.


      3.2.4 South African Weather Service


      The Chief Executive Officer, Dr J Mphepya presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of the South African Weather Service. The presentation
      focused on 2005 achievements and challenges as well as the 2006/07
      strategic priorities. According to the CEO, the 2006/07 strategic
      priorities of the South African Weather Service will focus on:


         • Need to accelerate the Modernisation/ recapitalisation plan


         • Implement a commercial strategy


         • Human capital investment and staff retention policy


         • Implementation of new science strategy
         ▪ Air quality management
         ▪ Advice decision makers in issues related to Climate
           variability and change


      3.2.5 Greater St Lucia Wetland Park


      The Chief Executive Officer, Mr A Zaloumis presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of the South African National Botanical Institute. The
      presentation focused on the 2005 achievements and challenges as well
      as the 2006/07 strategic priorities. According to the Chief Executive
      Officer, the 2006/07 strategic priorities of the South African
      Botanical Gardens will include:


         • Implementation of revised commercial strategy focusing on public
           access, refurbishment of existing park facilities and new
           investment;


         • Support settlement of land claims and implementation; and


         • Consolidation of uMkhuze, Ozabeni and Eastern Shores into one
           open ecological area.


      3.2.6 South African Grading Council


      The Chief Executive Officer, Dr S Siddo presented the 2006/07
      strategic plan of the South African Grading Council. The presentation
      focused on 2005 achievements and challenges as well as the 2006/07
      strategic priorities.


         • Working with Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
           provinces to monitor government procurement of graded
           establishment;


         • Accelerating grading of conference venues;


         • Finalizing and launching grading of tourist transport services;
           and


         • Initiating of development of grading schemes for golf n ad
           endorsement of star grading by domestic and international
           operators


      3.2.7 Tourism Hospitality Sport Education Training Facility


      The Chief Executive Officer Dr M Tsotetsi presented the 2006/07
      strategic plans of the Tourism Hospitality Education Training
      Authority. The presentation focused on 2005 achievements, challenges
      and 2006/07 strategic priorities. According to the Chief Executive
      Officer, the 2006/07 strategic priorities will focus on:


         • Reconstruction of the board;


         • Submission of new 30 qualifications to South African
           Qualifications Authority (SAQA);


         • Accreditation of training providers;


         • Research scarce and critical skills in the sectors;


         • Conducting skills audit; and


         • Streamline processes and procedures to ensure rapid deployment
           of resources.


     4. Workshop Recommendations


     In order to facilitate parliamentary oversight and executive
     accountability on Departmental and Public Entities programmes, the
     Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs recommends that:


        a) The Department and Public Entities must during the 2006 Second
           Term of Parliamentary Session come and brief Members of the
           Committee on poverty alleviation projects; NEPAD and SADC
           Tourism Plan; Greening of the Nation Project; Elephant
           Management Strategy; 2006 /07 Legislative programmes; Tourism
           Black Economic Empowerment Scorecard; Fishing rights policy and
           breakdown analysis of allocation; Environmental Impact
           Assessment; Skills development plans and retentions strategies
           of all the public entities and Hunting regulations;


        b) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must during
           the 2006 third term of parliamentary session provide training to
           Committee Members on all the international instruments passed
           since 1994 and departmental programmes;


        c) During the 2006 third term of parliamentary session, the
           Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must brief the
           Committee on progress made in respect of land claims, extended
           public works programs, infrastructure development, eco-tourism
           and black economic empowerment at the Kruger National Park;


        d) During the 2006 third term of parliamentary session, the
           Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must arrange and
           coordinate workshops with Members of the Committee on
           Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative in South Africa (ASGISA),
           and on Genetically Modified Organism and National Environmental
           Management Act;


        e) With effect from 1 April 2006, the Department and Public
           Entities should provide quarterly reports to Members of the
           Committee on all progress made with regard to their activities.


        f) The Department and Public Entities must ensure that in future
           the strategic planning workshops focus more on strategic
           priorities and less on past achievements that can be captured in
           annual reports as per requirements of Public Finance Management
           Act of 1999


     Report to be considered.

                           MONDAY, 14 AUGUST 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (1)     Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom
           of Spain for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
           of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on
           Capital, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
           1996.

        2) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic of
           South Africa and the Kingdom of Spain for the Avoidance of
           Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
           respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.

        3) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
           and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania for the
           Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
           Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of
           section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        4) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
           of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
           Republic of Tanzania for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
           the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
           Income.


                           TUESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Transport
          a) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2006] (National Assembly
             – proposed sec 75)  [Explanatory  summary  of  Bill  and  prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government  Gazette  No
             29118 of 10 August 2006.]


             Introduction  and  referral  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on
             Transport of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in  terms  of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of  the  Bill  may  be  submitted  to  the  JTM  within  three
             parliamentary working days.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National  Council  of  Provinces  in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


     (1)    2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13B  –
        2006] (National Assembly – sec 75)


     (2)    Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B
        16B – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76)


        The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee  on  Education
        and Recreation of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     (1)    Interim Report of the Special Investigating Unit (SIU)  for  the
         period April 2005 to September 2005.

2.    The Minister of Finance

      1) Government Notice No 972 published in Government Gazette No  29033
         dated 21 July 2006:  Minister  of  Finance,  acting  in  terms  of
         Section 66(3)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act,  1999  (Act
         No 1 of 1999), approve that  the  accounting  authority  for  Rand
         Water may commit to  a  shareholder’s  loan  of  USD  245  000,  a
         performance bond of  USD  1  470  000  and  provide  bid  security
         amounting to USD 122 500 for the Joint  Venture  with  the  Vitens
         International  BV  of  the  Netherlands  pursuant  to  effect  the
         management contract awarded by the Ghana Water Company,  in  terms
         of the Act. The above approval is granted subject  to  Rand  Water
         not exceeding their debt limit provided in the Government  Gazette
         Notice 23450 of 31 May 2002.


     2) Government Notice No 669 published in Government Gazette  No  29010
        dated 21 July 2006:  Notice  setting  out  particulars  of  arrears
        demarcated by Municipality of Matjhabeng in terms of section 13quat
        in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


                          WEDNESDAY, 16 AUGUST 2006


TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (1)    Submission by the Association for Community and Rural
         Advancement (AnCRA) regarding the Vlakfontein / Ganghae Land
         Restitution Claim (Northern Cape).

      Referred to the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs
         for consideration.


                          THURSDAY, 17 AUGUST 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Conformity Assessment, Calibration and Good Laboratory Practice
         Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of Trade and Industry on 14
         August 2006. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and
         Industry and the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.

    (2)     Measurements Units and Measurements Standards Bill, 2006,
         submitted by the Minister of Trade and Industry on 14 August 2006.
         Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and the
         Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


                            MONDAY 21 AUGUST 2006



TABLINGS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      Special Report of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JCSI)
    on the Reports of the Inspector General of Intelligence

CREDA PLEASE INSER REPORT – T060821E – PAGES 1791-1806

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development
     1) A report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr Matekere,
        an additional magistrate at the Magistrate Court, Johannesburg, in
        terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).


     2) A report on the provisional suspension from office of Mr I X
        Masimini, an additional magistrate at the Magistrate Court,
        Queenstown, in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act,
        1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


