---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 17 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-05-17
---

WEDNESDAY, 17 MAY 2006
                                    ____


              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, on behalf of the IFP, I will move on the next
sitting day:

  That the Council -

  (1) notes that even in this era, there are people who still think that the
       only way of solving their problems is through the barrel of a gun;


  (2) further notes that yesterday a security guard, Lucky Buthelezi, shot
       and wounded his girlfriend before killing himself;


  (3) wishes the wounded woman a speedy recovery; and


  (4) urges anyone who witnesses unusual behaviour displayed by any person
       to report this to the police, to prevent more of such tragic
       occurrences.



Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I will move at the next sitting of this House:


  That the Council notes -

  (1) with outrage the damage done to private properties by the striking
       security personnel of SATAWU yesterday;


  (2) that members of the public were assaulted and robbed in the centre of
       Cape Town;


  (3) that the SA Police Service was unable to protect properties of South
       African citizens;


  (4) that the union and its leaders should be held responsible and punished
       for these unlawful deeds; and
  (5) that law and order in South Africa is at all times of a low standard.

Ms J F TERBLANCHE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I intend to move
on the next sitting day.

That the Council –

  (1) together with the National Assembly, should appoint a joint ad hoc
       committee consisting of representatives of all parties to enquire
       into all aspects of the abuse of travel vouchers by MPs;


  (2) investigates whether Members, office bearers and officials of
       Parliament have co-operated in all aspects of the investigation into
       the abuse of travel vouchers as well as whether the Scorpions have an
       acceptable explanation for the untiring investigation which they have
       conducted;

    3) further considers what steps, if any, should be taken by Parliament
       against MPs involved in the abuse – whether they should be charged,
       tried and convicted . . .
  [Interjections.]


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order, hon Member! There’s a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Chairperson, it is not a point of
order. The hon member is not audible enough – at least to me and I think to
the other members as well. It is difficult to hear her. I’m not sure
whether it’s her voice or the sound system. Can that be rectified?

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Those who deal with the sound system
should please correct it.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                         (The late Reverend A Maart)

Mr N J MACK: Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council -

     1) notes with immense sadness the passing away of anti-apartheid
        activist and minister of the Bethel Congregational Church in Paarl
        East, Reverend Abe Maart, who passed away on Thursday, 11 May 2006;


     2) acknowledges that “Meneer”, as he was affectionately known, was a
        community and spiritual leader par excellence;


     3) further recalls that he endured the scorn and indignity directed at
        him by unprogressive forces in his community and detention by the
        previous security forces while in pursuit of the noble cause of a
        just society;


     4) recognises the enormous contribution that Rev Maart had made in the
        execution of his pastoral duties that transcended the artificial
        racial boundaries that were foisted upon the Paarl and surrounding
        communities;


     5) believes that Rev Maart leaves behind a legacy of selflessness and
        humility; and


     6) conveys its deepest condolences to the Maart family, his
        congregation and the Paarl community as a whole.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.




                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                        (The late Mr J F Aulsebrook)
Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


   (1)      notes the untimely departure of the hon J F Aulsebrook, a member
        of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature since 1994; and


   (2)      resolves to convey its heartfelt  condolences  to  the  bereaved
        family members, relatives and the party to which he belonged.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                        (The late Prince Gideon Zulu)

Ms A N T MCHUNU: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes with great sadness the passing away of one of the greatest
        sons of South Africa, Prince Gideon Zulu;
   (2)      further notes that he made  history  and  that  he  was  history
        himself – a selfless person who served all, the poor and the  rich,
        with great commitment; and


   (3)      resolves to convey its condolences to his family. May  his  soul
        rest in peace.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                  (The late Minister Stella Nomzamo Sigcau)

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Sihlalo lohlon, ngiphakamisa
sishukumiso lesingakabikwa ngaphambilini:

   Kutsi –


       leNdlu Yemkhandlu Wemaprovinsi ivakalise kushaceka
       nebuhlungu, ngekusishiya emhlabeni kwemhlon Indvuna
       Stella Nomzamo Sigcawu.


[Kuhlaba lulwimi.] (Translation of Siswati paragraphs follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Hon Chairperson, I would like to move:

    That the Council –

       notes with profound sadness the passing away of Minister Stella
       Nomzamo Sicgau, who passed way on Sunday, 7 May 2006.


[Interjections.]]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! I am sorry, Chief Whip. I didn’t hear
any interpretation of the speech. Where are the interpreters? Can the
interpreters indicate whether they are there or not. Are there any
interpreters there?

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Mgcinisihlalo, nome kute lohumushako
kodvwa ngicinisekile kutsi lesishukumiso sibhaliwe ngeSingisi kulama-
Odaphepha. (Translation of Siswati paragraph follows.)

[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, even though there is no
interpretation, I am sure that this motion is printed on the Order Paper.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Is it on the Order Paper? OK, you can then
continue. We will refer to what he is reading, which is mostly in English,
on the Order Paper. However, it’s not acceptable that we should not have
interpretation when we need it. All languages have to be spoken in the
House. Therefore there must be simultaneous interpretation. Ms Secretary
and the Table’s staff, this is not acceptable!

SOSISWEBHU WEMKHANDLU WEMAPROVINSI: Ngiyabonga kakhulu, Mgcinisihlalo. Nami
ngiyakusekela ngobe nami ngitigcabha kakhulu ngaleSiswati sakitsi.
Ngitsandza kutsi nangisikhuluma nalaba labanye bekunene bakhone kuva kutsi
ngitsini ngekutsi batolikelwe.

   Bengisasho-ke kutsi leNdlu -

   (1)      ivakalisa kushaceka nebuhlungu ngekusishiya emhlabeni kwemhlon
        Indvuna Stella Nomzamo Sigcau, losishiye emhlabeni ngeLisontfo mhla
        tingu 7 ku May kuwo lomnyaka;


   (2)      futsi sitawukhumbula kutsi umhlon Sigcau wacala ngekuba yiNdvuna
        yeLitiko leTemisebenti yaHulumende Nebantfu kusukela nga 1994 kwaze
        kwaba ngu 1999,emvakwaloko, umhlon Sigcawu wase uba yiNdvuna
        yeLitiko leTemisebenti yeMiphakatsi kusukela ngalowo mnyaka wanga
        1999 kwaze kwaba lilanga lekusishiya kwakhe emhlabeni;


   (3)      futsi sikhumbula indzima layidlala ngemsebenti wakhe labekawenta
        njengelilunga Lekomidi Lenkhulu Yavelonkhe ku-ANC, sikhumbula futsi
        nekutsi Indvuna Stella Sigcau ube livulandlela nelihambambili
        lelacala kutinikela ekwakhiweni kweNingizimu Afrika lenenchubekela
        embili; lengakhetsi muntfu ngekwelibala, ngebulili kantsi futsi
        ibusa ngekwedemokrasi;


   (4)      siphindze futsi sidvumise indzima ledlalwe ngumhlon Sigcawu
        ekwakhiweni kwaledemokrasi yetfu, ngekutsi abe lilunga leNdlu
        yeSishayamtsetfo saVelonkhe aphindze abe lilunga leKhabhinethi
        kuhulumende lomkhulu;


(5)   sitsandza kusho kutsi siyetsemba kutsi iNdvuna ishiye umlandvo
        wekusebenta ngekutinikela ngaphandle kwekutibukela yena ngekwakhe;

     7) (6)      ekugcineni, leNdlu bese ivakalisa buhlungu nendvudvuto
        kuyo indlunkhulu yaseQawukeni, nakumndeni wakhe kanye nasembutfweni
        we ANC.


   Ngiyabonga. (Translation of Siswati motion of condolence follows.)
[The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Thank you, Chairperson, I do agree with
you, because I am very proud of my language. However, when I do use it, I
would nevertheless like to be heard by all present in all the official
languages.

As I was saying, I move:

     That the Council –

     (1)    notes with profound sadness the passing away of hon Minister
         Stella Nomzamo Sigcau, who passed away on Sunday, 7 May 2006;


     (2)    recalls that Minister Sigcau served as Minister of Public
         Enterprises from 1994 to 1999 and as Minister of Public Works from
         1999 until her untimely death;


     (3)    further recalls that through her work as a member of the ANC’s
         National Executive Committee, Minister Sigcau was a patriot who
         devoted her life to the creation of a non-racial, non-sexist,
         democratic and proserous South Africa;


     (4)    acknowledges the great contribution that Minister Sigcau made in
         the making and shaping of our democracy, both as a member of the
         National Assembly and the government;


     (5)    believes that Minister Sigcau leaves behind a legacy of
         dedicated service and selflessness; and


      6) conveys its deepest condolences to the Qawukeni Royal House, all
         her loved ones and the ANC.


I thank you.]

Mr J W LE ROUX: Chairperson, I would like to address you on the fact that
Mr Watson is seriously ill and is in a hospital in Durban. He asked me to
convey my condolences on his behalf.

Thank you, Chairperson. The DA expresses its condolences to the family,
colleagues and friends of the late Minister Stella Sigcau. She was a very
special person and an African princess who devoted her life to the
betterment of South Africa and her people. She devoted her life to bringing
dignity to the rural women of the former Transkei and fearlessly fought for
democracy in South Africa. She set a very special example of dedication and
service; and will sorely be missed by all South Africans; we sadly regret
her passing away. I thank you.

Mnu M A MZIZI: Sihlalo, iNkatha Freedom Party izwakalisa ukudabuka
nokuletha induduzo kumndeni, kubangani nakuwo lo Mkhandlu wesishayamthetho.
Xa kunje amaXhosa aye athi: “Akuhlanga lungehliyo, lala ngenxeba.” Phofu ke
siyazi ukuba inxeba ukuba asinto ongalala phezu kwayo xa lisopha.

Siyamcela uNkulunkulu ukuthi abophe izinhliziyo ezophayo. AbeSuthu baye
bayikhulume kangcono le ndaba izwakale kahle. Bathi: (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the IFP conveys its condolences to the family, friends and
this very legislative House. When offering their condolences at times like
these, Xhosas often say that you should lie on the side where you are
wounded. However, we know that one cannot really do that if a wound is
bleeding.

We pray that God consoles the bereaved hearts. The Sotho people put it more
eloquently. They say:]

Ba re lefu ke ngwetsi ya malapa ohle. Ha le tjhatisa, le boloka mofu o
nahane mme, o be o hopole le wena hore hosane letjhato leno le tla be le le
ha hao. [Death knows no bounds. When there is a wedding or a burial, we
must always keep in mind that tomorrow it might be you or me.]

Siyazi bake bamhasha abamaziyo, behasha ubuqhawe bakhe. Mina-ke ngiyalazi
lelo qhawe. Abaningi benu bazokhumbula laphaya eThokoza okwake kwaba
nempicabadala kulwa amaXhosa namaZulu. Yafika inkosazana, hhayi njengoba
besenimbona emathunzi ayewuka nje, kwakusenguye esanyathela ngabantwana.
Yafika inkosazana ihamba nenkosi uNdamase nomntakaHolomisa uBantubonke.

Ubuqhawe la engabubona khona ukuthi ayesabi le nkosazana, kwathi sezingena
ezikaZulu zithi yibambeni imikhonto niyiphakamisele phezulu okungenjalo
uyosala phansi, yasukuma inkosazana ngabona ibheka ngapha nangapha. Yathi:

Hheyi bafondini, asiyo ndawo ekufanele sibe kuyo le, masihambeni. Ngasho
ngathi yiqhawe leli. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Those who knew her sang her praises; they praised her heroism. I
personally know her heroism. Most of you will remember when there was a
fight between the Zulus and the Xhosas. The princess came; she was still
young and beautiful then. She was accompanied by iNkosi Ndamase and
Bantubonke Holomisa.

Then I noticed her fearlessness when the Zulu warriors came to the meeting,
singing their popular song, which, loosely translated, says, “Let us take
our spears and raise them high lest we shall be killed”. She stood up and
looked at both sides decisively, and said: “Gentlemen, we are not supposed
to be here. We should leave.”

I say this is a heroine.]

Mr N D HENDRICKSE: We also want to join the rest of the House and all South
Africans to bring honour to a woman who in her time used all the facilities
at hand to bring a better life to our people. We also want to convey our
condolences to her family. Thank you.

Nkskz A N D QIKANI: Mphathisihlalo, sithe thina maMpondo enyanda edla
amadliwa sakuva ukuba awaseQawukeni afikelwe lizulu elithe lagqekeza lawisa
umthi omkhulu, kwathiwa, “ilele inkosazana; ulele uMaFaku.” Kwatsho
kwashukuma uMzantsi Afrika wonke kuba kaloku kulele umntwana wegazi.

Siza kumkhumbula thina kwela lethu lamaMpondo uMaNyawuza, uZiqelekazi,
uDakile, ngemisebenzi yakhe, uphuhliso loomama nololutsha ngokubanzi. Asazi
ke ngoku ukuba siza kukwazi na ukuthi wagwetywa ndlala kumntu oza kungena
ezinyaweni zakhe.

UThixo esimthembileyo akasusi nto angabeki nto. I-UDM ithi: Phumla ngoxolo,
Nyawuza, Thahla, Ndayeni, Hlamba ngocabeko amanz’ ekhona, Ngqungqushe,
Ziqelekazi. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Ms A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, the Pondo clan heard the news that the
princess had fallen, and they and the whole of South Africa were filled
with shock and immediately realised how shaken the whole nation would be
because a child of the royal house passed away.

The Pondos will remember MaNyawuza, Ziqelekazi, Dakile for all her good
deeds, especially her efforts towards the development of women and the
youth. As we are engulfed by sadness, we cannot help but wonder who would
listen to and hear our cries of sorrow and pangs of hunger when they become
insurmountable.

The God we believe in will certainly provide a suitable substitute. The UDM
pays tribute to the daughter of the Pondos, to Nyawuza, Thahla, Ndayeni,
Hlamba ngocabeko amanz’ ekhona, Ngqungqushe, Ziqelekazi. Thank you.]

Ms L MATLHOAHELA: Mr Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, the ID herewith
proffers our deepest and sincere condolences with the passing on of our hon
Minister of Public Works, Ms Stella Sigcawu. The country has lost a mother
and the traditional royalty has lost a princess. Thank you, Mr Chair.

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We now come to voting on the motion on the
Order Paper as printed in the name of the Chairperson of the NCOP. As there
is no speakers’ list, I shall now put the question. The question is that
the motion be agreed to.

As the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I
shall first ascertain whether all the delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces, votes. Are all delegation heads present?
Present.

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
would like to do so? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain from voting.
[Interjections.] Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: Iyaxhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr T S SETONA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: We support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke a rona. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Support.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: All nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Budget Vote No 18 – Social Development:

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chairperson, hon delegates, Deputy
Minister of Social Development, members of the provincial and executive
councils, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it has been said that
the life and the character of Oliver Tambo are an example of our struggle
for human rights, democracy and social development. I would like to draw on
the wisdom of this illustrious son of our country to present Budget Vote 18
of the Department of Social Development, and I quote:

   We believe that we must stand together in creating the new South Africa.
   When our work is done, let us all look at the new South Africa with hope
   and encouragement. Hope and encouragement because she will have
   demonstrated that it is possible for people of different colours and
   different races and nationalities to live together in peace and
   friendship sharing a common sense of nationhood and humanity.

This extract is from the speech made by Oliver Tambo in Johannesburg on 19
February 1993 during the conference titled “From Apartheid to Peace,
Democracy and Development”.

Budget Vote 18 is an expression of our promise to deepen and improve the
quality of life of all those who are impoverished, vulnerable and socially
excluded. In line with our Constitution, we will continue to accelerate
equitable access to services whilst ensuring freedom from discrimination
and harassment.

In the context of our developmental state, the principle of equitable
access requires that we pay special attention to the most remote areas of
our country. We therefore set aside over R58 million over the MTEF period
to promote sustainable livelihood strategies, principally in the nodal
areas of the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development and Urban Renewal
Programme. These strategies are based on national surveys as well as the
lessons learnt from two innovative sustainable livelihood pilot projects in
the Eastern Cape and Limpopo.

Let me take this opportunity to salute the efforts of numerous individuals,
the private sector and civil society organisations who, in partnership with
the Independent Development Trust, IDT, the National Development Agency,
NDA, and Kaelo Worldwide Media, have contributed to these projects. We will
launch one of these projects on Friday in the community of Dutyini, in the
Alfred Nzo district municipality in the Eastern Cape.

These community-level efforts will complement the allocation to provinces,
via the equitable share, of a sum of R388 million as part of the integrated
social development grant.

The late Oliver Tambo, speaking on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of
the Soweto uprising, remarked upon the fact that our young people had begun
the countdown for their recognition and inclusion as a main contributing
force to political and economic liberation 30 years before then. The youth
of Soweto, Mamelodi, Gugulethu and other parts of our country arose in
unison and declared that South Africa belongs to all, young and old, rich
and poor.

In commemoration of their heroism and in continuation of their efforts, on
1 June 2006, in Galeshewe, we will launch the social aspect of the youth
development framework, which was adopted by Minmec last year. Through this
framework we will improve the material conditions in which young people
grow up, study and play; strengthen social cohesion and establish the
people’s contract at local government level; and professionalise youth and
childcare work.

I would like to remind delegates to the NCOP that on 29 May 2006 we will be
launching child protection week. Please wear a green ribbon as a symbol of
our commitment to nurture and protect our children’s future.

The empowering and systematic involvement of our young people is vital to
attaining the target of the 6% economic growth rate set by our accelerated
and shared growth initiative. The social sector as a whole, through
conditional grants and the equitable share, has set aside R4,2 billion for
the Expanded Public Works Programme so as to realise the objective of
skills development and the creation of work opportunities in the home- and
community-based care and early childhood development sectors.

With the support of the Business Trust, the social sector has identified
the critical path for the implementation of the Expanded Public Works
Programme, EPWP, and we have begun to address the capacity and project
management deficits that have been identified. The sectors we wish to
target for the Expanded Public Works Programme are largely managed and run
by nonprofit organisations, NPOs, often with very little state and private
sector support. We have therefore set aside R51,9 million over the MTEF
period to enhance policy, create an enabling environment and improve
service standards in the NPO sector. The strengthening of the regional
offices of the National Development Agency will complement these funds.

Our ultimate objective is to eradicate absolute poverty and our social
assistance programme contributes to this effort. Through our income-support
programme we provide vital assistance to more than 11 million poor people
in our country. Disbursements in Gauteng province, the Western Cape and
Northern Cape are now conducted under the supervision of the SA Social
Security Agency and by March 2007 all provinces will disburse over R57,7
billion in social grants under the auspices of the agency.

What remains is the deepening of our comprehensive social security system
through, amongst other things, improving access and linking contributory
and noncontributory schemes. Our ultimate objective is a system of social
protection that protects against particular vulnerabilities and risks,
addresses retirement needs and promotes economic and social development.

The building of a comprehensive social security system requires both
vigilance and persistence in preventing leakages, and we will continue to
enhance our antifraud campaign and other activities. Government has already
instituted criminal proceedings against more than 900 of the 12 000 public
servants who, we believe, are unlawfully accessing social grants. We have
also suspended payments to all 12 000 public servants and dismissed 100
public servants in this regard. In order to help rectify our financial
losses, 2 000 public acknowledgements of debt have been signed and we will
recover R7 million through these means.

We intend to investigate each and every one of the 35 000 cases of
potential fraud and corruption that have been reported by the public to our
antifraud hotline, and we will be comparing databases with other government
agencies and the private sector.

Through all these efforts aimed at improving the integrity of the grant
payment system, government has managed to save about R1,2 billion in the
past financial year. We will not rest until the right people get the right
grants, in an appropriate manner that respects their dignity.
We will also accelerate our efforts to ensure that our clients know their
rights and receive the best possible services. In this regard we will
continue to work towards attaining the norms and standards. I am prepared
and pleased to announce the substantial progress that has been made in some
areas, such as Pietermaritzburg, were the aim is, and I am informed
actually of this, that the turnaround time for processing of the social
grant in KwaZulu-Natal is well within the 48 hours standard, that is in
KwaZulu-Natal.

We will now deepen in these efforts by communicating to our people,
wherever they are, in the language of their preference. This we will
achieve through innovative partnerships such as the one we have developed
in the context of Telephone Interpreting Service for South Africa, with the
Department of Arts and Culture.

This service which will cost R31 000 000, will ensure that all government
information and services are available to the public in any of the official
languages, including indigenous languages. Hon Chairperson, access to
services is not only restricted by language barriers, but also by
deficiencies in our capacity.

The quality and numbers of critical social service professionals are
decreasing, and as such our social worker corps is inadequate. We are
implementing critical elements of the social work retention strategy. This
includes skills enhancement for all social service professionals, reviewing
and revising the salaries of social workers in the Public Service, awarding
more bursaries for further education, curriculum improvement and
recruitment campaigns. We intend to revise the outdated Social Service
Professional Act and to ensure that it addresses the challenges of today
and tomorrow.

Chairperson, the work on the legislative front to address key policy and
legislative gaps continues. To this end we will firstly reintroduce the
section 76 elements of the Children’s Bill, which deals with provincial
competency and services. And I hope the NCOP will assist us in that.

Secondly, we will introduce the social relief fund so as to consolidate all
the relief funds administered by the department; and finally introduce
amendments to the Prevention and Treatment of Substance Abuse Bill, to
address the scourge of substance and drug abuse.

Hon members, we all know that while the appropriate policies and
legislation are vital to enable us to realise the hopes and dreams of our
people, by themselves they are insufficient. The implementation of these
policies and pieces of legislation is also a critical success factor in
achieving a better life for all.

We have therefore set aside R19,4 million over the MTEF period to monitor
and evaluate our implementation activities. We must be able to ascertain
that we are indeed fulfilling the aspiration, hopes and dreams of the
thousands of our people, who marched to the Union Buildings some 50 years
ago.

To mark and celebrate this particular act of struggle we will host a world
summit for rural women in September this year. The aspirations and hopes
and dreams of our people require that we are exemplary in our struggle for
human rights, democracy and social development.

I trust that hon members will support this Budget Vote. More importantly I
would really like to emphasise your remark, Chairperson, as we started here
that most of our articulations and addresses to such institutions as the
NCOP should be available to everybody, hence the issue of language and
interpretation becomes very important.

At this time it might probably not be a nice way of saying it, but one
question is quite clear: The majority of our people do not hear us, they do
not understand what we are saying because we are all speaking in English.
We run away from what we know. We ought to be speaking in our own
languages, at our homes, because I know that some of us speak in English to
our children.

But the reality is that the ordinary people do not understand us and hence
the reality of such an institution as the NCOP, being able to say in time,
and in substance, to reach our people it becomes very important to all of
us that we use our own languages. I think Parliament has been talking about
that for the past 12 years: that all languages are equal and they should be
made accessible to all our people, and that is what we ought to be doing.

Unfortunately there are very few groups that do that - except the people
who speak Afrikaans who demand it, rightly so. I support them very much.
They demand to be heard and to use their language.

All of us are becoming a little bit coy about it. We feel that everybody
will think that we are not educated enough if we speak our mother tongue.
If we do not do that, surely the rest of the world will look down upon us.
Let us speak our own languages.

Ms J M MASILO: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, Tona ya lefapha le Motlatsa-Tona,
badirikanna, Mokaedi-Kakaretso wa lefapha, botsamaisi jo bo kwa godimo,
bomme le borre . . . [Hon Chairperson, Minister and Deputy Minister of the
department, colleagues, the director-general of the department, top
management, ladies and gentlemen . . .]

... on 8 May 1996, the people’s representatives of our country adopted a
Constitution for the Republic of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996. The year
2006 thus marks the 10th anniversary of our Constitution as has been
celebrated by the two Houses recently.

The freedom we attained through the adoption of our Constitution will,
later this year, best be explained and demonstrated through the 50th
anniversary of the heroic women’s march to the Union Buildings on 9 August
1956. The 50th anniversary of the women’s march should therefore exhort us
to assess progress we have made and challenges recorded through the years
in our effort to achieve gender equity and the advancement of women’s
rights.

On 22 March 2006, the Department of Social Development briefed the select
committee on its strategic plan and also unveiled its financial plan for
2006 to 2007, which amounts to R62 005 460 billion. The objective of the
briefing was for the Department of Social Development to account to the
committee on how they intend to use their budget to achieve intended
service delivery programmes related to the following: administration,
comprehensive social protection, social security transfers and
administration, social welfare services, development and research,
strategy, regulation and oversight.

Departmental challenges are the following: the finalisation of the South
African Social Security Agency and the implementation of infrastructure and
personnel in all provinces; outstanding pieces of legislation; ever-
increasing demand for services as a result of various social and economic
challenges such as HIV/Aids and migration; leakages due to fraud and
corruption, though minimised; the filling of critical middle-management
vacancies especially in the regions. Out of 598 approved posts, only 399
are filled and 199 are still outstanding; the number of youth in the
development programme for 2005-06 are not explained; in Programme 4, 80
loveLife groundbreakers have been trained to reach out to farms and
informal settlements, but excluding the rural areas or villages.

To congratulate the department, by the end of the previous 2005-06
financial year, 98% had been spent, which shows good spending patterns. It
met the basic employment equity targets of 62% women, 80% Africans, 2%
people with disabilities, and facilitated and approved 29 internal and
external policies.
In Programme 4, on the department’s achievements of the 2005-06 financial
year, it finalised the Expanded Public Works Programme sector plan; the
HIV/Aids training programme for the government policy-makers and planners
was reviewed and implemented; 57 community-based multipurpose centres have
been established and funded, 352 organisations have been funded and 6 976
caregivers have been trained; and research has been done in monitoring the
community-based home care projects.

Regarding the Expanded Public Works Programme, the Department of Social
Development is responsible for providing the framework for the
implementation of the two Expanded Public Works Programmes. The first is
the home- and community-based care programme for people living with
HIV/Aids. In 2005-06, an amount of R138, 4 million was allocated for the
implementation of the programme. The grant was to be transferred to the
provinces for implementation. Equally important is the fact that community-
based caregivers, though receiving a small income, should also be provided
with skills.

The select committee will engage with the provincial departments on the
oversight role on the expenditure patterns with regard to the programme, as
well as assessing the impact of the programme at the community level.
Finally, the select committee will attempt to get an understanding of the
nature of skills transferred through the programme as well as the
responsibility for the provision of training.

With regard to the South African Social Security Agency, I would take this
opportunity firstly to congratulate the CEO of the agency, Mr Fezile
Makiwane, on his appointment, as well as his senior management.

The following are the issues to be considered by Sassa: the increase in the
allocation for the establishment of the SA Social Security Agency from R135
million in 2006 to 2007 to R167 million in 2008 to 2009. Will this increase
be adequate for the agency to take up its grant administration
responsibilities in all provinces? What kind of service-level agreements
has the department entered into with the agency to ensure that it carries
out its functions satisfactorily? To what extent have personnel, employed
by grant payment service providers, been found to be involved in defrauding
the social grant system? Also initiate antifraud measures to improve the
integrity of social grant administration.

The committee came up with recommendations and the tasks for the Department
of Social Development to continue to implement the comprehensive antifraud
strategy; to launch the national security agency in all provinces; to set
up 100 new youth advisory centres and to enrol at least 5 000 volunteers to
help vulnerable children.

This year we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the June 16 events. This
anniversary, within the context of social development, is a significant
symbol to instil hope of empowerment and development in our youth.

In conclusion, in the age of hope - a national effort for faster and shared
growth in social development sectors - I would like to thank the ministry,
all the senior management under the administrative leadership of Mr Vusi
Madonsela for the support and dedication they gave to the select committee
at all times.

Last but not least, I would like to thank the dedicated members of the
committee for a sterling job well done, moreover on the pieces of
legislation passed during the financial year 2005-06; especially the
Children’s Bill and Older Person’s Bill, after many days of deliberations
and heated debates. God bless you all in this phase of hope in our country.


The committee commends the Department of Social Development on its
strategic plan and Budget Vote 18 presentation, and pledges to support Vote
18. Thank you. [Applause.]
Ms H MALGAS (Eastern Cape): Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon Chairperson,
hon Minister and the Deputy Minister, and hon members of this respected
House, I greet you in the name of Mpuma-Kapa. Now I’ll go over to the
language that came to South Africa by boat! [Interjections.]

The ANC would like to congratulate the Minister responsible for social
development on his comprehensive and clear speech. It sets out a number of
policy areas which include a historical vision of the People’s Contract of
25 June 1955 as enshrined in the Freedom Charter, as well as the manner in
which the national initiatives would influence the mandate of the
department in the Eastern Cape in promoting the development of our people
according to Asgisa, the Provincial Growth and Development Plan and the
social needs cluster priorities of the province and the excision of the
social security to the capable hands of Sassa.

Chairperson, the ANC in the Eastern Cape feels it is befitting to
congratulate the Minister because the task he has of managing his
department is an enormous and complicated one. However, it is not his task
only. It is the task of his support staff and the communities of South
Africa, and requires guidance from us, his colleagues within the provinces.
It is a collective responsibility. We thank him and his deputy. Malibongwe!
[Praise!]
In his budget speech, the MEC of the department in the Eastern Cape says
the following:


  This budget will demonstrate how my department has begun a journey to
  align its targets with the commitments articulated in the Freedom
  Charter, and in government priorities both at national and provincial
  levels.

Our hon Minister quoted the late hon O R Tambo and the MEC quoted ex-
President hon Nelson Mandela as the beacon of light of our people. He
further states that the Freedom Charter we so much rely on is an
inspiration to the people of South Africa as it shows continuity,
consistency, steadfastness and stability when it comes to our policy
positions which we adhere to within the ANC and which are also espoused in
section 27 of the Constitution of South Africa. Everyone has a right to
basic health, food, water and social security included in clauses in the
Bill of Rights pertaining to the welfare of our people.

Chairperson, it is very important to showcase what has been done in this
department in the Eastern Cape. I won’t be long on that.

The department has managed to develop a new service delivery model aligned
with the national one to accommodate a new paradigm shift that was followed
by the development of an organogram. The department has intensified its
fight against fraud and corruption in conjunction with the law enforcement
agencies and manages to deal decisively with syndicates targeting social
security systems; but there have been casualties. The Minister did refer to
that.

We could mention the child support grant and the manner in which he dealt
with food shortages. I think what is important is that the department has
served as a centre of service excellence in the field of technology. We can
quantify our programmes for HIV/Aids, projects for youth, women and co-
operatives, income generation and food security.

I would like to thank our Minister because we are celebrating 50 years of
the women’s march to Pretoria. We thank you for the funding that you make
available to us, Minister. We appointed 150 social workers. It’s not enough
but the retention policy, about which the Minister talks, is important and
I am going to take that message back to the Eastern Cape. A victim
empowerment centre was also opened at kwaNobuhle in Uitenhage. Those are
but a few.

Our budget is R762 772 000. An amount of R182,089 million was allocated for
administration needs, R448,955 million for social welfare service and
R131,726 million for development and research.

The department has priorities such as transformation, poverty reduction,
HIV/Aids Programmes, victim empowerment, and so forth. The department will
be championing the social sector Expanded Public Works Programme and the
Minister has already referred to community-based care and early childhood
development. We thank the Minister and his department for the funding. The
department is also championing the moral regeneration programmes of the
province.

Chairperson, I would like to highlight our challenges because it is
important to look at both sides of the coin. The budget needs to fill
critical vacancies with new organ grams. There are problems. The budget to
extend social welfare services to many NGOs rendering services, but not yet
funded by the department, comes with its own challenges. The budget to
extend sustainable social development services to many needy communities
will still not be enough. Technical issues in the current year around
support services to Sass also pose a challenge.

We would like to have clarity around accountability, the reporting matrix,
because people on the ground will still look at the department and the MEC
because there are grey areas around the agreement. The matter about sharing
offices, rent and the telephone would need to be sorted out internally as
it relates to housekeeping.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the department’s commitment to a
new social development approach that will empower the poor and vulnerable
to regain power and control of their lives, to eradication of poverty and
growing the second economy, and victim empowerment. The department will use
its current allocation strategically, in line with its priorities, although
the needs of our communities are greater than the funds available.

All in all, the department will always be mindful of its obligation to give
meaning to the President’s dictum of the Age of Hope. I would like to tell
the hon. Minister that we will support him and we will be there in full
force when he launches the community project at Duty in the Alfred No
Municipality. The Eastern Cape supports Vote No 18. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms H LAMOELA: Minister, Deputy Minister, hon. Chair and hon. members,
recently members of the Select Committee on Social Development were
surprised with beautiful diaries for 2006 from the department. Today, it
being 17 May, I would like to quote from Katrina Costa’s quotation for
today in this diary when she said:

  Today is the day to complete what you worked towards Yesterday and a
  wonderful new opportunity to achieve what you Dream to accomplish
  tomorrow.

In 2004 the Social Security Agency Act of 2004, and the Social Assistance
Act of 2004, were signed into law. These Acts provide for the establishment
of the SA Social Security Agency, known as Sass. Sass is tasked with the
management, administration and payment of social grants. The establishment
of Sass is part of government’s efforts to provide services to the poorest
of the poor and to ensure restoration of the dignity of the most
vulnerable, especially older people, people with disabilities, women and
children.

For too long beneficiaries could not access their grants within the said
period and for too many their grants were processed when they were dying or
had been buried. Several families, older people and children had to endure
many hardships while awaiting the processing and finalisation of grants for
pensions they had applied for. Eventually the system was thwarted by
corrupt government officials; even medical doctors were conniving to rip
off the Department of Social Development.
Last year, corruption in Social Development was costing the state R1,5
billion per annum. More than 35 000 new cases of social grant fraud have
been uncovered, despite a government amnesty last year. In 2005 more than
12 000 public servants, who are ineligible, were found to be receiving
social grants. Of those 900 have been successfully prosecuted. This should
reflect on their employment record, and on a case-by-case basis, the worst
offenders should be dismissed. These individuals must bear full
responsibility for their crimes.

It has come to my attention that the department provides a comprehensive
social security system as proposed by the Taylor commission. However, if
you are an able-bodied male between the ages of 14 and 65, or a woman
between the ages of 14 and 60, there is very little provided by government
with regard to social grants.

The Taylor Commission clearly supported the introduction of the basic
income grant for the poorest of the poor and so does the DA. While the DA
is supportive of South Africa’s social welfare system, and, indeed, would
extend it to provide a basic income grant to the desperately poor, we are
concerned that much of the growth the grant takes up appears to come from
fraudulent claims and administrative failures.

Another point of grave concern for the DA is that of a chronic lack of
social workers, which, according to the department, is getting worse,
virtually by the day. Two very important Bills were passed by Parliament
recently, namely the Children’s Bill and the Older Person’s Bill. Both
these Bills depend heavily on social workers and both are doomed to fail
without the necessary number of social workers.

To implement the new Children’s Bill we will be needing more or less 16 000
social workers. The international norm is one social worker to 1 500
people, which translates into South Africa needing 29 879 positions. This
would give us a shortfall of 92%; these chronic shortfalls of social
workers is getting worse and not better. The disgracefully heavy workload
placed on our social workers owing to these shortages is compounded by,
firstly, the impact of HIV/Aids; secondly, the ever-increasing child abuse
statistics; and, thirdly, the additional responsibilities placed on social
workers by the two Bills I have just mentioned.

Dit is dan nou baie duidelik dat as ons ons droom van suksesvolle
dienslewering wil bereik, daar na dringende oplossings aangaande
maatskaplike werkers gekyk moet word, omdat hulle 'n kardinale rol in die
implementering en uitvoering van bogenoemde wetgewing speel.

Miskien moet daar na maniere in die stelsel gekyk word om maatskaplike
werkers van die geweldige administratiewe funksie te bevry sodat hulle dít
wat eintlik van hulle verwag word, kan doen. Hulpwerkers kan die werklading
verlig en so 'n bydrae lewer tot meer effektiewe dienslewering van
maatskaplike werkers.

Tydens my besoek aan Sassa se kantore in die Wes-Kaap, hier in Kaapstad,
was ek aangenaam verras deur die durf en ywer van hierdie instelling se
personeel om eens en altyd die instelling een van die effektiefste
komponente van dienslewering in die Staatsdiens te maak. Toegewydheid, ywer
en 'n intense fokus op dienslewering kon bespeur word. Aangenaam was ek
verras toe ek meegedeel is dat staatstoelaes en pensioene op 'n een-dag-
aansoek-basis in Bellville-kantore goedgekeur kan word – iets waaroor ek
baie jare lank gedroom het.

Intense opleiding en strategie vorentoe word steeds bepaal om die mees
afgeleë areas, veral dié in die platteland en landelike gebiede te
akkommodeer. Baie geluk aan Sassa met dié prestasie, en onthou die
spreekwoord sê: “The proof of the pudding is in the eating.” [As mens dit
opgeëet het, weet jy hoe dit smaak.]

Ons kyk gretig na volgende jaar om te sien of al die beleidsrigtings steeds
op dreef is. Begunstigdes van pensioene en toelaes moet ingelig word
betreffende verskillende toelaes, veral tydelike toelaes. Inligtingsessies,
radio-advertensies en strooipamflette, veral op die platteland en landelike
gebiede, word aanbeveel.

Die staat kan nou voortaan slegs die rol van reguleerder en  voorsiener  van
maatskaplike dienste speel, en sodoende verseker  dat  ...  (Translation  of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is indeed very clear now that  if  we  want  to  achieve  our  dream  of
successful service delivery, urgent solutions with regard to social  workers
should be looked at because they play a crucial role in  the  implementation
and execution of the above-mentioned legislation.

Perhaps one should look at the system to find ways to  free  social  workers
from their enormous administrative function so that  they  can  do  what  is
actually expected of them. Assistant workers can relieve  the  workload  and
in this way  make  a  contribution  to  social  workers  delivering  a  more
efficient service.

During my visit to the Western Cape offices of Sassa, here in Cape  Town,  I
was pleasantly surprised by the enterprise and diligence  of  the  staff  of
this institution, for once and for all to make it one of the most  efficient
components of service delivery in the Public Service. Commitment,  diligence
and  an  intense  focus  on  service  delivery  could  be  detected.  I  was
pleasantly surprised when I was told that  government  grants  and  pensions
could be approved on a one-day-application basis at the Bellville  office  –
something that I have been dreaming of for years.

Intensive training and strategies for the future are still being  determined
to accommodate the most remote areas, especially those in the  rural  areas.
Congratulations to Sassa on this performance, and remember the proverb:  The
proof of the pudding is in the eating.

We are eagerly looking forward to next year to see if all the policy  trends
will still be on  track.  Beneficiaries  of  pensions  and  grants  must  be
informed about the different types of grants, especially  temporary  grants.
Information sessions, radio advertisements and  flyers,  especially  in  the
rural areas, are recommended.

The state can henceforth only fulfil the role of regulator and  provider  of
social services, to ensure that ...]
... paying the right social grant to the right person at the right place is
implemented. Surely this will ensure that the Department of Social
Development uses the opportunity to achieve what they dream to accomplish
tomorrow. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M A SULLIMAN: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and hon
members, let me start by saying that my MEC would have loved to have been
here himself, but owing to other commitments it is not possible for him to
be part of this debate today.

Our President, President Mbeki, focused much of his attention in the 2006
state of the nation address on the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative
for South Africa, known as Asgisa, and on the role government envisages
this strategy will play in ensuring that the poor and the marginalised
communities share in the growth and development of our country.

The other important facet of government’s antipoverty strategy is the
provision of social assistance. It is also clear that up to 10 million
people in South Africa are receiving these social assistance grants, 7
million of whom are children. Given the resources allocated to this
function, it is imperative that the system functions effectively and
efficiently and that corruption is rooted out in its totality.
We also know that government has repeatedly signalled that it has wanted to
ensure that its expenditure on services to the poorest communities are well
targeted, and that the benefits reach those who most need them. This would
that require different departments work together to ensure that government
services are offered in an integrated manner.

The establishment of Sassa, the SA Social Security Agency, as a semi-
independent government agency has implications for the links between social
assistance and other social service departments, as well as services
offered by other government departments.

Someone who is in receipt of an old age grant for example, may have to be
registered as such with the local government for the purpose of rebates of
services on fees and taxes. Simultaneously, a person in receipt of a child
support grant should qualify for a school fee rebate.

We are not raising these things because we have problems with Sassa, but
what we are wanting, hon Minister, is to synchronise our programmes,
because one would not like to see a situation in which the poorest of the
poor suffer.

At the end of the first decade of our democracy, we can confidently claim
that the social transformation agenda is on track, with great strides
having been made in addressing poverty. Yet we can acknowledge that the
legacy of deprivation under apartheid was so deep that we are left with a
huge task of many and diverse challenges that still have to addressed.

The grant system is clearly one of the most effective tools in addressing
poverty. To that end, the Northern Cape has focused on the efficiencies in
the management of our systems. Today the result is that not only did we
eradicate all blockages, but we are now also able to process and respond to
these applications within 22 days.

As we hand over the services to Sassa, we are confident that we hand over
an efficient and streamlined service. Of course, with the relocation of a
large part of the function of the Department of Social Services to Sassa,
we have to refocus our energies on the plethora of other needs in our
society.

Crime does impact on the ability of a society to uplift itself. To that
end, we have to focus on the wellbeing of the family, the problem of
substance abuse, and the glorification of things like alcohol. These things
hold us back. However, we need an environment in which young people can
achieve their potential.

For the 2006-07 financial year the Northern Cape has decided to increase
its focus on the substance abuse programmes. A substance abuse summit was
held in October 2005 to lay the foundation for such action.

Social crime prevention is another focus area, with the department of
social services having decided to build an additional secure-care facility
in the province during this particular financial year.

Our elderly have to be treated with dignity and respect in their old age.
Programmes are already under way to intensify these support services to the
elderly, such as multipurpose service centres which the elderly who live in
the communities can visit on a daily basis to interact with their peers and
to receive a basket of services.

Another programme is the establishing of fora for the elderly at provincial
and local levels. These fora are to assist and lobby for the rights of the
elderly. What also assists us a great deal is the Older Persons Bill that
is still with us in Parliament, which was introduced in 2003. It took quite
a lengthy process to deal with this particular Bill, but we are in the
final stages of passing this particular Bill and it will also assist us a
great deal.

I just want to highlight something that happened a couple of days ago in
Platfontein near Kimberley when the Minister of Home Affairs visited us,
the !Xun, the Khwe and the Khomani San communities, and handed out birth
certificates, ID documents and so forth. That was a good gesture from the
Department of Home Affairs, because I believe that Social Development and
Home Affairs must work very closely together so that our people can obtain
these grants and so forth.

There is still much one can speak about, but my time is a bit limited. We
have not even said anything about disability and HIV/Aids in our provinces,
but we do have proactive programmes in place on how to deal with these
problems and the interventions we can make as a province. With those few
words I want to thank the Minister, the Deputy Minister and her team for
dealing with us in such a good way in the select committee. They are always
available when we call on them, and we are looking forward to working with
them for the rest of the year. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Nkk J N VILAKAZI: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nomnyango
wakho, amalungu onke ahloniphekile akule Ndlu amalungu asekhulumile
ngaphambi kwami. Akubeke kwacaca ukubaluleka kwezidingo lo mnyango obhekene
nazo. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, kulesi sabiwomali kuyosithokozisa kakhulu
ukubhekelwa kwalokhu okulandelayo – kuyosithokozisa impela.
Okokuqala, umnyango awuqhubeke nokulwa nenkohlakalo ekhona ekukhishweni
kwezimpesheni. Yebo, kukhona umnyango osukwenzile kodwa kunesidingo seso
elibukhali elizoqhubeka njalo ukucwaningisisa ukuhamba kwezinto.
Okwesibili, kwababhalisela ukuhola, asinciphe isikhathi sokulinda kwabo
belambile futhi akube khona indlela engenziwa kulabo bantu abasuke
bengenazo izincwadi ezifanele, okuvamise ukwenzeka uma kufa izihlobo
ngokuzuma. Kukhona abantwana abancela isithupha okufanele ukuba ngabe
bayahola inkinga kube ukuthola izitifiketi zokuzalwa.

Okwesithathu, ukuncipha kwesibalo sosonhlalakahle. Sebeshilo abakhulume
ngaphambi kwami. Sengathi isikhalo esigcwele yonke indawo lesi. Umnyango
sengathi kulesi sabiwomali kungaba khona ukuthi lesi sidingo sibekwe
eqhulwini. Okwesine, ukuhlukumezeka kwabadala kanye nezingane akumile,
kuqhubeka ngelikhulu izinga leli. Akukhona okoMnyango wezokuThuthukisa
ezeNhlalakahle kuphela kepha iqhaza lalo mnyango liyadingeka kulesi simo.
Abantu abadala kanye nezingane basaqhubeka nokuhlukunyezwa emindenini
nasemphakathini.

Okwesihlanu, indlala nobubha kudala ukuhlukumezeka ngoba kweminye imindeni
amantombazanyana aseyalotsholwa bese eyaganiswa eseneminyaka emincane
kakhulu. Asazi ukuthi qhaza lini umnyango ongalibamba kulokhu. Sicela
umnyango wenze imizamo ekukhuphuleni isabiwomali sokwandisa amathuba
emisebenzi ukuze abantu bangaphenduki izilwane. Indlala yenza abantu babe
yizilwane badlane bodwa.

Okwesithupha, ukulungiswa kwezindawo zokuhola imali kadekle makuqhubeke.
Siyakubona kodwa kusahamba kancane. Abantu abadala badinga ukuphatheka
kahle eminyakeni yabo yokugcina. Uyobusiseka Ngqongqoshe nomnyango wakho
uma wenze njalo. Asinciphe isikhathi – sebeshilo laba abanye ontangayethu –
sokuhlala belinde abazobaholela kusukela ekuseni kuze kube ntambama ngoba
laba bantu basuke benoshukela, i-High Blood Pressure, baphathwa amadolo,
amaqakala kanye nokunye.

Okunye esiye sikubone futhi kwezinye  izindawo  ukuthi  bahola  langa  linye
nalaba abahola imali yesondlo edume ngokuthi  eyeqolo.  Kanti  azehlukaniswe
izikhathi. Ekuseni akube ogogo nomkhulu  bese  kuthi  ntambama  kube  yilaba
bemali yeqolo.  Okwesikhombisa  nokokugcina,  ubugebengu  obukhona  ngelanga
lomholo kuxetshulwa imali  yogogo  nomkhulu  abunambinethi  kahle.  [Kuphele
Isikhathi.] Inkatha Freedom Party  iyaseseka  lesi  sabiwomali.  Ngiyabonga.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mrs J N VILAKAZI:  Hon  Chairperson,  hon  Minister  and  your  staff,  hon
members who spoke before me in this House, the members have  clearly  stated
the importance of  services  that  are  rendered  by  this  department.  Hon
Minister, with this budget, we would be grateful if you  could  address  the
following issues.

Firstly, the  department  must  continue  to  fight  corruption  in  pension
payments. Yes, the department has done a lot, but a greater effort  must  be
made. We must have a sharp eye that will continue to check the  progress  of
things. Secondly, we must eliminate the backlog in pension applications.  We
must also have  ways  of  helping  those  who  do  not  have  the  necessary
documents, which is usually the case when there is the unexpected  death  of
a relative. There are some children who are supposed to be  getting  grants,
but do not get them due to birth certificate constraints.

Thirdly, there is a decrease in the number  of  social  workers.  Those  who
spoke before me said it all. Everywhere, they are  complaining  about  this.
The department must make this issue a priority  in  this  budget.  Fourthly,
the abuse of children and the aged is growing in leaps and bounds.  This  is
not only the job of the Department of Social  Development,  but  the  active
participation of this department is also desired. Children and the aged  are
still abused in their communities and families.

Fifthly, hunger and  poverty  are  the  basis  of  abuse,  because  in  some
families underage girls are subjected to forced marriages. We are  not  sure
what role the department can play with regard  to  this.  We  will  be  once
again be appreciative if the department could increase the  budget  for  job
creation so that people won’t turn into animals. Hunger is the  reason  that
people become animals and eat each other.

Sixthly, the construction of pension points must continue. At the moment  it
is going at a snail’s pace. The aged need to  be  treated  with  dignity  in
their last days. They must  not  wait  in  queues  from  the  morning  until
afternoon because they have diabetes, blood pressure, arthritis, etc.

The other thing that we have noticed is that in some places they  get  their
pensions at the same time as those who get  child  support  grants.  In  the
mornings they must deal with the aged and in the afternoons they  must  deal
with those who are getting child support  grants.  Crime  on  pension  days,
when the elders are robbed of their money, is intolerable. The IFP  supports
this budget. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr B T BUTHELEZI (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister Dr
Skweyiya, Deputy Minister Dr Benjamin, special delegates from provinces and
hon members of this House, I wish to open my deliberations by singing from
the same hymn book as this House in offering our condolences to the
national government, colleagues, comrades, family and friends of the late
Minister of Public Works Nkosazana Stella Sicgau, of the Pondo Royal
Family, who was laid to rest with her forebears in Lusikisiki yesterday.

In the same breath, on behalf of the KwaZulu-Natal portfolio committee on
social welfare and population development, I would like to offer our
sincere condolences and heartfelt sympathies to the Zulu Royal Family,
colleagues and friends of the member of the provincial legislature and the
former KwaZulu-Natal MEC for social welfare and population development
Prince Gideon Layukona Zulu kaMnyayiza kaNdabuko kaMpande, who was called
to serve in high office yesterday evening at Durban’s Parklands hospital
following a long illness. May their souls rest in peace.

In coming to this debate, I would like to thank the hon Minister for a
comprehensive report on his budget for Social Development. In KwaZulu-Natal
the 2006-07 budgetary allocation for Vote 13, which is social welfare and
population development, has been significantly decreased to R894,1 million,
compared to the baseline budget of R13,6 billion for the 2005-06 financial
year. This decrease can be attributed to the transfer of the function of
social assistance grants to the national SA Social Security Agency.

For the past five years the function of social assistance has represented
the greatest portion of the budget for Vote 13, and the historic
overspending trends in this programme have negatively impacted on the
remaining programmes for this budget.

However, we have some serious concerns, hon Minister, about the transfer of
the social assistance function to the SA Social Security Agency, because
not only was Sassa not ready to take over the function of the disbursement
of social assistance on 1 March 2005 as originally planned by the national
government, but the allocation of social assistance grants during the 2005-
06 financial year was in the form of a national conditional grant payment
through the Division of Revenue Act.

In the 2004-05 financial year KwaZulu-Natal incurred overexpenditure of
R676,7 million, which had to be paid back by the province to the national
government. On 29 March 2006 the province reimbursed national government by
R465,4 million of the debt. This leaves a balance owing to national
government of R211,3 million, but we hope that National Treasury will write
off this balance.

As in the other provinces, hon Minister, the KwaZulu-Natal social welfare
and population development budget for the administration and disbursement
of social assistance grants has been transferred to Sassa for the 2006-07
financial year. In this regard, our province has the following concerns.
The first is that it was reported to the provincial portfolio committee
that the SA Social Security Agency was not yet ready to operate without the
assistance of provincial departments. Until it is in a position to do so,
the provincial departments of social welfare and population development
will continue to administer the personnel transferred to Sassa.

It was also reported to the portfolio committee that the province had been
given an assurance from national government that any direct cost incurred
by the province in this regard would be reimbursed, and we will closely
monitor this to see if it really happens.

The second concern that we have is that in the transfer of the function of
social assistance to Sassa, there are still a number of concerns not yet
clarified in the agreement between national government and the provincial
governments. The first concern is the payment of interest on pension
debtors. The second concern is the litigation costs incurred prior to the
transfer of the social assistance function to Sassa, borne as a direct
result of this function.

It would be unfair for the province and other provinces to be left with
this debt, because we believe in the principle of funds following function.
Also, our position as KwaZulu-Natal is that the transfer of the social
assistance function to Sassa should include a transfer of both assets and
liabilities.

Therefore the province will monitor the outcome of these negotiations in
the hope that an amicable solution will be reached in which Peter will not
be robbed to pay Paul. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Deputy Chairperson, hon
Minister, hon members, and distinguished guests, 50 years ago, the women of
South Africa staged a historic march to protest against the implementation
of the pass laws and against the marginalisation of the poor and rural
masses of our country.

Yesterday we buried a South African woman, an icon, Comrade Nomzamo Stella
Sigcau who, until the last moment, strived to improve the quality of life
particularly of rural communities.

We salute the late Comrade Stella for her untiring efforts in improving the
quality of life for our people, particularly in the rural areas.

I am proud to be associated with Budget Vote 18 which represents the social
dimension of the age of hope and promises to deepen the efforts of this
department to improve the quality of life of all those who are
marginalised, vulnerable and excluded.

As part of our work to ensure the sustainability of the social assistance
system and translate the vision of development into action, we are looking
at ways to link social grants to economic activities. In close
collaboration with the Department of Labour, we are working to ensure that
South Africans not only have access to the right to social security, but
also take responsibility to enhance their capabilities to enjoy the dignity
of gainful employment.

To this end, the department aims to expand the provision of social relief
of distress to support those who are vulnerable but do not qualify for the
main social grants. The vulnerable referred to here includes people who
face particular barriers to entering, remaining in and progressing in
employment, including educated youth, the disabled, people with certain
health conditions, single parents and persons over 50 years of age.

I would therefore like to say to the DA that perhaps they should look
beyond the basic income grant to address the problems of those people who
are not eligible for grants, because the department is doing that. The
poorest of the poor and those who have given up hope of employment need
support to become gainfully employed.

For the poor, the dignity, self-confidence and respect that come with work
are important. The objective of the new framework is to redesign the role,
responsibilities and contribution of social grants in alleviating poverty
but predominantly in providing better opportunities for the poorest of the
poor to generate their own income through self-employment or at least to
pursue job opportunities.

The poor need to be given the necessary support to achieve either self-
employment or to secure skills and employment.

I would like to bring the attention of this House to the 2006 Homeless
World Cup Soccer, which will be hosted by the Big Issue, South Africa, as
from 24 to 30 September 2006 in Cape Town.

The Big Issue is a nonprofit organisation established in 1996 as a job
creation initiative for unemployed homeless people particularly women and
youth. Our department will be hosting the Social Dialogues alongside the
Homeless Soccer World Cup to exhibit our programmes and to obtain public
commitment and action towards poverty eradication and the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals.
There is no doubt that substance abuse is touching the roots of our
society, for example: our children; our family lives; increased criminal
behaviour; HIV/Aids infection; poverty; unemployment; car accidents and
other forms of trauma; violence and other forms of abuse; loss of
productivity and in fact almost every facet of our social fabric.

Substance abuse is a scourge that threatens the future of our society and
it necessitates our urgent attention. During this Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period, the National Drug Master Plan will go to Cabinet for
approval. The new plan proposes an array of drug control, prevention and
treatment initiatives, which will inform new legislation and programmes.

As indicated by the Minister, the Prevention and Treatment of Substance
Abuse Amendment Bill will be introduced to Parliament during this financial
year. The Bill will provide for the transformation of services in the field
of substance abuse, including community-based services. It places more
emphasis on community-based interventions to ensure that communities takes
charge of their drug problems, and are capacitated to do so in an effective
manner.

I am pleased to share with you that the department has developed and
approved the national minimum norms and standards for treatment centres in
order to standardise services, facilitate transformation, ensure protection
of human rights and effective monitoring and for the evaluation of these
facilities. These measures will enable the newly appointed Central Drug
Authority and the provincial MECs to ensure that drug-related services
complying with minimum norms and standards are provided in all areas of
South Africa, and that communities are mobilised to take care of their own
drug problems.

The department further plans to host an international summit on substance
abuse during the third quarter of the 2006-07 financial year in order to
share best practice at national, regional and international levels in
managing the problem of substance abuse.

International Day against Substance Abuse will be celebrated in KwaZulu-
Natal this year. The Youth Model for Prevention and Treatment of Substance
Abuse will be launched during this celebration. We commend the MEC for the
Northern Cape for the initiative in hosting a substance abuse summit to
develop a strategy accepted by all role-players and stakeholders in October
last year. This year will see the roll-out of an integrated strategy to
address substance abuse. We encourage other MECs to follow this example.

A policy framework for services to people with disabilities within the
social development context has been developed, and the research on the
needs of people with disabilities is being conducted.

In terms of assistance to people with disabilities, in particular care-
dependent children, the department has finalised the assessment tool and
guidelines for implementation in terms of the new Social Assistance Act of
2004. This will require a campaign to create awareness of the improved
benefits to recipients as well as capacity-building programmes for all
officials to ensure that they apply the new legislation correctly.

The 23,2% increase over the 2006 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework period
in the social crime prevention subprogramme relates to the implementation
of the Child Justice Bill to improve the functioning of the integrated
justice system. Policies to promote the wellbeing of children will be
aligned to the new Children’s Act and implementation by all provinces will
be managed and progress evaluated. Programmes and policies for children
awaiting trial are being implemented, and will be monitored to assess
progress and its impact. This department is working towards the 60%
reduction in children in police cells and prisons during this financial
year.

Norms and standards for secure care centres will be implemented and 40
assistant probation officers will be trained. Five hundred volunteers will
be trained as assistant probation officers as part of the National Youth
Service Programme during this financial year. A professional board for
youth work will be established.

With an 8,8% increase in the allocation to our HIV/Aids programme, the
department will strengthen and expand the role of home community-based care
and support, and will ensure that 50% of home community-based care projects
comply with the norms and standards of service delivery. Groundbreakers
will be trained and linked to the Expanded Public Works Programme on farms
and in informal settlements.

The delivery of developmental social services necessitates the creation of
an enabling environment for social service practitioners. To this end, the
Social Service Profession Act and the Social Services Act will be reviewed
and implemented. All professions in the social welfare services sector will
be graded appropriately, and job descriptions will be benchmarked for child
and youth care workers as well as social auxiliary workers.

Finally, the acute shortage of social workers in our country remains a
major challenge to the effective rendering of services. In addition to the
efforts of the department, which includes a retention strategy and
reviewing of salaries, a limited number of bursaries for matriculants to
enter the profession have been made available. I would like to use this
opportunity to appeal to the private sector to make more bursaries
available, particularly for matriculants from rural areas.

Honourable members, delegates, as we celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the
Women’s March and the 30th Anniversary of the Soweto uprising, paying
tribute to our women veterans and our young lions, let us all, together, do
our utmost to promote economic independence and to give effect to building
a better South Africa and a better world. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L MATLHOAHELA: Hon Chair, I thank and greet you, the hon Minister,
Deputy Minister, and all hon members of the House. My speech relates to
state and citizen in partnership, shared and accelerated growth in social
and community development, and to local joint initiatives. It was noted in
the Budget Speech of 2006 that the joint resources and initiative of the
public and private sectors need to be mobilised. However, when citizens try
their very best to accomplish this, many obstacles are encountered. I have
an example of a small export biltong factory project that is about to be
started in Victoria West in the Northern Cape.

A citizen begged the state to participate. The citizen has struggled since
2003. Finally he has now managed to accomplish it on his own. I believe he
still requires assistance with this project. I trust that in future when
members of the public show great interest in social and community
development greater interest will be shown by the state. I thank you.

Nkk A N D QIKANI: Ndiyabulela, Mhlalingaphambili. KuMphathiswa neNdlu yakhe
namalungu onke ale Ndlu, kuqala ndithi mandibulele, okuthe kwenziwa
nguMphathiswa ngokuba afake uchintsi kwimali eyamkelwa ngabantwana
nabadala, nangona sisakhalaza sisithi oku akwanele, ngenxa yemithwalo
yabantu basemakhaya nangenxa yamaxabiso anyuke kakhulu ezinto ezivenkileni.
Indlala esagqubayo emakhaya nentswela-misebenzi iyitsho le mali
ingabonakali.

Nangona sikwamkela ukunyuswa kweminyaka yabantwana abafumana isondlo kwaya
kuma kwi-14, sinenkolo yokuba inganyuka kancinci kwakhona iye kuma kweli-16
iminyaka, ngoba bahluthwa ukutya emlonyeni kanye xa beqala ukungena
kumabanga aphezulu, ukanti bebeza kutsho bakwazi ukuzifunela intwana-ntwana
zabo abazidingayo. Mphathiswa, ziseninzi kakhulu iindawo abema ixesha elide
kuzo abantu benethwa zimvula, bekwatshiswa nalilanga xa beze kufumana le
mali. Langa eli sebe lingayiqwalasela kakhulu loo nto.

Sihlalo, okunye okwenzekayo kwiindawo ekwamkeliswa kuzo abantu,
kukuthathelwa kwabantu abadala iimali zabo ngolunya ngabantu abathi
babazalisela imali ebebeyibolekile, oomatshonisa, nababazalisela ngenzala
enkulu engahlawulekiyo. Mphathiswa, besicela ukuba abo bantu benza loo nto
kwezi ndawo batshutshiswe nguMthetho, ngoba oomakhulu bethu babuya
ngengaphethanga mali, itshone kwaba bantu. Oonovenkile nabo babanika ukutya
ngamatyala angaphezu kwemali abayifumanayo. Yingozi embi kakhulu leyo. I-
UDM iyaxhasa. Kea leboga.  (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mrs A N D QIKANI: I thank you, Chairperson. The Minister and his
department, members of this House, firstly, let me express our appreciation
of the Minister’s efforts for increasing the child support grant and the
old age grant. But we still maintain that it is not enough because of the
responsibilities that these people are faced with and the effects the
inflation rate has on them. Enormous hunger and unemployment diminishes the
value of the grants.

Although we accept the amendment to the age of a child receiving a support
grant to 14 years, we would be pleased if the age could be increased to 16.
The grant is stopped at a crucial stage, when a child is starting higher
levels of education and when the money is most needed. Minister, there are
still a number of areas in which people are exposed to rain and sun while
waiting for their payouts. I wish that the department could look at that.

Chairperson, instances where moneylenders take elderly people’s money
forcefully at payout stations have been reported. Elderly people are given
loans at very high interests. Minister, I plead with you that those who rob
the people must be prosecuted. The communities’ shop owners contribute to
this by allowing them credit that exceeds their grants. This is very risky.
The UDM supports this vote. I thank you.]

Ms N M MADLALA-MAGUBANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister,
and hon members, this is the Gauteng Department of Social Development’s
input that I was asked to render to you. The provincial government
acknowledges the significant improvement it has made in the lives of the
people of Gauteng in the first decade of democracy. However poverty and
unemployment have been identified as critical challenges that remain in our
province. In addressing these challenges a key part of the social
development agenda will be to take the lead in restoring the dignity of
poor and vulnerable people in order to build a better life for them and
sustainable communities.

Our programmes will provide the basic means for the target groups
effectively to participate in our democracy dispensation to improve their
material conditions. With social assistance migrating to the South African
Social Security Agency, Sassa, the department will intensify its service in
respect to statutory and developmental social services by leading and
facilitating the integration of prevention, intervention and rehabilitation
strategies.

When working with communities the departmental paradigm calls for
approaches that are people-centred and sustainable, redefining development
in terms of exploring the strength and vulnerabilities of the poor,
marginalised and vulnerable target groups, and the knowledge and expertise
of individuals in the communities to creatively and innovatively use
resources available in the environment to address the socioeconomic needs.

It also promotes holistic development of the poor, vulnerable and
marginalized women, youth, and people with disabilities. Last year we
committed ourselves to working with communities and NGOs to support and
empower people who are unable to work and have special needs such as the
most vulnerable children and youth in distress. Social welfare services
have historically been rendered by government and civil society
organizations.

Government acknowledges that many formal organisations have the skills,
expertise, infrastructure and other resources that could contribute to
reconstruction, development and the provision of services. The Department
of Social Development does not have the capacity to facilitate rendering of
all services mandated to it without the assistance of NGOs, community-based
and emerging organisations, which are often the best places and have the
potential to render services to the marginalised poor.

We acknowledge and appreciate the partnership with the non-profit
organisations and value their contribution to service delivery to the poor,
vulnerable and marginalized people in our province. The Gauteng provincial
government during this year proved that it is living up to its endeavour to
be a caring government.

Additional funding was appropriated during the August budget by the MEC for
finance and economic affairs for financing the NPO sector, which would be
carried through the other years. This has contributed to the alleviation of
the funding crisis facing the NPO sector. Service-level agreements were
entered into with 825 NPOs rendering social welfare services to 223 000
beneficiaries. Responding to the impact of HIV/Aids epidemic on children,
families and communities focusing on special needs of children and the most
vulnerable we also have 98 community-based care programmes focusing in the
main on 151 236 orphans and vulnerable children infected and affected by
HIV/Aids.

The increased allocation of R30 million is in line with the social sector
response to the Expanded Public Works Programme and will be utilised to
ensure that 1 700 volunteers become job incumbents in a newly created two-
year contract, and are given training as caregivers, community developers
and auxiliary social workers. These programmes are linked to the 98
HIV/Aids community home-based care sites. These funds will also be used for
job creation and training the child care workers and early child
development practitioners.

When coming to youth development let me say that in honour of the brave
youth who 30 years ago made valuable contributions to the democratic
process, increased attention is being placed on youth development. Youth
unemployment and underdevelopment impose a heavy cost upon individuals,
employers, trade unions, governments and society. Rising unemployment and
underdevelopment among youth may be a source of social instability,
increased drug abuse and crime.
The department will conduct moral regeneration programmes in all local
government areas to equip 5 000 youths with life skills to master these
circumstances. Through the Integrated Social Development programme we plan
to work with communities, NGOs and local government to create alternative
lifestyles and develop skills for 1 042 youths living and working on the
streets.

Last year the province committed to the development of a package of
services to improve the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable children -
the Bana Pele [Children First] programme. It was launched on 1 June 2005 by
the Premier of Gauteng in Claremont, west of Johannesburg. Bana Pele has
achieved the first targets.

The Gauteng provincial government departments’ contributions to the
programme can be summarised as follows. Statutory social work: in
recognition of 10 years of our Constitution the department will intensify
its mandate contained in section 26 of the Bill of Rights by improving the
efficiency and equitable provision of the statutory services that we
provide such as foster care and adoption.

Foster care services have become one of the critical statutory community-
based services responses to children who are in need of care, abandoned,
neglected or orphaned. The department and its social services partners, who
are accredited welfare organisations in terms of the Child Care Act, have
provided foster care services to 35 972 children in Gauteng province. Due
to the HIV/Aids pandemic the demand for the provision of foster care
services has increased by 50%. The service providers experience acute
resource shortages and a concerted effort is required to accommodate all
children who need this kind of care. The programme aims to deal with the
backlog of cases as well as increasing the targeted number of children to
be placed in foster care to 45 000 children.

Additionally, there has been an initiative to ensure that children who are
part of the backlog and awaiting finalisation for placement into foster
care will be given temporary assistance in the form of social relief of
distress. Early childhood development is a priority area for the Gauteng
provincial government. Investment in ECD is seen not only as a means of
giving children a good start, but also of developing their families and
contributing to the socioeconomic development of the province. In the
Premier’s 2005 speech he highlighted the fact that an ECD strategy focusing
on children at risk in the most disadvantaged communities will be
implemented. As a result of this the following has been achieved.

The department provides services to 19 915 children in 270 registered ECD
facilities in terms of the Child Care Act. Services include the home
visiting programmes on basic care skills, educational stimulation, toy
library and other child minding services. A budget of R25 million is set
aside for this function.

When coming to substance abuse, the province is experiencing an increase in
the number of people abusing substances. The people that are most affected
by this scourge are the youth. The department has accepted the challenge of
ensuring that the capacity of the departmental facilities and those of NGOs
needs to be improved. Together with this there is a need to ensure
interdepartmental collaboration and co-ordination to promote a healthy
lifestyle and make youth believe it is cool to be sober.

The department maintains the state rehabilitation centre of Magaliesoord
which cares for 300 adults and children requiring inpatient treatment for
drugs and alcohol abuse. Furthermore the department subsidises 80 treatment
centres in Gauteng that ... The Gauteng provincial government supports the
budget. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N D HENDRICKE: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, the need for a realistic social safety net which involves input
from all departments needs to happen - given the uptake of grants for the
elderly and child support grants. At a more practical level the social
pension is still relatively insignificant as many families, especially in
rural areas, rely solely on it – given the high unemployment in those
areas.

In terms of human resource challenges, the shortage of social workers in
some institutions requires a developmental approach. Perhaps there could be
a scarce-skills allowance incentive to train, recruit and retain these
professionals as they play a huge support role in the sector.

The establishment and operation of the South African Social Security
Agency, SASSA, that manages the social grant system will result in a more
efficient and hopefully a less corrupt list, especially for old age
pensions.

The National Development Agency has for far too long been plagued with
inactivity, bad management and dysfunctionality. Although disbursement
ratios to civil society organisations have improved, much needs to be done
to address and empower civil society to engage effectively in poverty
relief programmes, especially in coastal and rural areas.

The implementation of the Older Persons Bill is unnecessarily long overdue
- given that the aged have always been on the back burner and featured on
the periphery of society.

While the ineffectiveness of the National Drug Master Plan is unfortunate,
given the crises of addiction especially in the Western Cape where ``tik-
tik’’ addiction has reached record levels, the Central Drug Authority has a
capacity for challenges related to monitoring work. The Victims Empowerment
Policy will play a central role in assisting victims in adjusting back into
society. A short implementation period is required in order to fast-track
processes.

Key challenges are in an integrated approach, interdepartmental co-
operation and programme alignment in order to assist in improving social
welfare services. This forms part of a developmental state necessary for
South Africa, given the level of underdevelopment in our society.

Even with the high incidence rate of HIV/Aids infections and related
deaths, we could see high uptakes for caregivers of orphan children.

Whilst the departments via the policies play a leading role in terms of
social developmental functions, their budget via allocation and programme
efficiency is well received by the UIF and is supported as such. Thank you,
Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Hon Chairperson, I am happy that the
debate today has not been very much politicised. It is not because people
do not want to represent their parties’ political views, but because the
policies of the ANC in this country are morally, ideologically and
philosophically uncontested. I would like to thank members of the
opposition who, despite their posturing to negate even every positive thing
they have said in support of this budget vote, have agreed, by and large,
with the positions and programmes that are provided by this department.

Of course, it is normal in South Africa that, over time, we will have to
overcome our opposition that is permanently in a state of twisted logic of
a perpetual mode of opposition - even where they agree with the government.

Hon Lamoela has succinctly and unequivocally supported everything that the
department has done to do what it is supposed to do from the beginning to
the end. But she has raised concerns and these concerns are legitimate
ones. These are concerns that our people in communities are raising; and we
agree with her. But because of being trapped in this twisted logic of
perpetual opposition, she did not find it enough to complete her speech
without posturing an opposition kind of politics. However, I think we will
be able to overcome this over time.

I have prepared a speech, but I think most of the issues have been covered
by and large by all hon members. I really want to express my appreciation
to the hon member who spoke before me for emphasising the developmental
trajectory of social development in South Africa. In the light of
increasing joblessness that is facing SA and the ravaging pandemic of
HIV/Aids, which continues to rob our labour market of an active labour
force, there is certainly no way in which South Africa will find it
sustainable to eradicate poverty if it only insists on the provision of
grants. So, it becomes critical that as parliamentary elected
representatives of our people and as a democratic government, of course
also elected by our people, we join our hands and brains to begin to
profile in a more robust and systematic way the developmental trajectory of
social development.

What kind of things ought we to do for our communities of the Eastern Cape
where there is poverty? What kind of initiatives do we need to unleash in
our communities in the Free State, particularly in QwaQwa which has been
declared a rural node by our President, to support initiatives by women who
are not employable in any Seta, but women who have had the courage to
respond accordingly to the clarion call of our President of Vukuzenzele to
initiate income-generating projects?

I think we have a basis in South Africa for a developmental trajectory of
social development. If Parliament in particular - and the Department of
Social Development through your leadership, hon Minister - can begin to
profile this, some of our colleagues outside there in the civil society
will actually even begin to agree that some of the positions which it is
ideologically sound to call for, such as the basic income grant, BIG, as
the mother of all solutions of the problems of poverty in South Africa, are
not the only option. In fact, it is one of the options that have been
proven unsustainable globally. South Africa cannot take that particular
action at this point in time.

I would like to thank the Minister, the Deputy Minister and all hon members
who have participated in this debate. The debate has once more reignited
that light of hope to the people of South Africa that despite the problems
and challenges we have before of us, there is hope for a better future. As
our President has said, we are in an age of hope. Thank you very much,
Chairperson. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Chairman, I do not think I will
contribute much that is new, especially after the speech of the last
speaker, Mr Setona.

It is quite obvious that all of us, all the parties, have always agreed
that the issues that we are facing in South Africa are issues of social
development. They are basically issues of uplifting the poorest of the
poor, so that there can be a better life for almost everybody. On such
issues we dare not, and I repeat, we dare not differ. The only thing we can
do is to see how we can work amongst ourselves and for ourselves in
improving that. As such I do agree in principle with almost everything that
has been said.

As regards the issues Mr Setona has just spoken about, first of all we have
to understand that when we took over the state and divided it into
provinces, those provinces were not equal as far as development was
concerned. The public servants we had at the time did not necessarily
understand what had to be done, and might not have had the necessary
skills, etc.

We were completely different, and as we progress, we will always find that
one province is a little bit more skilled as far as continuing the services
are concerned than the others, especially in those in which there were
Bantustans before 1994.
That is the point we have to accept. I know it is very painful for people
to accept that. We tried to say at the time that we were not equal, that
the provinces were not equal. We did not spell it out, but some of the
provinces are really much better off than the others in terms of skills,
experience and basically how they use the resources at their disposal. I
therefore think we have to accept that.

Despite that I would like to agree in principle with what has been said
here generally by quite a number of people. I think we have definitely
agreed here in this House on many occasions that the basic income grant
sounds very nice, but as Mr Setona said, it is sometimes not possible to
make it a big one. Principally we would like to have it. We, the ANC,
actually stated that as early as 1994 or 1995. After discussing it for
longer than two or three years, however, we had to come to the conclusion
that it was not possible for us to implement it at that time. After that we
appointed the Taylor Commission, which also agreed that there was no
possibility of doing it, but suggested it, and it did not necessarily
receive the necessary support from everybody.

One of the things we agreed on is that the people who are entitled to it
according to our Constitution – if those people could be served, if we had
the necessary mechanisms to ensure that everybody is served - at the time
it was people from six years old and younger. Later we moved to eight,
after that to nine, then 10, and now it is 14 years of age.

Quite obviously we found that it was very difficult to do that, and at the
same time we did not have the necessary resources. This does not mean that
we will not proceed with it in future, should the means, the resources and
the ability of the public service enable us to do so. We have stopped at 14
so that everybody who is entitled to this at that age should be able to
say: I have and I can receive that from the government. And up to 98% or
99% of elderly people know that. We had to work on that. We have also tried
our best as far as disabled people are concerned.

Having done all that, however, we came to the conclusion that there is a
little bit of exploitation as far as this issue is concerned. There are
people who are not entitled to this grant who are receiving it. We
therefore had to go back and clean up that data, and we are still doing it.
We have to thank the public here for the way in which they reacted. More
than 89 000 people came forward and said who were getting grants to which
they were not entitled. Amongst those people we found that there were 12
000 people whom we told we were not going to give them any lenience about
this, because they knew from the start that they were not entitled, as
public servants. At present we are therefore still trying to clean it up,
and we are working with all the law enforcement agencies to achieve this.

The last time we found, from the public themselves, that there were 35 000
people who were getting these grant, though they were not supposed to get
them. Members of the public came forward themselves and said: So and so, my
neighbour, still gets it. We know beyond any reasonable doubt that he is
not entitled to it, because he earns a lot. We therefore want to say to
those people who were able to give us that information that we are thankful
and grateful for the questions that they have raised, and that we as
government will do everything to ensure that this is stopped.

The main thing is not the question of the police being able to do
something, but the important thing is our involvement. As representatives
of the people in government, we should know which people in our
constituencies who are supposed to get it, but are not getting it, who are
getting it who are not supposed to be getting it. As members of Parliament
we should be able to say that a person is getting it, that it should be
stopped and he must pay back that money. Some will not be able to do that
and it will not work for all of us. This goes not only for the national and
provincial government, but for all local government representatives there.

What we want is that this function should work at the local level. Everyone
in each locality should be able to say: I know and I’m entitled to that.

We should be able to do the same thing that the churches are doing amongst
us at present. We would never have been able to service the majority of
people in South Africa if the non-governmental organisations, especially
the religious, faith-based organisations, were not doing what they are
doing. I therefore think this is an issue that we should never forget, ie
that it is our duty and that some of the things are still our
responsibilities.

I think the R2 billion we were able to save – I am sure this is the amount
for the last year, and it can even be more next year – was saved because we
were able to arrest the people and we have been able to stop them receiving
that money, and we were able to say: This is the money we have. In other
words, I think this is what all of us are supposed to do. It has to be done
though it might not be very popular.

As far as the question of the shortage of social workers is concerned, I
agree in principle with Miss Lamoela of the DA that there is a shortage,
and we’ve been saying that for a long time. We have agreed in the NA that
all of us who are able to assist must work together. We have agreed with
the DA itself. Members of the DA in the National Assembly have agreed to
work with the department and I to encourage people to assist us in solving
this problem. We should be able to use matriculants and people with degrees
but no work, encompass them in this so that we can employ them and be able
to say: Train them, and afterwards, in a year’s time, bring them back to
work in this area. I think what happens in the end, should also happen in
the NCOP.

As regards KwaZulu-Natal and what Mr Buthelezi was saying: Yes, do a little
research, my dear comrade from the KwaZulu-Natal IFP, and you will find
that there is nothing wrong with the Treasury demanding back its money that
has been used by our department in that area when they were not supposed to
use it. The issue at stake is that the Minister, the KwaZulu-Natal province
took about R696 million from their budget for social assistance between the
years 2005 and 2006 and used it to write off their previous year’s
deficits. The Treasury disagreed with them and the Treasury has every right
to demand that money back. There is no one who is going to get it back from
us, except that we demand our money back and I think I’ll stand with Trevor
on that.

As regards the amount owed to the province, another problem he raised is
that In terms of the Division of Revenue Act and the Appropriation Act of
2005, the social assistance budget was allocated as a conditional grant in
line with the shifting of this function from the province to the national
sphere of government. Your province was therefore not allowed, by law, to
use this money for any other purpose except ...

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J Tolo): We would appreciate it if you
would round off.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: I am rounding off, but I have to answer
here. [Laughter.]

To use the money for any other purpose than social assistance grants is
determined by the Division of Revenue Act. The National Treasury is
therefore acting within the ambit of the law to demand that money back. I
think if you do a little bit more research you’ll be able to agree with me.

In principle I would like to say . . . The hon Chair is harassing me.
[Laughter.] One thing I would like to say is that we should all understand
that provinces are still not the same. Therefore, when we introduce these
agencies, it is easier for us to work in Gauteng and the Western Cape than
it is to work in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo and other
provinces. This is simply because those systems were not there before 1994.


People do not know that they are entitled to that. In those other three
provinces that we are talking about people do know and they make their
demands, and they have access to all these other issues. We as Members of
Parliament must accept these issues, ie that you cannot put the Western
Cape in the same position in which you would like to put Limpopo and the
Eastern Cape. That has been proved beyond any reasonable doubt. In other
words, in those provinces where there were Bantustans there are more
problems than in the Western Cape, Gauteng or in the Northern Cape. As we
work amongst ourselves and understand the situation there, we would be able
to resolve the issues that we are supposed to.

On behalf of the department I would like to acknowledge the work that has
been done, first of all by my sister, Comrade Stella Sigcau, whom we buried
yesterday in Lusikisiki – and we convey our condolences – in a very
different and difficult province.

I would also like to convey my condolences, specifically to Chief Zulu, the
former Minister for Social Development in KwaZulu-Natal. Unfortunately for
Dr Buthelezi, he understood the issues much better than Mr Buthelezi.
[Laughter.] He told me many times that there are a lot of problems here,
and some of these people get grants to which they are not entitled. The
majority of people that come from Swaziland, Mozambique and Lesotho, claim
their grants and go back. If Mr Buthelezi can stop that he will resolve
some of the problems and understand why they exist.

We were able to use this question for me to basically put a lot of pressure
on some of the provinces, especially those that were run like the Eastern
Cape, to try to resolve some problems. I won’t say I am using my powers or
the ANC’s in order to suppress any other person, but in KwaZulu-Natal we
had a bamba-kahle bamba-yeka [touch and leave] problem with the way in
which we were doing it, with the way you people in KwaZulu-Natal voted on
all these other issues. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON (Mr B J Tolo): Before we adjourn, I would like to
thank the Minister and the Deputy Minister on behalf of the House for
having participated in this debate. Every time they come here we as the
NCOP feel that we are blessed. I would also like to say that while you were
making your closing remarks, the majority of members here, across party
lines, were actually nodding, which means people did agree with what you
were saying and with what the department is doing. We want to congratulate
you on that. [Applause.]

The Council adjourned at 16:13.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS



                            MONDAY, 3 APRIL 2006



TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Uganda on Police Co-
        operation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


                            FRIDAY, 7 APRIL 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
     (1)    Sectional Titles Amendment Bill, submitted by the Minister for
        Agriculture and Land Affairs on 30 March 2006. Referred to the
        Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs and the Select
        Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson

1.    Referrals to committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:


        (a)      Government Notice No 115 published in Government Gazette
             No 28469 dated 3 February 2006: Determination of the daily
             allowance in respect of meals and incidental costs for purposes
             of the Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


        (b)      Government Notice No 177 published in Government Gazette
             No 28550 dated 24 February 2006: Fixing of rate per kilometer
             in respect of motor vehicles for the purposes of section
             8(1)(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of
             1962).

    2.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Public Services for consideration:
        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2006-
             2010.


    3.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Social Services:


        a) Co-operation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
           Tunisia and the Republic of South Africa on Public Health and
           Medical Sciences, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


    4.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


        (a)      Report of the Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons for 2005-
             2006 [RP 27-2006].




TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     (a)    Report on withholding of remuneration of Magistrate M S Makamu,
        a magistrate at Benoni, in terms of section 13(4A)(b) of the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism

     (a)    Government Notice No 231 published in Government Gazette No
        28620 dated 14 March 2006: Invitation to interested persons to
        submit names to fill vacancies on the Board of South African
        Weather, in terms of the South African Weather Service Act, 2001
        (Act No 8 of 2001).


     (b)    Government Notice No 232 published in Government Gazette No
        28620 dated 14 March 2006: Invitation to interested persons to
        submit names to fill vacancies on the Board of South African
        National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), in terms of the National
        Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2001 (Act No 10 of
        2004).


     (c)    General Notice No 425 published in Government Gazette No 28636
        dated 20 March 2006: Draft policy on the Allocation of White Shark
        Cage Diving Permits and the Management of White Shark Cage Diving
        Industry for Public Comment, in terms of the Marine Living
        Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


     (a)    Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the year
        ended June 2005, including the Report of the Independent Auditors
        on the Financial Statements for the year ended June 2005.




National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson
    The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 17
    March 2006 to the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces
    informing Members of the Council of the employment of the South African
    National Defence Force in the Union of Comores:


    EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN COMPLIANCE
    WITH THE INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
    TOWARDS THE UNION


    This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I
    authorised the employment of the South African National Defence Force
    (SANDF) in fulfilment of the international obligations of the Republic
    of South Africa towards the African Union, through participation in the
    African Union Mission in the Union of Comores, to ensure a secure
    environment conducive to credible, free and fair elections.


    This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
    section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
    1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of
    2002).


    A total of 371 members will be deployed to the Union of Comores as part
    of the African Union Mission to the Union of Comores for a period of
    three (3) months.


    The expected costs for the deployment of personnel for the period to
    the Mission are as follows:


      Personnel and administrative costs     R16 207 375
      Logistic costs   R75 202 038
      Total R91 409 413


    The Department of Defence is responsible for the costs of this
    deployment and is able to accommodate it in its 2006/2007 peace support
    operations allocation.


    I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly and
    request that you bring its contents to the attention of members of the
    National Council of Provinces.


    Regards


    signed
    PRESIDENT


                           TUESDAY, 18 APRIL 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

      1) Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
         Bill [B 25D – 2005] – Act No 28 of 2005 (assented to and signed by
         President on 7 April 2006).


COMMITTEE REPORTS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Joint Budget Committee on Departmental Expenditure for
    the Second and Third Quarters of 2005/6 Financial Year – July to
    December 2005[1], dated 24 March 2006:


Part A: Second Quarter Expenditure Report: July - September 2005


By the end of the second quarter of the 2005/06 financial year,  departments
had spent an average  of  47.50%.   The  Department  of  Education  was  the
highest spending department at 75.18%.


Table 1:Highest spending Departments at the End of the second quarter
Expenditure

|R'000                     |Total Budget |Total       |% Total     |
|                          |             |Expenditure |Expenditure |
|                          |             |to date     |to date     |
|Education                 |12397064     |9319735     |75.18%      |
|Social Development        |56549127     |30147594    |53.31%      |
|Environmental Affairs and |1723111      |895724      |51.98%      |
|Tourism                   |             |            |            |
|Housing                   |5191712      |2695612     |51.92%      |
|Minerals and Energy       |2117585      |1062673     |50.18%      |

Table 2 identifies that the  Department  of  Land  Affairs  was  the  lowest
spending department, spending 27.71% at the end of the second quarter.



Table 2: Lowest spending Departments at the End of the second quarter
Expenditure

|R'000                     |Total Budget |Total       |% Total     |
|                          |             |Expenditure |Expenditure |
|                          |             |to date     |to date     |
|Land Affairs              |3881513      |1075561     |27.71%      |
|Statistics South Africa   |691257       |228785      |33.10%      |
|Sport and Recreation South|203628       |72283       |35.50%      |
|Africa                    |             |            |            |
|Public Service and        |167726       |61210       |36.49%      |
|Administration            |             |            |            |
|Provincial and Local      |15580777     |5979990     |38.38%      |
|Government                |             |            |            |


   Table 3: Overall Expenditure at the end of the second quarter


|R'000                        |Total     |Total       |% Total        |
|                             |Budget    |Expenditure |Expenditure    |
|                             |          |to date     |to date        |
|Voted Amounts                |221405759 |105162886   |47.50%         |
|Central Government           |27593328  |11009271    |39.90%         |
|Administration               |          |            |               |
|The Presidency               |213463    |87614       |41.04%         |
|Parliament                   |677255    |332376      |49.08%         |
|Foreign Affairs              |2595071   |997483      |38.44%         |
|Home Affairs                 |2972711   |1241252     |41.75%         |
|Provincial and Local         |15580777  |5979990     |38.38%         |
|Government                   |          |            |               |
|Public Works                 |5554051   |2370556     |42.68%         |
|Financial and Administrative |15329901  |6856359     |44.73%         |
|Services                     |          |            |               |
|Government Communications and|249130    |108060      |43.37%         |
|Information Services         |          |            |               |
|National Treasury            |13990708  |6349285     |45.38%         |
|Public Enterprises           |91983     |45300       |49.25%         |
|Public Service and           |167726    |61210       |36.49%         |
|Administration               |          |            |               |
|Public Service Commission    |82050     |40120       |48.90%         |
|SA Management Development    |57047     |23599       |41.37%         |
|Institute                    |          |            |               |
|Statistics South Africa      |691257    |228785      |33.10%         |
|Social Services              |81371732  |45167669    |55.51%         |
|Arts and Culture             |1082699   |445885      |41.18%         |
|Education                    |12397064  |9319735     |75.18%         |
|Health                       |9825237   |4608418     |46.90%         |
|Labour                       |1313977   |573754      |43.67%         |
|Social Development           |56549127  |30147594    |53.31%         |
|Sport and Recreation South   |203628    |72283       |35.50%         |
|Africa                       |          |            |               |
|Justice and Protection       |65272095  |28139503    |43.11%         |
|Services                     |          |            |               |
|Correctional Services        |9234085   |3769074     |40.82%         |
|Defence                      |22459432  |9411528     |41.90%         |
|Independent Complaints       |49522     |23839       |48.14%         |
|Directorate                  |          |            |               |
|Justice and Constitutional   |5072061   |2152777     |42.44%         |
|Development                  |          |            |               |
|Safety and Security          |28456995  |12782285    |44.92%         |
|Economic Services and        |31838703  |13990084    |43.94%         |
|Infrastructure Development   |          |            |               |
|Agriculture                  |1684738   |813039      |48.26%         |
|Communications               |1017503   |439624      |43.21%         |
|Environmental Affairs and    |1723111   |895724      |51.98%         |
|Tourism                      |          |            |               |
|Housing                      |5191712   |2695612     |51.92%         |
|Land Affairs                 |3881513   |1075561     |27.71%         |
|Minerals and Energy          |2117585   |1062673     |50.18%         |
|Science and Technology       |1986639   |850527      |42.81%         |
|Trade and Industry           |3076331   |1268513     |41.23%         |
|Transport                    |7602159   |3276244     |43.10%         |
|Water Affairs and Forestry   |3557412   |1612567     |45.33%         |

  Current, Transfer and Capital Expenditure


  Departments were already running behind with  their  capital  and  current
  expenditures.  In this regard, Departments  had  recorded  an  average  of
  43.81%, 50.09% and 29.52% on Current,  Transfer  and  Capital  expenditure
  respectively.


  Current Expenditure

  Table 4: Overall Current Expenditure at the end of the second quarter

|                    |Current    |Current         |% Current        |
|                    |Budget     |Expenditure     |Expenditure      |
|R'000               |           |to date         |to date          |
|Voted Amounts       |71110801   |31151462        |43.81%           |
|Central Government  |7761070    |3745402         |48.26%           |
|Administration      |           |                |                 |
|The Presidency      |188986     |75246           |39.82%           |
|Parliament          |527756     |257628          |48.82%           |
|Foreign Affairs     |2014234    |917537          |45.55%           |
|Home Affairs        |1299059    |642510          |49.46%           |
|Provincial and Local|229018     |109966          |48.02%           |
|Government          |           |                |                 |
|Public Works        |3502017    |1742515         |49.76%           |
|Financial and       |3257125    |1351795         |41.50%           |
|Administrative      |           |                |                 |
|Services            |           |                |                 |
|Government          |170351     |64055           |37.60%           |
|Communications and  |           |                |                 |
|Information Services|           |                |                 |
|National Treasury   |2074879    |931149          |44.88%           |
|Public Enterprises  |72698      |32295           |44.42%           |
|Public Service and  |163971     |60217           |36.72%           |
|Administration      |           |                |                 |
|Public Service      |80138      |39514           |49.31%           |
|Commission          |           |                |                 |
|SA Management       |30996      |9872            |31.85%           |
|Development         |           |                |                 |
|Institute           |           |                |                 |
|Statistics South    |664092     |214693          |32.33%           |
|Africa              |           |                |                 |
|Social Services     |2768390    |1191574         |43.04%           |
|Arts and Culture    |168770     |117373          |69.55%           |
|Education           |463424     |167738          |36.20%           |
|Health              |699810     |278314          |39.77%           |
|Labour              |891039     |409381          |45.94%           |
|Social Development  |432763     |189905          |43.88%           |
|Sport and Recreation|112584     |28863           |25.64%           |
|South Africa        |           |                |                 |
|Justice and         |51437910   |22638460        |44.01%           |
|Protection Services |           |                |                 |
|Correctional        |7858725    |3291199         |41.88%           |
|Services            |           |                |                 |
|Defence             |12837175   |5632954         |43.88%           |
|Independent         |48293      |21116           |43.72%           |
|Complaints          |           |                |                 |
|Directorate         |           |                |                 |
|Justice and         |3949180    |1600662         |40.53%           |
|Constitutional      |           |                |                 |
|Development         |           |                |                 |
|Safety and Security |26744537   |12092529        |45.21%           |
|Economic Services   |5886306    |2224231         |37.79%           |
|and Infrastructure  |           |                |                 |
|Development         |           |                |                 |
|Agriculture         |790689     |253214          |32.02%           |
|Communications      |247141     |116649          |47.20%           |
|Environmental       |481988     |207102          |42.97%           |
|Affairs and Tourism |           |                |                 |
|Housing             |240851     |67977           |28.22%           |
|Land Affairs        |787380     |325896          |41.39%           |
|Minerals and Energy |462700     |171479          |37.06%           |
|Science and         |156607     |60669           |38.74%           |
|Technology          |           |                |                 |
|Trade and Industry  |640454     |236113          |36.87%           |
|Transport           |534675     |162849          |30.46%           |
|Water Affairs and   |1543821    |622283          |40.31%           |
|Forestry            |           |                |                 |

  Table 5 represents  the  departments  with  the  highest  overall  current
  expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


  Table 5: Highest Current Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|                     |Current    |Current         |% Current       |
|                     |Budget     |Expenditure     |Expenditure     |
|R'000                |           |to date         |to date         |
|Arts and Culture     |168770     |117373          |69.55%          |
|Public Works         |3502017    |1742515         |49.76%          |
|Home Affairs         |1299059    |642510          |49.46%          |
|Public Service       |80138      |39514           |49.31%          |
|Commission           |           |                |                |
|Parliament           |527756     |257628          |48.82%          |

  Table 6  represents  the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  current
  expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


  Table 6: Lowest Current Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|                        |Current      |Current        |% Current   |
|                        |Budget       |Expenditure    |Expenditure |
|R'000                   |             |to date        |to date     |
|Sport and Recreation    |112584       |28863          |25.64%      |
|South Africa            |             |               |            |
|Housing                 |240851       |67977          |28.22%      |
|Transport               |534675       |162849         |30.46%      |
|SA Management           |30996        |9872           |31.85%      |
|Development Institute   |             |               |            |
|Agriculture             |790689       |253214         |32.02%      |

  Transfers


Table 7 represents the departments’ overall transfer payments at the end  of
the second quarter.
   Table 7: Overall Transfer Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|R'000                 |Transfer     |Transfer        |% Transfer    |
|                      |Budget       |Expenditure     |Expenditure   |
|                      |             |to date         |to date       |
|Voted Amounts         |144139747    |72194333        |50.09%        |
|Central Government    |17703909     |6894851         |38.95%        |
|Administration        |             |                |              |
|The Presidency        |19222        |11465           |59.65%        |
|Parliament            |97171        |48582           |50.00%        |
|Foreign Affairs       |348927       |56907           |16.31%        |
|Home Affairs          |894215       |470545          |52.62%        |
|Provincial and Local  |15345969     |5867643         |38.24%        |
|Government            |             |                |              |
|Public Works          |998405       |439709          |44.04%        |
|Financial and         |12024632     |5473033         |45.52%        |
|Administrative        |             |                |              |
|Services              |             |                |              |
|Government            |76469        |41799           |54.66%        |
|Communications and    |             |                |              |
|Information Services  |             |                |              |
|National Treasury     |11903138     |5404642         |45.41%        |
|Public Enterprises    |18758        |12829           |68.39%        |
|Public Service and    |361          |157             |43.49%        |
|Administration        |             |                |              |
|Public Service        |183          |0               |0.00%         |
|Commission            |             |                |              |
|SA Management         |24788        |13212           |53.30%        |
|Development Institute |             |                |              |
|Statistics South      |935          |394             |42.14%        |
|Africa                |             |                |              |
|Social Services       |78443732     |43934645        |56.01%        |
|Arts and Culture      |909567       |328508          |36.12%        |
|Education             |11889082     |9144876         |76.92%        |
|Health                |9097514      |4324571         |47.54%        |
|Labour                |350368       |147313          |42.05%        |
|Social Development    |56111169     |29946478        |53.37%        |
|Sport and Recreation  |86032        |42899           |49.86%        |
|South Africa          |             |                |              |
|Justice and Protection|10519254     |4431269         |42.13%        |
|Services              |             |                |              |
|Correctional Services |38124        |54312           |142.46%       |
|Defence               |9357388      |3778574         |40.38%        |
|Independent Complaints|149          |125             |83.89%        |
|Directorate           |             |                |              |
|Justice and           |695622       |420795          |60.49%        |
|Constitutional        |             |                |              |
|Development           |             |                |              |
|Safety and Security   |427971       |177463          |41.47%        |
|Economic Services and |25448220     |11460535        |45.03%        |
|Infrastructure        |             |                |              |
|Development           |             |                |              |
|Agriculture           |864993       |519155          |60.02%        |
|Communications        |763882       |319497          |41.83%        |
|Environmental Affairs |1190330      |666127          |55.96%        |
|and Tourism           |             |                |              |
|Housing               |4947840      |2624893         |53.05%        |
|Land Affairs          |3058267      |742033          |24.26%        |
|Minerals and Energy   |1647942      |890847          |54.06%        |
|Science and Technology|1829227      |789100          |43.14%        |
|Trade and Industry    |2424187      |1029835         |42.48%        |
|Transport             |7057209      |3111702         |44.09%        |
|Water Affairs and     |1664343      |767346          |46.11%        |
|Forestry              |             |                |              |

   Table 8 represents the departments  with  the  highest  overall  transfer
   expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


   Table 8: Highest Transfer Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|R'000                    |Transfer      |Transfer    |% Transfer Expenditure     |
|                         |Budget        |Expenditure |                           |
|                         |              |to date     |to date                    |
|Correctional Services    |38124         |54312       |142.46%                    |
|Independent Complaints   |149           |125         |83.89%                     |
|Directorate              |              |            |                           |
|Education                |11889082      |9144876     |76.92%                     |
|Public Enterprises       |18758         |12829       |68.39%                     |
|Justice and              |695622        |420795      |60.49%                     |
|Constitutional           |              |            |                           |
|Development              |              |            |                           |

   Table 9 represents the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  transfer
   expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


   Table 9: Lowest Transfer Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|R'000                |Transfer     |Transfer        |% Transfer   |
|                     |Budget       |Expenditure     |Expenditure  |
|                     |             |to date         |to date      |
|Public Service       |183          |0               |0.00%        |
|Commission           |             |                |             |
|Foreign Affairs      |348927       |56907           |16.31%       |
|Land Affairs         |3058267      |742033          |24.26%       |
|Arts and Culture     |909567       |328508          |36.12%       |
|Provincial and Local |15345969     |5867643         |38.24%       |
|Government           |             |                |             |

   Capital Expenditure


   Table 10 represents the departments’ overall capital expenditure  at  the
   end of the second quarter.


   Table 10: Overall Transfer Expenditure at the end of the second quarter

|R'000                |Capital Budget|Capital Expenditure|% Capital    |
|                     |              |                   |Expenditure  |
|                     |              |to date            |to date      |
|Voted Amounts        |6155211       |1817091            |29.52%       |
|Central Government   |2128349       |369018             |17.34%       |
|Administration       |              |                   |             |
|The Presidency       |5255          |903                |17.18%       |
|Parliament           |52328         |26166              |50.00%       |
|Foreign Affairs      |231910        |23039              |9.93%        |
|Home Affairs         |779437        |128197             |16.45%       |
|Provincial and Local |5790          |2381               |41.12%       |
|Government           |              |                   |             |
|Public Works         |1053629       |188332             |17.87%       |
|Financial and        |48144         |31531              |65.49%       |
|Administrative       |              |                   |             |
|Services             |              |                   |             |
|Government           |2310          |2206               |95.50%       |
|Communications and   |              |                   |             |
|Information Services |              |                   |             |
|National Treasury    |12691         |13494              |106.33%      |
|Public Enterprises   |527           |176                |33.40%       |
|Public Service and   |3394          |836                |24.63%       |
|Administration       |              |                   |             |
|Public Service       |1729          |606                |35.05%       |
|Commission           |              |                   |             |
|SA Management        |1263          |515                |40.78%       |
|Development Institute|              |                   |             |
|Statistics South     |26230         |13698              |52.22%       |
|Africa               |              |                   |             |
|Social Services      |159610        |41450              |25.97%       |
|Arts and Culture     |4362          |4                  |0.09%        |
|Education            |44558         |7121               |15.98%       |
|Health               |27913         |5533               |19.82%       |
|Labour               |72570         |17060              |23.51%       |
|Social Development   |5195          |11211              |215.80%      |
|Sport and Recreation |5012          |521                |10.40%       |
|South Africa         |              |                   |             |
|Justice and          |3314931       |1069774            |32.27%       |
|Protection Services  |              |                   |             |
|Correctional Services|1337236       |423563             |31.67%       |
|Defence              |264869        |0                  |0.00%        |
|Independent          |1080          |2598               |240.56%      |
|Complaints           |              |                   |             |
|Directorate          |              |                   |             |
|Justice and          |427259        |131320             |30.74%       |
|Constitutional       |              |                   |             |
|Development          |              |                   |             |
|Safety and Security  |1284487       |512293             |39.88%       |
|Economic Services and|504177        |305318             |60.56%       |
|Infrastructure       |              |                   |             |
|Development          |              |                   |             |
|Agriculture          |29056         |40670              |139.97%      |
|Communications       |6480          |3478               |53.67%       |
|Environmental Affairs|50793         |22495              |44.29%       |
|and Tourism          |              |                   |             |
|Housing              |3021          |2742               |90.76%       |
|Land Affairs         |35866         |7632               |21.28%       |
|Minerals and Energy  |6943          |347                |5.00%        |
|Science and          |805           |758                |94.16%       |
|Technology           |              |                   |             |
|Trade and Industry   |11690         |2565               |21.94%       |
|Transport            |10275         |1693               |16.48%       |
|Water Affairs and    |349248        |222938             |63.83%       |
|Forestry             |              |                   |             |

   Table 11 represents the departments  with  the  highest  overall  capital
   expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


   Table 11: Highest Capital Expenditure at the end of the second quarter
|R'000               |Capital    |Capital        |% Capital        |
|                    |Budget     |Expenditure    |Expenditure      |
|                    |           |to date        |to date          |
|Independent         |1080       |2598           |240.56%          |
|Complaints          |           |               |                 |
|Directorate         |           |               |                 |
|Social Development  |5195       |11211          |215.80%          |
|Agriculture         |29056      |40670          |139.97%          |
|National Treasury   |12691      |13494          |106.33%          |
|Government          |2310       |2206           |95.50%           |
|Communications and  |           |               |                 |
|Information Services|           |               |                 |

   Table 12 represents the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  capital
   expenditure at the end of the second quarter.


Table 12: Lowest Capital Expenditure at the end of the second quarter

|R'000                            |Capital    |Capital        |% Capital        |
|                                 |Budget     |Expenditure    |Expenditure      |
|                                 |           |to date        |to date          |
|Defence                          |264869     |0              |0.00%            |
|Arts and Culture                 |4362       |4              |0.09%            |
|Minerals and Energy              |6943       |347            |5.00%            |
|Foreign Affairs                  |231910     |23039          |9.93%            |
|Sport and Recreation South Africa|5012       |521            |10.40%           |

   Part B: Third Quarter Expenditure Report


   The first quarter expenditure report indicated that  departments  started
   the financial year with a low expenditure of 5% in April 2005, increasing
   sharply to 11.13% in May and decreasing to 7% in June 2005. This resulted
   in an overall expenditure of 23.14% at the end of the first  quarter.  At
   the end of the second quarter average departmental expenditure  increased
   to 43.81%. By the end of the third quarter, expenditure increased  to  an
   average of 70.47%.


   Table 13:Overall departments’ expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                |Total Budget  |Total Expenditure  |% Total     |
|                     |              |                   |Expenditure |
|                     |              |to date            |to date     |
|Voted Amounts        |225656770     |159024684          |70.47%      |
|Central Government   |28219765      |18837036           |66.75%      |
|Administration       |              |                   |            |
|The Presidency       |216463        |130166             |60.13%      |
|Parliament           |672412        |511063             |76.00%      |
|Foreign Affairs      |2693766       |1607516            |59.68%      |
|Home Affairs         |3032461       |2140533            |70.59%      |
|Provincial and Local |15960427      |10632235           |66.62%      |
|Government           |              |                   |            |
|Public Works         |5644236       |3815523            |67.60%      |
|Financial and        |15562426      |10181606           |65.42%      |
|Administrative       |              |                   |            |
|Services             |              |                   |            |
|Government           |249130        |167872             |67.38%      |
|Communications and   |              |                   |            |
|Information Services |              |                   |            |
|National Treasury    |14172795      |9326986            |65.81%      |
|Public Enterprises   |92653         |61300              |66.16%      |
|Public Service and   |187271        |111126             |59.34%      |
|Administration       |              |                   |            |
|Public Service       |86106         |62019              |72.03%      |
|Commission           |              |                   |            |
|SA Management        |57047         |37229              |65.26%      |
|Development Institute|              |                   |            |
|Statistics South     |717424        |415074             |57.86%      |
|Africa               |              |                   |            |
|Social Services      |82081554      |65230686           |79.47%      |
|Arts and Culture     |1108944       |690374             |62.26%      |
|Education            |12613190      |11489262           |91.09%      |
|Health               |9952861       |7088117            |71.22%      |
|Labour               |1308738       |853933             |65.25%      |
|Social Development   |56640033      |44996060           |79.44%      |
|Sport and Recreation |457788        |112940             |24.67%      |
|South Africa         |              |                   |            |
|Justice and          |65710461      |42901177           |65.29%      |
|Protection Services  |              |                   |            |
|Correctional Services|9324220       |5877445            |63.03%      |
|Defence              |22670482      |13523590           |59.65%      |
|Independent          |49522         |36231              |73.16%      |
|Complaints           |              |                   |            |
|Directorate          |              |                   |            |
|Justice and          |5185733       |3264965            |62.96%      |
|Constitutional       |              |                   |            |
|Development          |              |                   |            |
|Safety and Security  |28480504      |20198946           |70.92%      |
|Economic Services and|34082564      |21874179           |64.18%      |
|Infrastructure       |              |                   |            |
|Development          |              |                   |            |
|Agriculture          |1967768       |1186745            |60.31%      |
|Communications       |1031683       |624408             |60.52%      |
|Environmental Affairs|1753307       |1290751            |73.62%      |
|and Tourism          |              |                   |            |
|Housing              |5265672       |4111809            |78.09%      |
|Land Affairs         |3897117       |1782509            |45.74%      |
|Minerals and Energy  |2252371       |1565809            |69.52%      |
|Science and          |2041936       |1518930            |74.39%      |
|Technology           |              |                   |            |
|Trade and Industry   |3907420       |2409993            |61.68%      |
|Transport            |8029654       |4899222            |61.01%      |
|Water Affairs and    |3935636       |2484003            |63.12%      |
|Forestry             |              |                   |            |

   The Department of Education was the highest spending  department  at  the
   end of the third quarter, with a  recorded  expenditure  of  91.09%.  The
   department with the second highest expenditure at the end  of  the  third
   quarter is the Department of Social Development.


   Table 14:Higest spending departments at the end of the third quarter
   expenditure

|R'000                      |Total Budget   |Total        |% Total       |
|                           |               |Expenditure  |Expenditure   |
|                           |               |to date      |to date       |
|Education                  |12613190       |11489262     |91.09%        |
|Social Development         |56640033       |44996060     |79.44%        |
|Housing                    |5265672        |4111809      |78.09%        |
|Parliament                 |672412         |511063       |76.00%        |
|Science and Technology     |2041936        |1518930      |74.39%        |

   Sport and Recreation South Africa was the lowest spending  department  at
   the end of the third quarter, with  a  recorded  expenditure  of  24.67%.
   However, departments have  generally  spent  a  large  portion  of  their
   budgets.


   Table 15: Lowest spending departments at the end  of  the  third  quarter
   expenditure
|R'000                     |Total Budget|Total        |% Total      |
|                          |            |Expenditure  |Expenditure  |
|                          |            |to date      |to date      |
|Sport and Recreation South|457788      |112940       |24.67%       |
|Africa                    |            |             |             |
|Land Affairs              |3897117     |1782509      |45.74%       |
|Statistics South Africa   |717424      |415074       |57.86%       |
|Public Service and        |187271      |111126       |59.34%       |
|Administration            |            |             |             |
|Defence                   |22670482    |13523590     |59.65%       |

   Current, Transfer and Capital Expenditure


   Departments spent an average of 67.77%, 72.49%  and  54.33%  in  Current,
   Transfer  and  Capital  expenditure  respectively.   The  slow  trend  of
   spending on capital expenditure is similar to that of previous  financial
   years.


   Current Expenditure


   Table 16 represents the departments’ overall current expenditure  at  the
   end of the third quarter.


   Table 16: Overall Current Expenditure at the end of the third quarter

|                     |Current    |Current         |% Current       |
|                     |Budget     |Expenditure     |Expenditure     |
|R'000                |           |to date         |to date         |
|Voted Amounts        |71840748   |48689761        |67.77%          |
|Central Government   |8147126    |5833336         |71.60%          |
|Administration       |           |                |                |
|The Presidency       |186881     |113122          |60.53%          |
|Parliament           |556929     |398941          |71.63%          |
|Foreign Affairs      |2089476    |1392068         |66.62%          |
|Home Affairs         |1451093    |1076761         |74.20%          |
|Provincial and Local |248939     |177571          |71.33%          |
|Government           |           |                |                |
|Public Works         |3613808    |2674873         |74.02%          |
|Financial and        |3193449    |2077458         |65.05%          |
|Administrative       |           |                |                |
|Services             |           |                |                |
|Government           |167409     |104548          |62.45%          |
|Communications and   |           |                |                |
|Information Services |           |                |                |
|National Treasury    |1974940    |1350405         |68.38%          |
|Public Enterprises   |75586      |48114           |63.65%          |
|Public Service and   |182624     |105192          |57.60%          |
|Administration       |           |                |                |
|Public Service       |84175      |60930           |72.38%          |
|Commission           |           |                |                |
|SA Management        |29806      |17204           |57.72%          |
|Development Institute|           |                |                |
|Statistics South     |678909     |391065          |57.60%          |
|Africa               |           |                |                |
|Social Services      |2940682    |1934069         |65.77%          |
|Arts and Culture     |171506     |182691          |106.52%         |
|Education            |508856     |255949          |50.30%          |
|Health               |714706     |416115          |58.22%          |
|Labour               |952341     |599563          |62.96%          |
|Social Development   |469469     |430013          |91.60%          |
|Sport and Recreation |123804     |49738           |40.17%          |
|South Africa         |           |                |                |
|Justice and          |51326059   |35317270        |68.81%          |
|Protection Services  |           |                |                |
|Correctional Services|7873216    |5071712         |64.42%          |
|Defence              |12760614   |8916338         |69.87%          |
|Independent          |46989      |33088           |70.42%          |
|Complaints           |           |                |                |
|Directorate          |           |                |                |
|Justice and          |4017696    |2501407         |62.26%          |
|Constitutional       |           |                |                |
|Development          |           |                |                |
|Safety and Security  |26627544   |18794725        |70.58%          |
|                     |           |                |                |
|Economic Services and|6233432    |3527628         |56.59%          |
|Infrastructure       |           |                |                |
|Development          |           |                |                |
|Agriculture          |777553     |401873          |51.68%          |
|Communications       |278601     |177759          |63.80%          |
|Environmental Affairs|495988     |296144          |59.71%          |
|and Tourism          |           |                |                |
|Housing              |242875     |112531          |46.33%          |
|Land Affairs         |829459     |507465          |61.18%          |
|Minerals and Energy  |481114     |265459          |55.18%          |
|Science and          |161637     |127336          |78.78%          |
|Technology           |           |                |                |
|Trade and Industry   |695053     |388271          |55.86%          |
|Transport            |567696     |280077          |49.34%          |
|Water Affairs and    |1703456    |970713          |56.98%          |
|Forestry             |           |                |                |

   Table 17 represents the departments  with  the  highest  overall  current
   expenditure at the end of the third quarter.


   Table 17: Highest Current Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|                     |Current    |Current         |% Current        |
|                     |Budget     |Expenditure     |Expenditure      |
|R'000                |           |to date         |to date          |
|Arts and Culture     |171506     |182691          |106.52%          |
|Social Development   |469469     |430013          |91.60%           |
|Science and          |161637     |127336          |78.78%           |
|Technology           |           |                |                 |
|Home Affairs         |1451093    |1076761         |74.20%           |
|Public Works         |3613808    |2674873         |74.02%           |

   Table 18 represents the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  current
   expenditure at the end of the third quarter.


   Table 18: Lowest Current Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|                   |Current    |Current         |% Current        |
|                   |Budget     |Expenditure     |Expenditure      |
|R'000              |           |to date         |to date          |
|Sport and          |123804     |49738           |40.17%           |
|Recreation South   |           |                |                 |
|Africa             |           |                |                 |
|Housing            |242875     |112531          |46.33%           |
|Transport          |567696     |280077          |49.34%           |
|Education          |508856     |255949          |50.30%           |
|Agriculture        |777553     |401873          |51.68%           |

   Transfers


   Table 19 represents the departments’ overall transfer expenditure at  the
   end of the third quarter.


   Table 19: Overall Transfer Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                   |Transfer     |Transfer        |% Transfer    |
|                        |Budget       |Expenditure     |Expenditure   |
|                        |             |to date         |to date       |
|Voted Amounts           |147416790    |106858531       |72.49%        |
|Central Government      |18133241     |12205318        |67.31%        |
|Administration          |             |                |              |
|The Presidency          |25827        |15078           |58.38%        |
|Parliament              |96826        |72873           |75.26%        |
|Foreign Affairs         |373013       |164569          |44.12%        |
|Home Affairs            |955958       |765277          |80.05%        |
|Provincial and Local    |15705000     |10451571        |66.55%        |
|Government              |             |                |              |
|Public Works            |976617       |735950          |75.36%        |
|Financial and           |12295839     |8049456         |65.46%        |
|Administrative Services |             |                |              |
|Government              |76539        |59170           |77.31%        |
|Communications and      |             |                |              |
|Information Services    |             |                |              |
|National Treasury       |12176094     |7956839         |65.35%        |
|Public Enterprises      |16540        |12876           |77.85%        |
|Public Service and      |419          |291             |69.45%        |
|Administration          |             |                |              |
|Public Service          |202          |1               |0.50%         |
|Commission              |             |                |              |
|SA Management           |24785        |19509           |78.71%        |
|Development Institute   |             |                |              |
|Statistics South Africa |1260         |770             |61.11%        |
|Social Services         |79048273     |63246775        |80.01%        |
|Arts and Culture        |933076       |507608          |54.40%        |
|Education               |12090008     |11225504        |92.85%        |
|Health                  |9200577      |6663339         |72.42%        |
|Labour                  |341671       |245288          |71.79%        |
|Social Development      |56153969     |44542436        |79.32%        |
|Sport and Recreation    |328972       |62600           |19.03%        |
|South Africa            |             |                |              |
|Justice and Protection  |10809492     |5493184         |50.82%        |
|Services                |             |                |              |
|Correctional Services   |39205        |59272           |151.18%       |
|Defence                 |9644999      |4607252         |47.77%        |
|Independent Complaints  |149          |68              |45.64%        |
|Directorate             |             |                |              |
|Justice and             |697133       |545991          |78.32%        |
|Constitutional          |             |                |              |
|Development             |             |                |              |
|Safety and Security     |428006       |280601          |65.56%        |
|Economic Services and   |27129945     |17863798        |65.85%        |
|Infrastructure          |             |                |              |
|Development             |             |                |              |
|Agriculture             |1145546      |714038          |62.33%        |
|Communications          |746382       |439192          |58.84%        |
|Environmental Affairs   |1201240      |959681          |79.89%        |
|and Tourism             |             |                |              |
|Housing                 |5017836      |3995084         |79.62%        |
|Land Affairs            |2991888      |1261268         |42.16%        |
|Minerals and Energy     |1764314      |1299216         |73.64%        |
|Science and Technology  |1879494      |1390090         |73.96%        |
|Trade and Industry      |3194666      |2018635         |63.19%        |
|Transport               |7447470      |4616632         |61.99%        |
|Water Affairs and       |1741109      |1169962         |67.20%        |
|Forestry                |             |                |              |

   Table 20 represents the departments with  the  highest  overall  transfer
   expenditure at the end of the third quarter.


   Table 20: Highest Transfer Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                 |Transfer      |Transfer      |% Transfer   |
|                      |Budget        |Expenditure   |Expenditure  |
|                      |              |to date       |to date      |
|Correctional Services |39205         |59272         |151.18%      |
|Education             |12090008      |11225504      |92.85%       |
|Home Affairs          |955958        |765277        |80.05%       |
|Environmental Affairs |1201240       |959681        |79.89%       |
|and Tourism           |              |              |             |
|Housing               |5017836       |3995084       |79.62%       |

Table 21  represents  the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  transfer
expenditure at the end of the third quarter.

Table 21: Lowest Transfer Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                       |Transfer   |Transfer         |% Transfer |
|                            |Budget     |Expenditure      |Expenditure|
|                            |           |to date          |to date    |
|Public Service Commission   |202        |1                |0.50%      |
|Sport and Recreation South  |328972     |62600            |19.03%     |
|Africa                      |           |                 |           |
|Land Affairs                |2991888    |1261268          |42.16%     |
|Foreign Affairs             |373013     |164569           |44.12%     |
|Independent Complaints      |149        |68               |45.64%     |
|Directorate                 |           |                 |           |

Capital Expenditure

Table 22 represents the departments’ overall capital expenditure at the  end
of the third quarter.

Table 22: Overall Capital Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000           |Capital      |Capital           |% Capital         |
|                |Budget       |Expenditure       |Expenditure       |
|                |             |to date           |to date           |
|Voted Amounts   |6399232      |3476392           |54.33%            |
|Central         |1939398      |798382            |41.17%            |
|Government      |             |                  |                  |
|Administration  |             |                  |                  |
|The Presidency  |3755         |1966              |52.36%            |
|Parliament      |18657        |39249             |210.37%           |
|Foreign Affairs |231277       |50879             |22.00%            |
|Home Affairs    |625410       |298495            |47.73%            |
|Provincial and  |6488         |3093              |47.67%            |
|Local Government|             |                  |                  |
|Public Works    |1053811      |404700            |38.40%            |
|Financial and   |73138        |54692             |74.78%            |
|Administrative  |             |                  |                  |
|Services        |             |                  |                  |
|Government      |5182         |4154              |80.16%            |
|Communications  |             |                  |                  |
|and Information |             |                  |                  |
|Services        |             |                  |                  |
|National        |21761        |19742             |90.72%            |
|Treasury        |             |                  |                  |
|Public          |527          |310               |58.82%            |
|Enterprises     |             |                  |                  |
|Public Service  |4228         |5643              |133.47%           |
|and             |             |                  |                  |
|Administration  |             |                  |                  |
|Public Service  |1729         |1088              |62.93%            |
|Commission      |             |                  |                  |
|SA Management   |2456         |516               |21.01%            |
|Development     |             |                  |                  |
|Institute       |             |                  |                  |
|Statistics South|37255        |23239             |62.38%            |
|Africa          |             |                  |                  |
|Social Services |92599        |49842             |53.83%            |
|Arts and Culture|4362         |75                |1.72%             |
|Education       |14326        |7809              |54.51%            |
|Health          |37578        |8663              |23.05%            |
|Labour          |14726        |9082              |61.67%            |
|Social          |16595        |23611             |142.28%           |
|Development     |             |                  |                  |
|Sport and       |5012         |602               |12.01%            |
|Recreation South|             |                  |                  |
|Africa          |             |                  |                  |
|Justice and     |3574910      |2090723           |58.48%            |
|Protection      |             |                  |                  |
|Services        |             |                  |                  |
|Correctional    |1411799      |746461            |52.87%            |
|Services        |             |                  |                  |
|Defence         |264869       |0                 |0.00%             |
|Independent     |2384         |3075              |128.98%           |
|Complaints      |             |                  |                  |
|Directorate     |             |                  |                  |
|Justice and     |470904       |217567            |46.20%            |
|Constitutional  |             |                  |                  |
|Development     |             |                  |                  |
|Safety and      |1424954      |1123620           |78.85%            |
|Security        |             |                  |                  |
|Economic        |719187       |482753            |67.12%            |
|Services and    |             |                  |                  |
|Infrastructure  |             |                  |                  |
|Development     |             |                  |                  |
|Agriculture     |44669        |70834             |158.58%           |
|Communications  |6700         |7457              |111.30%           |
|Environmental   |56079        |34926             |62.28%            |
|Affairs and     |             |                  |                  |
|Tourism         |             |                  |                  |
|Housing         |4961         |4194              |84.54%            |
|Land Affairs    |75770        |13776             |18.18%            |
|Minerals and    |6943         |1134              |16.33%            |
|Energy          |             |                  |                  |
|Science and     |805          |1504              |186.83%           |
|Technology      |             |                  |                  |
|Trade and       |17701        |3087              |17.44%            |
|Industry        |             |                  |                  |
|Transport       |14488        |2513              |17.35%            |
|Water Affairs   |491071       |343328            |69.91%            |
|and Forestry    |             |                  |                  |

Table 23  represents  the  departments  with  the  highest  overall  capital
expenditure at the end of the third quarter.

Table 23: Highest Capital Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                           |Capital    |Capital        |% Capital       |
|                                |Budget     |Expenditure    |Expenditure     |
|                                |           |to date        |to date         |
|Parliament                      |18657      |39249          |210.37%         |
|Science and Technology          |805        |1504           |186.83%         |
|Agriculture                     |44669      |70834          |158.58%         |
|Social Development              |16595      |23611          |142.28%         |
|Public Service and              |4228       |5643           |133.47%         |
|Administration                  |           |               |                |

Table  24  represents  the  departments  with  the  lowest  overall  capital
expenditure at the end of the third quarter.

Table 24: Highest Capital Expenditure at the end of the third quarter
|R'000                           |Capital    |Capital        |% Capital        |
|                                |Budget     |Expenditure    |Expenditure      |
|                                |           |to date        |to date          |
|Defence                         |264869     |0              |0.00%            |
|Arts and Culture                |4362       |75             |1.72%            |
|Sport and Recreation South      |5012       |602            |12.01%           |
|Africa                          |           |               |                 |
|Minerals and Energy             |6943       |1134           |16.33%           |
|Transport                       |14488      |2513           |17.35%           |

Conclusion

Departments had spent a significant portion of their budgets at the  end  of
the third quarter.  However, the research unit had not been able to  contact
departments regarding their expenditure trends due to time constraints.

Sources

    • Statement of National and Provincial Governments’ revenue, expenditure
      and National borrowing as at 30 September 2005; National Treasury.
    • Statement of National and Provincial Governments’ revenue, expenditure
      and National borrowing as at 31 December 2005; National Treasury.

Report to be considered.

2.    Annual Report of the Joint Budget Committee, dated 28 March 2006:

                  FOR THE PERIOD JANUARY TO DECEMBER 2005,
                             DATED 24 MARCH 2006

   1. Name of the Committee: Joint Budget Committee (JBC)

      Co-Chairpersons: Ms L L Mabe, MP (NA) and Mr B J  Mkhaliphi, MP (NCOP)


      Committee Secretary: Mr K Dlamini


   2. Co-Chairpersons’ overview:


      During the year under review, the Committee continued implementing its
      mandate. A major milestone reached during the year was the Committee’s
      adoption of its strategic plan which incorporates a report envisaged
      in item 9 of its Terms of Reference.


      Challenges persisted. To gain a clear picture of progress made, the
      Committee will have to embark on a strategic session in order to
      appreciate the extent of work done in comparison with its long term
      programme. Challenges that are being encountered include, amongst
      other things:
      - the absence of dedicated members to this Committee
      - the frequent restructuring of Committees which brings about change
        in this Committee
      - the description of this Committee as a Joint Budget Committee as it
        creates an impression that it operates like any other joint
        committee yet its mandate is complex and elaborate.


      Amongst the things that the Committee has realised during the year is
      the strengthening of co-ordination with other Committees, like the two
      sectoral Committees on Finance. Deliberations with these Committees
      gave the Joint Budget Committee insight with relation to the
      functioning of the economy and fiscal monitoring exercise.


      Another challenge with regard to resources is the absence of a
      dedicated researcher. As a Committee which is still in a developmental
      stage and whose mandate is so complex, it is imperative that we are
      provided with a dedicated researcher.


   3. Vision and mission of the Committee

   3.1 Mandate


      The JBC’s mandate is found in its Terms of Reference  as  resolved  by
      both Houses of Parliament on 25 June 2004. The resolution  established
      the  Committee to:


      (1) consider  proposed  allocations  in  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure
      Framework and the Appropriation Bill and whether these allocations are
      broadly in keeping with the policy directions of the Government;


      (2) make proposals regarding the processes  Parliament  should  follow
      with regard to its role in the developing  of  budgets  in  accordance
      with constitutional requirements;


      (3) on a regular basis monitor monthly published  actual  revenue  and
      expenditure per department, and to ascertain whether they are in  line
      with budget projections;


      (4) consider, when tabled, the Medium-Term  Budget  Policy  Statement,
      with the exception of those sections dealing  with  the  macroeconomic
      situation and revenue;


      (5) conduct hearings on  the  Medium-Term  Expenditure  Framework  and
      Budget Policy Review Document, with the exception  of  those  sections
      dealing with the macroeconomic situation and revenue;


      (6) exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that may assist in carrying
      out its functions;


      (7) report—
        a) on the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement regarding the matters


           referred to in paragraph 5;  and  (b)  quarterly  regarding  the
        matters referred to in
           paragraph 4; and


      (8) consider and make proposals regarding the nature of its  functions
      relative to those of other committees in respect of the budget process
      and conducting oversight, the Committee to report thereon from time to
      time as may be necessary and to submit a final  report  by  not  later
      than the end of the next budget cycle in Parliament.


      The Committee’s vision and mission are incorporated in its strategic
      plan adopted by the Committee on 22 June 2005 and ultimately by
      Parliament on 16 November 2005.


   3.2 Vision

      The JBC’s vision is that of having an effective role in budget
      management, facilitating improved spending outcomes in terms of:
        i) aligning spending outcomes with government priorities; and
       ii) ensuring value for money.


   3.3 Mission

      The Joint Budget Committee’s mission is to practise effective
      oversight over state spending on consolidated budget.

   4. List of public entities over which the committee exercises oversight


      The Committee monitors monthly expenditure by all government
      departments and reports to Parliament quarterly.

   5.  Number of meetings held and cancelled


      No of meetings held: 31
      (Thirteen of the above meetings were held jointly with the Finance
      Committees and one with the Focus Group on Money Bills)


      No of meetings cancelled: 9
      (Of the above called meetings, four were cancelled because attendance
      was very poor [less than four members]).


      Generally, attendance of meetings is very poor, especially when the
      Committee is meeting separately from the Finance Committees.


   6. Legislation referred to the committee (Finalised and not finalised):
      indicate the following:-


      None

   7. Papers (International Agreements, Protocols, Reports etc) referred to
      the Committee: indicate the following:-

|Paper/ Report|Referral  |Adoption   |ATC          |Debate Date |Debate   |
|             |Date      |Date of    |publication  |in NA       |Date in  |
|             |          |Committee  |Date         |            |NCOP     |
|             |          |Report     |             |            |         |
|Expenditure  |31 /01/   |22 /06/    |03 /08/ 2005 |16 /11/ 2005|14 /09/  |
|Statements   |2005      |2005       |             |            |2005     |
|for the third|          |           |             |            |         |
|quarter of   |          |           |             |            |         |
|2004/5       |          |           |             |            |         |
|financial    |          |           |             |            |         |
|year         |          |           |             |            |         |
|(October,    |          |           |             |            |         |
|November and |          |           |             |            |         |
|December     |          |           |             |            |         |
|2004)        |          |           |             |            |         |
|             |          |           |             |            |         |
|Expenditure  |30 /04/   |22 /06/    |03 /08/ 2005 |16 /11/ 2005|14 /09/  |
|Statements   |2005      |2005       |             |            |2005     |
|for the      |          |           |             |            |         |
|fourth       |          |           |             |            |         |
|quarter of   |          |           |             |            |         |
|2004/5       |          |           |             |            |         |
|financial    |          |           |             |            |         |
|year         |          |           |             |            |         |
|(January,    |          |           |             |            |         |
|February and |          |           |             |            |         |
|March 2005)  |          |           |             |            |         |
|Expenditure  |31 /07/   |31 /08/    |15 /09/ 2005 |16 / 11/    |Pending  |
|Statements   |2005      |2005       |             |2005        |         |
|for the first|          |           |             |            |         |
|quarter of   |          |           |             |            |         |
|2005/6       |          |           |             |            |         |
|financial    |          |           |             |            |         |
|year (April, |          |           |             |            |         |
|May and June |          |           |             |            |         |
|2005)        |          |           |             |            |         |
|Medium-Term  |31 /10/   |11 /11/    |14 /11/ 2005 |15 /11/ 2005|16 /11/  |
|Budget Policy|2005      |2005       |             |            |2005     |
|Statement    |          |           |             |            |         |
|(MTBPS) 2005)|          |           |             |            |         |
|Submission of|06 /05/   |Committee  |             |            |         |
|the Financial|2005      |not        |             |            |         |
|and Fiscal   |          |required to|             |            |         |
|Commission on|          |report     |             |            |         |
|the  Division|          |           |             |            |         |
|of Revenue   |          |           |             |            |         |
|for 2006-2007|          |           |             |            |         |

   8. Local oversight visits


      The Committee did not undertake any oversight visits but Messrs
      Mkhaliphi and Nene attended three meetings of the Budget Council
      during the year, two in Pretoria  and one in Mpumalanga.


      It is by convention that Chairpersons of the Budget and Finance
      Committees attend the meetings of the Budget Council as observers.

      The Budget Council consists of the Minister of Finance, the MECs of
      Finance and National and Provincial Treasuries. Its main function is
      to co-ordinate the different interests of national and provincial
      governments and to make sure that agreement is reached on how to share
      revenue.

      These meetings assist in providing the Co-Chairpersons with insight
      into the discussions and activities taking place during the budget
      preparation phase. Such insight then translates into proper guidance
      and direction of the whole Committee when the budget is tabled in
      Parliament and referred to the Committee.

   9. International Visits:


      The Committee did not undertake any visits during the period covered
      by the Report. However, it is the Committee’s intention to undertake
      an international study tour of a country where the Budget Committee
      has been fully operational for a long time.

     At the request of the Speaker and the Chairperson of the NCOP the Co-
     Chairpersons met with the following international delegations which
     visited Parliament:

    - Speaker of the Zimbabwean Parliament
    - Speaker of Cote d’Ivoire
    - United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and National
      Institute of Public Finance


  10. Budget Vote

      There was not a budget vote officially referred to the Committee.
      However, the Committee deployed some of its members to attend various
      Portfolio Committees’ hearings on departmental budget votes. The
      Committee is yet to develop a work method for interacting with
      sectoral committees when dealing with budget votes.

  11. Annual reports of the Executive (30 September)


      In exercising its monitoring function over departmental expenditure,
      the Committee does refer to the contents of various annual reports
      although such reports are not officially referred to the Committee.


       12. Other committee activities (briefings on other issues,
           workshops, conferences)


      12.1 Workshops


      The Committee held two workshops as an ongoing exercise of
      unpacking its Terms of Reference.
      12.1.1


      The first workshop was held in Parliament in February. Out of the
      workshop a new internal discussion document was produced.


      12.1.2


      The second one was held in Gordon’s Bay in May. A report,
      incorporating the Committee’s strategic plan as well as a report
      envisaged in item 9 of the Terms of Reference, was produced and tabled
      in Parliament.


                • Consideration date by the committee – 22 June 2005
                • Report publication (ATC date) – 14 November 2005
                • Debate in the House – NCOP: 14 September 2005
                                         NA: 16 November 2005


      12.2 Hearings


      Hearings were held on the following:

      12.2.1 Provincial expenditure
      Hearings on Provincial expenditure were held jointly with the Select
      Committee on Finance on 18 and 21 February 2005. The following
      institutions and individuals appeared before the Committees:


      ➢ Pandor, Ms N (MP): Minister of Education
      ➢ National Department of Education
      ➢ KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education
      ➢ National Department of Housing
      ➢ KwaZulu-Natal Department of Housing
      ➢ National Department of Health
      ➢ Eastern Cape Department of Health
      ➢ Gauteng Department of Health
      ➢ KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health
      ➢ Limpopo Department of Health
      ➢ National Treasury


      Report on hearings was tabled by the Select Committee on Finance.


      12.2.2 Budget for 2005-06


      The Committee sat jointly with Finance Portfolio and Select Committees
      during the hearings on the 2005-06 budget from 25 February to 04 March
      2005. The following institutions and individuals appeared before the
      Committee:
         ➢ Manuel, Mr T (MP): Minister of Finance
         ➢ National Treasury
         ➢ South African Revenue Services (SARS)
         ➢ South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA)
         ➢ Business Unity of South Africa (BUSA)
         ➢ Chambers of Commerce and Industry South Africa (CHAMSA)
         ➢ Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA)
         ➢ Ballim, Mr G: Chief Economist – Standard Bank
         ➢ Nhlapo-Hlophe, Ms J: Human Development Policy Analyst
         ➢ Twine, Mr T: Director and senior economist: Econometrix (Pty)
           LTD
         ➢ Kosch, Prof, S: Tax expert – University of Pretoria


      Report on hearings was tabled by the Finance Committees.


      12.2.3 Appropriation Bill


      The Appropriation Bill was, amongst other Committees, referred to the
      JBC on 23 February 2005 and in line with its mandate, the Joint Budget
      Committee held its own hearings on the Bill on 23 May 2005:
      The following Departments appeared:


          ➢ Agriculture and Land Affairs
          ➢ Health
          ➢ Public Works

      The Committee adopted its report on 22 June 2005 and it was
      published in the ATC on 3 August 2005. It was debated in the NCOP
      and NA on 14 September 2005 and 16 November 2005, respectively.

      12.2.4 Expenditure Reports

      The Committee, having identified irregular spending patterns, called
      the Department of Communications for a hearing on 22 June 2005. The
      Committee compiled a Report on the hearings and adopted it on 31
      August 2005 and it appeared in the ATC on 15 September 2005. The
      Report was considered and adopted by the NA on 16 November 2005 and is
      due to be considered by the NCOP.


      12.2.5 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS)


      The MTBPS was tabled in Parliament by the Minister of Finance on 25
      October 2005 and was referred to, amongst other committees, the JBC
      for consideration in line with its mandate.


      The MTBPS is aimed at providing a pre-budget view on the macroeconomic
      context, assumptions and projections underlying the Budget, the medium-
      term fiscal policy  framework,  and  the  main  divisions  of  revenue
      between functions and spheres of government.


      Having been briefed by the Minister of Finance (Mr  T  A  Manuel)  and
      National Treasury, the JBC held hearings on the MTBPS from 27  October
      to and 02 November 2005 and adopted its report  to  Parliament  on  11
      November 2005.(See table under par 7).


      The  following  Departments,  institutions  and  individuals  appeared
      before the Committee and made presentations:


      A. DEPARTMENTS
          ➢ Department of Agriculture
          ➢ Department of Communications (Minister I Matsepe-Cassaburi)
          ➢ Department of Correctional Services
          ➢ Department of Defence
          ➢ Department of Education
          ➢ Department of Health
          ➢ Department of Home Affairs
          ➢ Department of Housing
          ➢ Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
          ➢ Department of Land Affairs
          ➢ Department of Provincial and Local Government
          ➢ Department of Public Works
          ➢ Department of Safety and Security
          ➢ Department of Social Development
          ➢ Department of Trade and Industry
          ➢ Department of Transport
          ➢ Department of Water Affairs and Forestry

      B. OTHER INSTITUTIONS


         ➢ BUSA
         ➢ FEDUSA
         ➢ NAFU
         ➢ People’s Budget
         ➢ SALGA


      C. INDIVIDUALS


         ➢ Mr C Mlatsheni
         ➢ Ms N King-Conradie
         ➢ Ms N Moola


      D. WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS (no oral presentations)


         ➢ Idasa
         ➢ Institute for Security Studies


  13. Budget of the committee


   Amount allocated for 2004-05 =                  R333 532
      Less: Total Expenditure     =                R166 425
                                             ---------------------------
         - Catering                 =              R12 379
         - Provincial Visits        =             R60 817
         - Public Hearings     =             R58 625
          - Workshops          =             R31 104
          - Research (MTBPS)   =             R 3 500
                                        --------------------
     Less: Transfer to Consolidated Fund      R 79 103
          Transfer to Staff Travel                 R 10 100
                                   ----------------------------
   Balance (as at 02 December 2005)          R 77 904

  14. Outstanding matters:
      Committee reports on Expenditure Statements for the second and third
      quarters of 2005-06 financial year (July, August, September October,
      November and December 2005).


                • Referral date – 30 August 2005
                • Consideration date by the committee – Outstanding


  15. Support Staff


           Control Committee Secretary: Mr L Pakati

            Committee Secretary: Mr K Dlamini

           Committee Assistant: Mr B Viljoen


            Secretary to Co-Chairperson (NA):  Ms Z Vice

            Secretary to Co-Chairperson (NCOP):  Ms Z Mkutukana

            Researcher (Research Unit): Ms B Diutlwileng (until
            10 October 2005)

            Report to be considered.


                           THURSDAY, 20 APRIL 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

    (1)     Electronic Communications Bill [B 9B – 2005] – Act No 36 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 11 April 2006).
      2) Precious Metals Bill [B 30D – 2005] – Act No 37 of 2005 (assented
         to and signed by President on 15 April 2006).


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     Tobacco Products Control Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
         Minister of Health on 4 April 2006.


            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Health and the Select
         Committee on Social Services.


    (2)     Deeds Registries Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
         Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs on 9 April 2006.
            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
         Affairs and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs.


      3) Corporate Laws Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of
         Trade and Industry on 5 April 2006.


            Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry and
         the Select Committee on Economic and Foreign Affairs.


3.    Membership of Committees


      1) The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
         Committees, viz:


         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women:
         Appointed: Mdaka, Ms N M


         Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children,  Youth  and
        Disabled
         Persons:
         Appointed: Mdaka, Ms N M


                          WEDNESDAY, 26 APRIL 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs and the Joint Standing
        Committee on Defence:

          a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 17
             March 2006 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
             Provinces informing Members of the Council of the employment
             of the South African National Defence Force in the Union of
             Comores.


    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

          a) Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD)
             for 2006-2009 [RP 28-2006].

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs:


          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Uganda on Police
             Cooperation, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs:

          a) General Notice No 381 published in Government Gazette No 28591
             dated 7 March 2006: Invitation to interested persons to submit
             names for vacancies on the Board of South African Tourism, in
             terms of the Tourism Act, 1993 (Act No 72 of 1993).

          b) Government Notice No 223 published in Government Gazette No
             28618 dated 10 March 2006: Amendment of fees payable for the
             use of fishing harbour facilities (fishing harbour fees), in
             terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of
             1998).


          c) Government Notice No 231 published in Government Gazette No
             28620 dated 14 March 2006: Invitation to interested persons to
             submit names to fill vacancies on the Board of South African
             Weather, in terms of the South African Weather Service Act,
             2001 (Act No 8 of 2001).


          d) Government Notice No 232 published in Government Gazette No
             28620 dated 14 March 2006: Invitation to interested persons to
             submit names to fill vacancies on the Board of South African
             National Biodiversity Institute (SANBI), in terms of the
             National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2001 (Act
             No 10 of 2004).


          e) General Notice No 425 published in Government Gazette No 28636
             dated 20 March 2006: Draft policy on the Allocation of White
             Shark Cage Diving Permits and the Management of White Shark
             Cage Diving Industry for Public Comment, in terms of the Marine
             Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).

    (5)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        (a)      Government Notice No 298 published in Government Gazette
             No 28582 dated 3 March 2006: Karoo National Park: Exclusion of
             Land, in terms of the National Environmental Management:
             Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act No 57 of 2003).

    (6)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Bloem Water for the
             year ended June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended June
             2005.

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report on withholding of remuneration of Magistrate M S
             Makamu, a magistrate at Benoni, in terms of section 13(4A)(b)
             of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security
    (a)     Proclamation No R.4 published in Government Gazette No 28533
        dated 20 February 2006: Notification by President in respect of
        entities identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms
        of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
        Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    (b)     Proclamation No R.6 published in Government Gazette No 28544
        dated 24 February 2006: Notification by President in respect of
        entities identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms
        of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
        Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    (c)     Proclamation No R.9 published in Government Gazette No 28611
        dated 10 March 2006: Notification by President in respect of
        entities identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms
        of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
        Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    (d)     Proclamation No R.13 published in Government Gazette No 28648
        dated 22 March 2006: Notification by President in respect of
        entities identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms
        of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
        Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    (e)     Proclamation No R.14 published in Government Gazette No 28649
        dated 22 March 2006: Notification by President in respect of
        entities identified by the United Nations Security Council in terms
        of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and
        Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


    (a)     United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization
        (UNESCO) Convention Against Doping in Sport, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 106 of 1996).


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the United Nations Education,
        Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Convention Against
        Doping in Sport.

3.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

    (a)     Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on
        the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996 (Act No 106 of 1996).


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Joint Convention on the Safety of
        Spent Fuel Management and on The Safety of Radioactive Waste
        Management.


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson

           a) Statement received from the Minister for Local Government,
              Housing and Traditional Affairs regarding an investigation at
              the Mkhambathini Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal in terms of
              section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
              Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


    (b)     Notice received from the MEC for Housing and Local Government
        in the Northern Cape regarding an investigation at the Sol Plaatje
        Municipality in terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government:
        Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


    (c)     Statement received from the Minister for Local Government,
        Housing and Traditional Affairs regarding an investigation at the
        Umsunduzi Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal in terms of section 106(3) of
        the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
        2000).


    (d)     Statement received from the Minister for Local Government,
        Housing and Traditional Affairs regarding an investigation at the
        Ezinqoleni, Ulundi and Ilembe Municipalities, KwaZulu-Natal in
        terms of section 106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems
        Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).


Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and Administration.


                            THURSDAY, 4 MAY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior
             notice of its introduction published in Government Gazette No
             28751 of 20 April 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification
         in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 4 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Calling of Joint Sitting

      The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 4 May 2006, called a Joint
    Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
    as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

      The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, have, in terms
    of Joint Rule 7(2), called a joint sitting of the Houses of Parliament
    for Monday, 8 May 2006 at 14:15 in celebration of the Tenth Anniversary
    of the Constitution.

    B MBETE, MP                              M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES


                             MONDAY, 8 MAY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces



The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


        a) Corporate Laws Amendment Bill [B 6 – 2006] (National Assembly –
           sec 75)
               [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
        introduction published in
                Government Gazette No 28765 of 21 April 2006.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
              and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
              the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
              of Joint Rule 160, on 9 May 2006.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the Joint
              Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three parliamentary working
              days.





                             TUESDAY, 9 MAY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Council of Provinces




The Chairperson



1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


    (1)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

             a) Proclamation No R.4 published in Government Gazette No 28533
                dated 20 February 2006: Notification by President in respect
                of entities identified by the United Nations Security
                Council in terms of the Protection of Constitutional
                Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
                (Act No 33 of 2004).


             b) Proclamation No R.6 published in Government Gazette No 28544
                dated 24 February 2006: Notification by President in respect
                of entities identified by the United Nations Security
                Council in terms of the Protection of Constitutional
                Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004
                (Act No 33 of 2004).

             c) Proclamation No R.9 published in Government Gazette No 28611
                dated 10 March 2006: Notification by President in respect of
                entities identified by the United Nations Security Council
                in terms of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy
                against Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No
                33 of 2004).

             d) Proclamation No R.13 published in Government Gazette No
                28648 dated 22 March 2006: Notification by President in
                respect of entities identified by the United Nations
                Security Council in terms of the Protection of
                Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
                Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

             e) Proclamation No R.14 published in Government Gazette No
                28649 dated 22 March 2006: Notification by President in
                respect of entities identified by the United Nations
                Security Council in terms of the Protection of
                Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related
                Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

             a) United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural
                Organization (UNESCO) Convention Against Doping in Sport,
                tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


             b) Explanatory Memorandum to the United Nations Education,
                Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Convention
                Against Doping in Sport.



    (3)     The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:


             a) Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and
                on The Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, tabled in
                terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


             b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Joint Convention on the Safety
                of Spent Fuel Management and on The Safety of Radioactive
                Waste Management.




TABLINGS



National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Foreign Affairs

     (a)    Strategic Plan of the Department of Foreign Affairs for 2006 to
    2009.


2.    The Minister of Transport


     (a)    Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
           tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (b)    Protocol to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile
           Equipment on Matters Specific to Aircraft Equipment, tabled in
           terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     (c)    Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention on International
           Interests in Mobile Equipment and the Protocol to the Convention
           on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters
           Specific to Aircraft Equipment.


3.    The Minister of Safety and Security

        a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
           January 2003 to December 2003, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
           the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).


4.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

        a) Draft Practical Guidelines for Employees in terms of section 10
           of the Protected Disclosures Act, 2000.


        b) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of the
           Presidents’ Fund for 2003-2004 [RP 229-2005].


        c) Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial Service
           Commission for 2005.


        d) Proclamation No R.3 published in Government Gazette No 28528
           dated 17 February 2006: Commission of inquiry to conduct an
           investigation into alleged illicit activities of certain South
           African companies or individuals relating to the United Nations
           Oil-For-Food Programme in Iraq, in terms of the Commissions Act,
           1947 (Act No 8 of 1947).

        e) Government Notice No R.159 published in Government Gazette No
           28528 dated 17 February 2006: Terms of Reference of the
           President of the Republic of South Africa for the establishment
           of a commission of inquiry to conduct an investigation into
           alleged illicit activities of certain South African companies or
           individuals relating to the Oil-for-Food Programme in Iraq, in
           terms of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.

5.    The Minister of Education

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Education for 2006 to 2010.


6.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


     (a)    Strategic Plan of Sport and Recreation South Africa for 2006 to
         2010.

7.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy

      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Minerals and Energy for
         2006/07 to 2010/11.


                           WEDNESDAY, 10 MAY 2006


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    REPORT OF THE VISIT TO THE FREE STATE PROVINCE BY THE SELECT
    COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION:
    17 October 2005 – 21 October 2005.

1. Introduction

The Select Committee on Education undertook a provincial visit to the Free
State Province between 17 October 2005 and 21 October 2005.

2. Objectives

The main objective of the visit to the Free State province was to exercise
oversight. The Select Committee on Education and Recreation exercise
oversight over the following departments; Education, Sport and Recreation,
Arts and Culture and Science and Technology.

The committee focused on the following:


Education

    • Primary School Nutrition Programme
    • School sanitation and water supply
    • Early Childhood Development
    • Adult Basic Education and Training
    • Education for Learners with Special Education Needs
    • Governance in schools (School Governing Bodies)
    • Progress on removal of learners under trees
    • Programmes on HIV / Aids
    • School vandalism and sexual abuse
    • School staffing and availability of classrooms
    • General challenges facing the schools


Sport and Recreation


    • School sports and extra mural activities
    • Programmes for the disabled and disadvantaged
    • Rural sport development
    • Women’s sport
    • Funding policy for sport development


Arts and Culture


    • Ongoing projects and programmes started as a major area in the
      provinces that needs to be developed.

    • The committee also visited the Cultural Heritage sites, to help the
      province preserve and declare sites as national treasures, and promote
      a culture of national pride.

3.  Delegation

A delegation from the Select Committee under the leadership of Mr BJ Tolo,
Chairperson of the committee included, Ms FN Mazibuko- Gauteng, Mr JO
Thlagale- North West, and Mr M Thetjeng- Limpopo. The Committee Secretary,
Ms C Gcasamba accompanied the delegation.

4.  Overview of the visit

On the first day of the visit the committee met with both the departments
of Education, and Culture and sport. The delegation also visited the
following sites; Vredeford Dome, Flavius Mareka FET College, Zamdela Arts
and Culture and Mass participation, Thiboloha School, Kgola Thuto School,
Maluti FET College, Basotho Cultural Village, Modderpoort, Mmabana Cultural
Centre, Vulamasango Secondary School and Tjebelopele Primary School. The
visit was concluded by a debriefing session with Education MEC, Ms MA Tsopo
and the officials from sport and culture department.

5.  Briefing by the Director General of Education, Mr Rakometsi

The Director General, Mr Rakometsi gave the overview of the province on
issues relating to Education, as follows:

The province is made up of five districts; namely, Motheo, Xhariep,
Lejweleputswa, Thabo Mofutsanyana and Fezile Dabi. The province has 1 922
schools, 23 554 educators and 694 790 learners.

The total expenditure for the current financial year was at 47% at the end
of September.


PROGRESS ON BUILDING OF SCHOOLS


The province does not have learners under trees but there is a high problem
of overcrowding. Currently the province is building more schools, through
the departmental allocation grant allocated to schools affected by floods
and incentives for the best performing schools. The department received
additional funding from treasury to cater for renovations. Other projects
include building of flush toilets, septic tanks and conversion of pit
toilets, resource centres, green patch hostels and administration blocks.

PROCUREMENT AND DELIVERY OF LEARNER TEACHER SUPPORT MATERIAL TO NON-S21
SCHOOLS

These were issued on the 8 September 2005. About 40% has been received at
the warehouse to date. Stationery was issued on the 22 September; about 50%
has been received at the warehouse to date. Distribution to schools will
commence on the 07 November 2005. Arrangements have been made with the
Districts to get contact numbers of Educators or School Governing Body
members who will be receiving LTSM five days after the school had closed.
The cooperation and the long standing mutual relationship between the
Department and publishers, stationery suppliers and distributors and the
dedication and commitment of book packaging officials will guarantee that
100% LTSM will be distributed to all Non-Section 21 schools by the first
day of school in January 2006.

NO FEE SCHOOLS FOR 2006

The amount that is allocated in the first quintile is R703 per learner.
Schools in quintile one will be persuaded to be no fee schools in 2006.
Total budget for all the schools is R341million. Currently the number of
schools in quintile one is 1 237 and 174 in quintile
two.

LEARNERS WITH SPECIAL EDUCATION NEEDS

The province has 19 special schools scattered in four districts. Learners
in the Xhariep district are accommodated in the Motheo district. The nature
of learners at special schools includes the deaf, mentally mildly impaired,
intellectually severely impaired, physically disabled, visually impaired
and neurologically handicapped.

FURTHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING

The province has four FET institutions, namely, Flavius Mareka (3
campuses), Maluti (8 campuses), Motheo (13 campuses) and Goldfields (2
campuses). All the campuses offer the following fields: agriculture;
manufacturing, engineering and technology; physical planning and
construction, business, commerce and management studies; physical,
mathematical, computer and life sciences; and hospitality and services.

ADULT BASIC EDUCATION AND TRAINING

The province has 201 centres, 197 centre managers and 1 842 educators.

EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT

There are 887 ECD practitioners and 22 687 beneficiaries. The sites include
community-based, free-standing, school-based, Flemish-funded and
learnership projects.

LEARNER SUPPORT PROJECTS

The projects were introduced last year. Included are the National School
Nutrition Programme, hostels and learner transport. The total allocation
for the project is R36 830 million. Currently, the number of farm school
learners is 1 011, learners benefiting from NSNP is 75 000, vulnerable
learners (orphans) receiving food parcels is 23 475 and the number of
transported learners is 364. It was indicated that not all routes are
covered due to lack of service providers.

154 schools in all five districts have started with food gardens. Workshops
were held to capacitate schools.  The vegetables are given to the community
over the weekends.

6.  BRIEFING BY MR TA JONAS, SENIOR MANAGER: ARTS AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS

Mr Jonas briefed the delegation as follows:

The cultural affairs programme comprises of four sub-programmes; namely;
management, cultural affairs, museum and heritage resource services and
language.
a)  Visual and Performing Arts:

This unit aims at advancement of performing, creative and visual arts in
the province contributing towards poverty alleviation and the improvement
of quality of life through projects and programmes and promotion of
performing arts in the province by staging Macufe and to support other
performing arts programmes.

b)  Musicon

Musicon promotes and teaches music in the province to ensure skills and
people development and job creation.

c)  Mmabana Cultural Centre

Its goal is to maintain and further develop community arts centres in Thaba
Nchu, Thabong and Zamdela to serve the arts and culture needs of the
communities so that people’s development and job creation takes place.

Mmabana has nine units, namely, dance, theatre, drama, sewing, arts, music,
folkloric, food production and Early learning centre.

GOVERNANCE

The centre in Thaba-Nchu has been governed under the old Boputhatswana
dispensation and in September 2005 the Free State Legislature repealed the
Mmabana Foundation Act. This means that the centres will be fully
integrated into the department. A new financial manager was employed in
September to assist in streamlining and putting financial systems in place
for the three centres. Only recently in September the coordination process
was started between the department and local municipalities, who are pilots
of Rural Policy Initiatives.

FINANCE ADMINISTRATION AND SUPPORT UNIT

The main purpose of the unit is to support the core units of the Mmabana
cultural centre, the Thabong Arts and Culture Centre and Zamdela Arts and
Culture Centre that are satellite centres of Mmabana.

Production units find themselves in a compromising situation when they
cannot carry on with their tasks due to budget constraints. Money brought
in barely covers the running costs of the centre. Service delivery has been
affected due to high vacancy rates in the component. The centre has lost
professional positions, and key positions that are supposed to be adding
value to our communities.

The Mmabana concept, to a certain degree has become irrelevant due to the
activities being isolated and instructors being oblivious to developments
taking place in the arts and culture industry on a daily basis.

In transforming Mmabana to fit into the department programme, a
consultative approach should be engaged. This will allow the department to
understand the Mmabana concept and how to fit it in within its strategic
programme, without dampening Mmabana’s ability to develop and nurture
talent.

TRAINING

With funds from Investing in Culture in 2004, the department managed to
send dance instructors from Thabong and Zamdela Arts Centres to Durban on
two occasions to attend training.

Challenges:

    • Funding of outreach programmes.
    • Creation of more posts for a diversity of dance disciplines needs to
      be considered.
    • Teaching and choreographing are two special areas. The two should be
      separated in order to have prolific results in the development of
      dance. This approach will allow for job creation as performing
      companies can be formed.
    • The centre is faced with the situation that equipment and machinery
      have aged beyond repair.
    • Outdoor play equipment is not sufficient for the early learning
      centre.
    • There is a poor student intake due to unemployment of parents.

FUTURE PLANS

The department plans to:

    • Establish a community theatre linked to community arts centres in a
      way of job creation.
    • Take part in more national drama.
    • Educate and inspire existing and prospective audiences.

MEMORANDUM OF CO-OPERATION BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS OF CULTURE AND EDUCATION
Both parties expressed their willingness to co-operate in provision and
promotion of Arts and Cultural Affairs.

ONGOING PROJECTS AND PROGRAMMES;

Visual Arts and Crafts

    • Investing in culture projects:

These projects are funded directly by the National Department of Arts and
Culture (DAC). The provincial department only monitors the progress of the
projects. There are currently four projects in the province that are being
funded. All of these projects were already operational when funds were
allocated and some products were being produced. In most cases, the
allocation is used to further develop the products, give further training,
and to buy better equipment and market the products.

The projects are the following:

Afriwo projects in Mangaung

Two projects merged for the purpose of funding. One part is the production
of paper maché masks and wood sculptures. Five people are involved. The
other part of the project is involved with the production of various craft
items like wire and bead products and wooden objects. Ten people are
involved. The project received funding of R217 000.

Ikgopoleng project in Thabong
Ikgopoleng produces various sewing products and a variety of beadwork.
Fifteen women are involved. Thabong Cultural Centre manages it. Ikgopoleng
received R300 000 funding.

Bompodi project in Virginia

Bompodi produces handmade paper products, sewing products like embroidery
and beadwork. Fifteen women are involved; R153 104 funds the project.

Menwana Clay and Buttons projects in Clocolan

Menwana produces clay beads, buttons and other clay objects. Twenty women
are involved. The management of the project and support for accessing
markets will be given by an established pottery studio near Ladybrand (Mud
Studio). A retail outlet will also be established in the town of Clocolan.
R290 500 funds the project.

Past Projects (Poverty Alleviation)

Fourteen projects in the Free State received funding between 2000 and 2003
from DACs poverty alleviation funds. In most cases, the allocation was used
to further develop the products, give further training, and buy better
machinery or equipment and to market the products.

It was reported that some of the projects are currently much better off
than before and are self- sustainable and income generating, although no
profits are made. Examples are Kutloano Papermaking project in Welkom, the
Thusano Beads project in Viljoenskroon, the Tshwarisanang knitting project
in Qwaqwa, Namahadi Craft project in Frankfort and the Intabazwe candle-
making project in Harrismith.

The Free State Craft Development project was also funded from poverty
alleviation funds from DAC, but implemented by the provincial department’s
Visual Arts and Craft section. This project aimed to develop the quality
and improve the variety of Free State craft through product development,
workshops, marketing actions, distribution network and exposure for
crafters. The implementation of the project started in October 2003 and
will continue until the end of 2005.

Thaba Blinds Grass Weaving Factory

The factory was established as a joint project between Department of Arts
and Culture and Social Development. It has been in operation since August
2003. It mainly produces grass blinds for the home decoration industry and
the blinds are of a very good quality, while a wide variety of designs are
available. The raw material for the weaving all comes from the Qwaqwa rural
area and is collected by the people of the area.

The project created 30 full time jobs and was providing a regular income
for more than 100 people in the poverty-stricken rural area of Qwaqwa
through its grass-harvesting programme before it ran into financial
difficulties and had to stop operating. Currently it is not in production.

Various efforts to secure further funding to save the factory from closing
down have produced only promises so far, but no funding. A skeleton staff
is still keeping the factory open, but very little has been produced since
June 2004. Business partners and funding are needed.

7. Briefing by Ms K Thlakudi, Assistant Manager; Mass Participation

Mass Participation

Background:

Mass Participation project is a national project initiated by Sport and
Recreation South Africa running in all 9 nine provinces to establish a
cultural movement of mass participation through active involvement in
positive leisure activities within the field of sport and recreation.

Mass Participation in Free State

Free State has identified 22 hubs. Three activity coordinators were
appointed in each hub, and an additional three coordinators at Mmabana,
Zamdela, and Thabong cultural centre. Activity Coordinator (AC) 1 is
responsible for aerobics and general gymnastics. AC 2 is responsible for
soccer, handball, basketball and fun walks or fun runs. AC 3 is responsible
for indigenous games and managing the hubs. Assistant Provincial
Coordinator is responsible for administration and coordinating the
programme within the province.

There are 73 Activity coordinators (AC), 20 Hub Coordinators and 1
Assistant Provincial Coordinator in mass participation. The total number
currently is 94.

On 18 April 2005 until 22 July 2005, AC 1 and AC 3 were trained, AC 1 in
General Gymnastics and Aerobics and AC 3 in Netball and Volleyball at
Mangaung Community Development Centre.

On 24 July 2005 – 28 July 2005 district training was conducted for hub
coordinators, AC 1, AC 2, AC 3 on Administration, Indigenous games, Fun
Runs, Fun Walks and Life Skills at Thabo Mofutsanyane District.

At the end of October 2005 training in Baseball Event Management, First Aid
and Life Skills will be conducted for all MPPs in Motheo district.

EQUIPMENT

All 20 municipalities have received equipment. Only three ACs are still
outstanding.

PARTICIPATION

Total participants from April stand at 97 765
Number of women: 56 620
Number of youth: 95 616
Number of disabled: 877
Number of elderly: 13 500
The target for 2005/6 is 346 400

The following challenges were highlighted:

         • Insufficient funding
         • The department is seriously understaffed

8.  FLAVIUS MAREKA FET COLLEGE

The college offers programmes that have been previously offered in
technical colleges. It also offers learnership programmes and short courses
with municipalities. Engineering is the main stream in the college.

CHALLENGES

The main challenge highlighted is funding. The college depends on transfer
funds, which are not stable. There is no staff establishment for the
college. Buildings belong to somebody else and it is difficult to maintain
them. The equipment is not enough.

9.  ZAMDELA ARTS AND CULTURE CENTRE AND MASS PARTICPATION

The centre offers outreach programmes for the community. It helps the
prisoners with sewing classes and also helps Orangeville residents with
exhibiting their products.

There are 6 hubs and 19 coordinators.  Elders are involved in indigenous
games.

CHALLENGES

Equipment is insufficient. A delay was highlighted regarding the payment of
stipends for activity coordinators.

10.  Kgola-Thuto Secondary School

Kgola Thuto is one of the Dinaledi schools in the Free State. The school
has 24 educators, 898 learners and 30 classrooms. The teacher learner ratio
is 1:34. The school performs section 21 functions. The school has a
functional school governing body. The exemption policy is used in the
school and parents are encouraged to apply for exemption. The principal
further reported that the school is successful due to team spirit
prevailing among all staff members. Educators are focused, motivated and
have a positive attitude. The school management teams always come up with
developmental programmes.

The following challenges were raised:

    • Changing the negative perception of most of the parent community
      towards the previously disadvantaged schools in comparison to the
      previously advantaged schools.
    • Feeder schools push over-aged learners to the school and that brings
      disciplinary problems. Parents of these learners do not support the
      school and do not attend parents meeting.
    • Training for OBE and NCS is inadequate. It is only now that educators
      are being exposed.
    • Departmental workshops that are called over school holidays cause a
      serious inconvenience, as the school cannot run its vacation classes.
      This year, the school could not run such classes during Easter and
      winter vacation.
    • The school is still using ventilated pit latrine toilet system
    • There is no school clerk since 2000. Teenage pregnancy has gone up.
    • Insufficient laboratory and library equipment

11.  Thiboloha Primary School

Thiboloha is a school for the disabled with 261 learners and 30 educators.
The school has been started as pilot resource centre.  After Grade 9,
learners are taken to technical institutions to prepare them for the labour
market. The school is currently in the process of building a lab.

The school is facing the following challenges:

    • The school requires the services of health proffesionals
    • The school buys medicines and assistive equipment from the school
      allocation.
    • Sport facilities needs to be upgraded
    • Exemption policy is not properly applied, it needs some revision
    • The school fencing is poor.
    • Some parents do not co-operate.

12.  MALUTI FET COLLEGE

The college has eight campuses. These campuses are located in Bethlehem,
Bonamelo, Harrismith, Itemoheleng, Kwetli-song, Lere a Tshepe Tseki,
Sefikeng and Main Campus. The college is offering the following fields,
Educare, Engineering, Public Management, Business Management, Financial
Management, Marketing Management, Human Resources Management, Hospitality
and Catering, and Management Assistant.

Challenges:

         • Funding was mentioned as a major problem.
         • All campuses need full renovation that is, walls, and razor wire
           to ensure maximum security.
         • Additional classrooms and office space is required.
         • Training needs.
         • Inaccessible and unsafe built environments.
         • Student support services are insufficient.

13. BASOTHO CULTURAL VILLAGE

This friendly village lies in the scenic Qwaqwa National Park in an area
rich in natural beauty. The village houses a traditional Sotho museum, a
sandstone amphitheatre, a restaurant and a curio shop. The museum
introduces visitors to the South Sotho (Basotho) nation, from its inception
through its history till their present day existence. Guided tours of the
museum are conducted daily, seven days a week.

14. MODDERPOORT

Modderpoort with its historical cave, priory, buildings and farms has been
in the care of Anglican Diocese of Bloemfontein since 1865. It is located
between Ficksburg and Ladybrand. Buried there is one of the most revered of
local saints recognized by the Basotho by the name Anna Mantsopa Makhetha,
a prophet. She was the most famous Mosotho woman of the 19th Century. Her
prophecy turned out to be an excellent description of what took place at
the Battle of Viervoet Northwest of modern day Ladybrand when major Warden
and Baralong troops from Thabanchu were badly defeated by the Basotho.

Challenges:

The missionaries are refusing to give the site to the department of Arts
and Culture so as to declare it a Heritage site.

15.  VULAMASANGO HIGH SCHOOL

Vulamasango is a section 20 school, with 816 learners and 30 educators. It
is one of the schools that has been chosen for the beautification project
and also qualifies for minor repairs. The school received seven computers
from the department of education. It was clearly indicated that the school
is operating under difficulties; 200 learners have been exempted from
paying school fees.

Challenges:

    • Learner performance declined since the introduction of OBE
    • Educators are demoralized
    • Buildings need major renovations
    • Sport facilities need an upgrade
    • Shortage of support staff
    • Learners are not disciplined
    • The community is very poor, learners come to school without food.

16.  TJEBELOPELE COMBINED SCHOOL

The school started in 2001 as Bothahadi but due to increased enrolment,
Tjebelopele was born in 2002. The school has 1 342 learners and 40
educators. 83 learners have been exempted from paying school fees. The
school has a morning and afternoon session due to lack of classrooms.

The majority of learners are poor and the school is working with the Red
Cross Society to provide food parcels to learners. The school has a school
garden, which also provides for the community over the weekends. The
principal indicated that the school is getting full support from the
district and the staff is committed. The SGB is very committed.

Challenges:

    • Buildings are not acceptable (prefabs)
    • There is overcrowding
    • There is a shortage of furniture for the learners
    • Learners are not safe especially those that attend the morning session
    • There is no nutrition programme from the department

17.  DEBRIEFING SESSION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND THE DEPARTMENT
    OF CULTURE AND SPORT

Mr Tolo, leader of the delegation briefed both departments on findings,
which were the following:

         • In Zamdela, the payment of stipends to activity coordinators is
           delayed

         • Equipment is not sufficient, that affects the work of the
           activity coordinators

         • The Department of Sport is understaffed

         • Clarity is required as to who should be responsible for
           libraries and museums, in terms of governance, between Local
           government and Arts and Cultural Affairs

         • The FET Colleges require more funding to facilitate smooth
           running

         • Equipment in Flavius Mareka is obsolete

         • Thiboloha Primary requires renovations

         • There is an urgent need of medical staff in Thiboloha Primary

         • Thiboloha is buying medicine for the school out of its own funds

         • In Mmabana Cultural Centre, the Early Learning Centre needs
           urgent attention from the Department of Education
         • The theatre group is completely neglected; there are no
           resources to continue with its work

         • The gymnasium has been privatized


18.  CONCLUSION


        In the five days the committee visited a number of schools, Further
        Education and Training Colleges, Heritage sites and Community Art
        Centres.


        The committee is of the opinion that although schools visited may
        not necessarily be a representative sample of all the schools and
        colleges in the province, they provided the framework for the
        Committee to better comprehend the state of education in the
        province. Most of the issues that were identified during the site
        visits were also highlighted during the briefing session.


        Despite the challenges facing the province, the committee would
        like to express its appreciation to the province for its input
        during the visit.

      Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation for the
    Provincial visit to the Western Cape (South Cape Region), 13-17 March
    2006.

1.   INTRODUCTION:


  The Select Committee on Education and Recreation undertook a provincial
  visit to the Western Cape Province  (South Cape Region) between 13 March
  and 17 March 2006.


  The objective of the study tour was to exercise oversight and to undertake
  the monitoring function of the committee and to get a report on issues
  highlighted below:


         • National School Nutrition Programme
         • Exemption policy in schools (school fees)
         • Progress report on removal of learners studying under trees and
           hazardous conditions
         • Water supply and sanitation in schools
         • Governance in schools (Schools Governing Bodies)
         • Readiness of the province to implement National Curriculum
           Statement
         • General challenges facing schools


  2.   DELEGATION:


         • Mr. BJ Tolo - Mpumalanga (Leader of the delegation),
         • Ms JM Masilo - North West
         • Ms NF Mazibuko - Gauteng
         • Mr M Thetjeng - Limpopo
         • Ms JN Vilakazi - KwaZulu Natal
         • Ms AND Qikani - Eastern Cape
         • Mr JO Thlagale - North West
         • Ms C Gcasamba - Committee Secretary
         • Ms C Sheldon - Committee Assistant


  3.  BRIEFING BY REGIONAL DIRECTOR OF EDUCATION


  3.1 Overview of the region


  There are 227 mainstream schools, 5 special schools, 57 preprimary and
  Educare centres and 14 private schools.


  3.2 NATIONAL SCHOOL NUTRITION PROGRAMME


  The three national focus areas of the programme are providing meals at
  schools, facilitating food gardens or other food production projects in
  schools and educating learners and the community at large about good
  nutrition.


  The programme is expected to target public schools serving previously
  disadvantaged schools and the poorest communities, with particular
  priority given to farm, rural and informal settlements for school feeding.
  It is funded through a conditional grant with which the province buys
  goods and services.


  Below is the statistics of the distribution of the programme in the
  region:


  |Number of      |Type of School      |Number of       |Number of       |
|Schools        |                    |Learners to be  |volunteers      |
|               |                    |fed             |                |
|162            |Primary schools     |28 094          |292             |
|18             |Secondary/High      |2 446           |18              |
|               |Schools             |                |                |
|2              |Special schools     |161             |2               |
|182            |                    |30 701          |312             |


  The programme is presently piloting hot menus / cooked menus in the EMDC
  in seven schools. The gradual roll-out is anticipated from July 2006 to
  all other schools not on the pilot. Learners are still being fed peanut
  butter, jam, bread and energy drinks.


  The Province has added high schools to the programme, at the beginning of
  the 2006 school calendar. There are 18 high schools on the programme.
  In each high school, 200 learners are targeted.


  The programme in the province received additional funds from the National
  Department. The Southern Cape Region utilized the funds in supplying
  mobile units for storage and preparation of food at a cost OF R55 000 per
  unit, per school. These funds are given to schools with no storage and/ or
  food preparation facilities. The EMDC has 12 of these schools.


  An amount of R4 500 was allocated to all schools in anticipation of the
  roll-out of the cooked menus to purchase kitchen equipment: gas stoves,
  pots, eating bowls, spoons, stirring spoons and gas cylinders with gas.


  The volunteer honorarium has been increased from R50,00 per person per
  month to R250,00 per


  Food gardens are encouraged at each school so as to supplement the food
  sourced from government. Schools are urged to develop these gardens in
  their grounds and also seek the participation of the school and
  surrounding communities.


3.3  STATE OF READINESS OF GRADE 10 NATIONAL CURRICULUM STATEMENT (NCS)
    IMPLEMENTATION


  All public high schools (41) in the district were reported to be
  implementing the NCS. and 832 educators attended the five-day orientation
  session in July and September in three venues in the South Cape. Other
  educators attended workshops in Worcester and Cape Town, for smaller
  subjects.


  All public schools submitted the registration of their grade-10 subject
  choices. The EMDC indicated that support could be given in all grade 10
  subjects except for Accounting, Dance, Art, IT, Visual Arts, Computer
  Aided Design, Foreign Languages and Religious Studies.


  School visits to support specific schools were carried out. Learning
  programmes of schools were checked. Isolated problems are experienced in
  learner support material not being enough and educators not being trained
  for specific subjects.


  4. MEETING WITH GEORGE SCHOOL GOVERNING BODIES (SGB)


  The committee had a meeting with the SGBs from George, in which the
  following concerns were raised:


         • The poverty ranking of schools is not clear. The schools have
           been over-ranked. The whole process needs to be reviewed.


         • There is racial imbalance in terms of deployment of educators.
           Black teachers are rarely deployed to ex-model-c schools.


         • Formula used for allocation of teachers needs to be reviewed


         • Sport facilities are not of acceptable standards


         • Special schools needs more attention and health specialists
           should be deployed to schools.


         • Grade 12 certificates are expensive. The department should
           devise other means to finance the issuing of certificates.


5.   SCHOOL VISITS

5.1   Mzoxolo Primary School

Mzoxolo is a quintile one school, with 901 learners and 22 state employed
educators.

434 learners are fed. The school also started a vegetable garden, last year
but it is not well established.

The school governing body is fully functional. It is only 20 % of learners
that pay the school fees. Some parents have requested to be exempted from
paying school fees.

5.1.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • Classrooms are not enough such that a library has been converted into
      a classroom.

5.2  Tyholorha Primary School

Tyholora is a quintile three school, with 1 324 learners and 34
educators.The school is also making use of eight teacher assistants in the
foundation phase.

700 learners are fed and that has improved school attendance. The nutrition
programme is also supplemented by a vegetable garden. The school receives
full support from parents.

The school has survived through donations from different bodies such as the
lottery, Fancourt etc.

5.2.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • Classes are overcrowded
    • Furniture shortage
    • No computer lab, a class has been converted into a lab

5.3 Outeniqua High School

Outeniqua is an ex-model-c high school, with 1 650 learners and 46
educators. The school is also making use of four additional temporal
educators.

Oteniqua is one of the schools that sold the land to private owners. The
land was sold for R64m.

450 learners have been exempted from paying school fees.

Oteniqua is one of the well-resourced schools that is running fairly
smoothly.

5.3.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • The school has been using mobile classes for almost nine years
    • Toilets are not enough

5.4  Hoekwil Primary School

A quintile five school, with 121 learners and three educators. One educator
is employed by the School Governing Body.

The school has no nutrition programme since it falls under quintile five.
The School Governing Body is fully functional and parents assist with
fundraising for the school.

5.4.1 Challenges faced by the school
    • Multi-grading
    • Shortage of teachers

5.5   Touwsranten Primary School

Touwsranten is a section 54 school with 229 learners and six educators. The
school accommodates learners with learning disabilities.

180 learners are fed. The school also has a vegetable garden but is not
well established

5.5.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • The school has no library
    • There is no staff room
    • Insufficient classrooms
    • No open space for playgrounds
    • More teachers are required
    • Multi-grading, especially in the foundation phase.

5.6  Lancewood Primary School

A farm school, with 64 learners and three teachers. The school survives
through donations from different donors. The school has a crèche that is
sponsored by the farm owner.  The nutrition programme is well run.
A vegetable garden has been started through a donation from BMW.
5.6.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • Multi-graded classes makes teaching ineffective
    • There is no scholar transport
    • Learners cannot participate in sporting activities due to lack of
      transport

5.7  Percy Mdala High School

Percy Mdala is a quintile one high school, with 1 164 learners and 33
educators. Percy Mdala is one of the Dinaledi Schools.

The school is functioning very well due to the cooperation among teachers,
community and the municipality. The school governing body is functioning
very well.

5.7.1  Challenges faced by the school

    • Shortage of teachers due to increased numbers
    • There is no school hall. The school makes use of the community hall of
      which at times there are problems such as clashes in terms of time.
    • In terms of scholar transport, the bus contracts needs to be revised
    • The school cannot take learners to education tours due to lack of
      funds.
    • Parents are inactive, especially on issues that relates to
      fundraising.
    • The teachers expressed discomfort with the centralisation of services,
      for example, finance and personnel offices located in Cape Town.

5.8  Sunridge Primary School

Sunridge is a quintile three school with 1 268 learners, 32 state
educators, and two SGB teachers. At the foundation phase, the school is
making use of 8 teacher assistants.

270 learners are benefiting from the school nutrition programme. The
scholar transport caters for 450 learners; 143 learners have been exempted
from paying school fees.

5.8.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • No sporting facilities
    • No visits from the department
    • High unemployment rate and it affects the participation of parents in
      school activities

5.9  Chris Nissen Primary School

Chris Nissen is a quintile three school with 650 learners.

The nutrition programme is running smoothly and is also supported by the
Anglican Church in Knsyna. In relation to school fee exemption, only few
parents responded.  Support from parents is minimal.

5.9.1 Challenges faced by the school

    • School library has been converted to a classroom
    • Political intolerance in the area
    • Insufficient playgrounds
    • There is a need for more toilets especially for ECD phase

5.10  MM Mateza Primary School

Mateza is a primary school with 1 507 learners and 38 educators.

438 learners benefit from the school nutrition programme; 25 % of learners
have been exempted from paying schools fees. The community is very poor and
this impacts on the participation of parents in school activities.

5.10.1  Challenges faced by the school

    • Buildings need renovations
    • Classes are not friendly to physically challenged learners
    • Sporting facilities are in a poor state
    • Classes are overcrowded
    • The school needs a media centre

6.  CONCLUSION

The visit to the Southern Cape has been an eye-opening exercise. Overall
the region is doing fairly well except for few things that need attention.
Differences between ex-model-c schools and public school have been noted.
The region is still lagging behind in terms of transformation. Multi-
grading is one major problem that needs to be addressed. The committee
feels that it should be abolished.

The committee expresses its sincere appreciation to the Province,
specifically the Southern Cape Region for the cooperation.

Report to be considered.





                             FRIDAY, 12 MAY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Introduction of Bills


                 1) The Minister of Sport and Recreation


         (a)     South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill
              [B 7 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary
              of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
              Government Gazette No 27787 of 22 July 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee Sport and
         Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160, on 15 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     South African Institute for Drug-Free Sport Amendment Bill,
         2006, submitted by the Minister of Sport and Recreation on 5 May
         2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation
         and the Select Committee on Education and Recreation.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


     (a)    Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
        Division of Revenue Bill for 2007-2008, tabled in terms of section
        9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97
        of 1997).


2.    The Minister of Finance
     (a)    Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2004.


     (b)    Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2004.


     (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
        on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2004.


     (d)    Government Notice No 317 published in Government Gazette No
        28699 dated 31 March 2006: Adjusted allocations in terms of the
        Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).


     (e)    Proclamation No R.16 published in Government Gazette No 28675
        dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which certain sections
        respectively must come into operation, in terms of the Revenue Laws
        Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005) and Revenue Laws Second
        Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 32 of 2005).


     (f)    Proclamation No R.17 published in Government Gazette No 28675
        dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which section 103(1) shall
        come into operation, in terms of the Revenue Laws Amendment Act,
        2002 (Act No 74 of 2002).


     (g)    Government Notice No 316 published in Government Gazette No
        28698 dated 31 March 2006: Commencement of the provisions in terms
        of the Auditing Profession Act, 2005 (Act No 26 of 2005).


     (h)    Government Notice No R.238 published in Government Gazette No
        28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
        Registrar of Securities Services in terms of the Securities
        Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).


     (i)    Government Notice No R.239 published in Government Gazette No
        28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
        Registrar of Friendly Societies in terms of the Friendly Societies
        Act, 1956 (Act No 25 of 1956).


     (j)    Government Notice No R.240 published in Government Gazette No
        28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
        Registrar of Financial Services Providers in terms of the Financial
        Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, 2002 (Act No 37 of 2002).


     (k)    Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
        Germany and the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        concerning Financial Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (l)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
        of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Financial Cooperation in 2004.


     (m)    Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Support to the Risk Capital
        Facility (SA/007/04), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


     (n)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the European
        Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning Support to
        the Risk Capital Facility (SA/007/04).


     (o)    Project Agreement between the Government of South Africa and the
        Government of Ireland on a Project for Supporting the Prevention,
        Care and Support of HIV and AIDS and the reduction of its impact in
        the Limpopo Province, through the Provincial Department of Health,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (p)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Project Agreement between the
        Government of South Africa and the Government of Ireland on a
        Project for Supporting the Prevention, Care and Support of HIV and
        AIDS and the reduction of its impact in the Limpopo Province.


     (q)    Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning EPRD Audit/Evaluation Facility
        (SA/006/05), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     (r)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
        European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning EPRD
        Audit/Evaluation Facility (SA/006/05).


     (s)    Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No. 674-0332 between the
        United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
        Increased Sustainable Local Government Service Delivery, tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (t)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
        Agreement No. 674-0332 between the United States of America and the
        Republic of South Africa for Increased Sustainable Local Government
        Service Delivery.


     (u)    Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No. 674-0328 between the
        United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
        Increased Access to Quality Education and Training, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (v)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
        Agreement No. 674-0328 between the United States of America and the
        Republic of South Africa for Increased Access to Quality Education
        and Training.
     (w)    Amendment number five to the Grant Agreement between the
        Government of the United States of America acting through the
        United States Agency for International Development and the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa for the Increased
        Commercial Viability of Existing Small and Medium Agribusiness,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (x)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Amendment number five to the Grant
        Agreement between the Government of the United States of America
        acting through the United States Agency for International
        Development and the Government of the Republic of South Africa for
        the Increased Commercial Viability of Existing Small and Medium
        Agribusiness.


     (y)    Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0330 between the
        United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
        Democratic Consolidation Advanced, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (z)    Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
        Agreement No 674-0330 between the United States of America and the
        Republic of South Africa for Democratic Consolidation Advanced.


     (aa) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Programme of Assistance to the
        Victim Empowerment Programme of the Department of Social
        Development in the South African Government (SA/003/05), tabled in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
     (bb) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
        European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
        Programme of Assistance to the Victim Empowerment Programme of the
        Department of Social Development in the South African Government
        (SA/003/05).


     (cc) Letter of Agreement for the Provision of Funds from the National
        Forest Programme Facility, through the Food and Agricultural
        Organization of the United Nations to Department of Water Affairs
        and Forestry of the Government of the Republic of South Africa,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (dd)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Letter of Agreement for the
        Provision of Funds from the National Forest Programme Facility,
        through the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
        Nations to Department of Water Affairs and Forestry of the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa.


    (ee)  Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Economic Development Support
        Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/003/04), tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (ff)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
        European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
        Economic Development Support Programme in the Eastern Cape
        (SA/003/04).


     (gg)  Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning African Union/Nepad Capacity
        Building in Governance and Public Administration (SA/006/04),
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (hh)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
        European  Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
        African Union/Nepad Capacity Building in Governance and Public
        Administration (SA/006/04).


     (ii)  Agreement between the Government of the Swiss Confederation and
        the Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning
        Operational Police Commanders Training in the Democratic of Congo,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (jj)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
        the Swiss Confederation and the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa concerning Operational Police Commanders Training in the
        Democratic of Congo.


     (kk)  Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark regarding the Urban
        Environmental Management Programme in South Africa (2006-2010),
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (ll)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of
        Denmark regarding the Urban Environmental Management Programme in
        South Africa (2006-2010).


     (mm) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        through its
              National Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, and the
        Government of
              Switzerland through its Swiss Agency for Development and
        Cooperation
              concerning the Masibambane – ‘Local Government Capacity
        Building through
              Knowledge Sharing’ Project (01.04.2005-31.03.2008), tabled in
        terms of section
              231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     an) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government of
         the
              Republic of South Africa through its National Department of
     Water Affairs and
              Forestry, and the Government of Switzerland through its Swiss
     Agency for
              Development and Cooperation concerning the Masibambane –
     ‘Local
              Government Capacity Building through Knowledge Sharing’
     Project (01.04.2005-
              31.03.2008).


     (oo)  Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0331 between the
        United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
        Support for Economic Growth and Analysis, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     ap)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant Agreement
         No 674-
               0331 between the United States of America and the Republic of
     South Africa for
               Support for Economic Growth and Analysis.


     (qq)  Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
        Republic of South Africa concerning Support to Urban Renewal
        Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/001/05), tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     (rr)  Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
        European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
        Support to Urban Renewal Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/001/05).


3.    The Minister of Labour


    (a)     Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2005-
        2006 [RP 45-2006].


4.    The Minister of Correctional Services


    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
        2006/07 to 2010/11.


                            TUESDAY, 16 MAY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills
     (1)    The Minister for Agriculture and Land Affairs


         (a)     Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 75) [Bill and prior notice of its introduction
              published in Government Gazette No 28798 of 12 May 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
         Agriculture and Land Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as
         referral to the JTM for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160,
         on 16 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
         within three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Provincial and Local Government


        a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Local
           Government Association (SALGA) for 2004-2005, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
           2004-2005 [RP 21-2006]


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson


    (a)     Notice of the written statement in terms of section 106(3) of
        the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
        2000): Nokeng Tsa Taemane Local Municipality.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration.


                           WEDNESDAY, 17 MAY 2006


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Arts and Culture


        a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Arts and Culture for 1 April
           2006 to 31 March 2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS





National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Public Services  on  the  Convention
   for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage  by  Air,
   dated 10 May 2006:
      The Select Committee on Public Services, having considered the
        request for approval by Parliament of the Convention for the
        Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air,
        referred to it, recommends that the Council, in terms of section
        231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Convention.

Report to be considered.

-----------------------
[1] All tables and graphs were compiled by authors using National Treasury
data.


