---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 August 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-08-15
---

TUESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Acting Speaker Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBERS


                               (Announcement)

The Acting Speaker announced that the vacancies caused by the vacation of
seats in the National Assembly by Mr N A Ramatlhodi, Ms C E Gillwald, Ms S
N Sigcau and Mr R S Ndou had been filled by the nomination, with effect
from 24 July 2006, of Ms M D Seadimo, Mr T L Mahlaba, Ms Z N Nawa and Mr P
S Gabanakgosi respectively.

The Acting Speaker further announced that the vacancies caused by the
vacation of seats in the National Assembly by Mr L S Gabela, Mr D V
Mabuyakhulu and Ms H Blose had been filled by the nomination, with effect
from 7 August 2006, of Mr N W Ngcobo, Mr M J Nene and Mr M E Mbili
respectively.


                                    OATH


Ms M D Seadimo, Mr T L Mahlaba, Ms Z N Nawa, Mr P S Gabanakgosi, Mr N W
Ngcobo, Mr M J Nene and Mr M E Mbili, accompanied by Ms E Ngaleka and Ms J
E Sosibo, made and subscribed the oath, and took their seats.

                       NELSON MANDELA’S 88th BIRTHDAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that 18 July 2006 was the eighty-eighth birthday of Nelson
       Mandela, the first President of a democratic Republic of South
       Africa;


  (2) congratulates the former President of the Republic on his birthday and
       hopes that he will see many more; and


  (3) wishes Tatu uMadiba a happy belated birthday.
Agreed to.


   APPOINTMENT OF MRS ZANELE MBEKI AS FIRST CHANCELLOR OF CIDA CITY CAMPUS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms I W DIREKO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

  That the House –

  (1) notes that –


       (a)  last Saturday, 12 August 2006, the First Lady Mrs Zanele Mbeki
           became the first Chancellor of Cida City Campus; and


       (b)  Mrs Mbeki has been involved with Cida University since 2002;


  (2) congratulates the First Lady on being appointed chancellor of the
       University; and


  (3) wishes her success in her new role.

Agreed to.

                     JOY AT HAVING OWN HOME AT AGE OF 87


                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M D NXUMALO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is committed to ensuring that
the rights of people to live where they choose, to be decently housed and
to bring up their families in comfort and security is realised.

On the eve of the 50th anniversary of the 1956 women’s march, for the first
time in her life, Mama Letia Hlongwane, who is 87 years old, took ownership
of a house which is truly her own. She had been renting from other people
until she decided to erect a shack. Mama Hlongwane said, and I quote:
``People overcharged me for renting backrooms until I erected a small two-
roomed shack. I was forced to share the two rooms with my elder daughter,
two grandchildren and two great grandchildren’’.


Mama Hlongwane was amongst the 50 women from Orange Farm, south of
Johannesburg, who received houses as part of the celebration of the 50th
anniversary of the women’s march to the Union Buildings. The ANC is firmly
committed to the realisation of a better life for all. I thank you.
[Applause.]


                 DA’S POSITION ON GEOGRAPHICAL NAME-CHANGING


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D VAN DER WALT (DA): The DA’s position on geographical names is that we
are committed to nation-building and we believe that South Africa should be
shared by all who live in it. New names must rectify imbalances and reflect
the cultural diversity as demographically and historically applicable. New
names should only be formalised and announced once adequate and transparent
consultation with relevant role-players has taken place.

Any name change should enjoy the popular support of the community where the
site is located. It should not be a matter of controversy and contention
and should not have the effect of dividing a community or creating
controversy, which will rebound against the naming authority.

Name-changing should only be undertaken after the direct and downstream
financial impact of the proposed change has been quantified, has been found
to be affordable and has been properly budgeted and planned for.

Wat deur die ANC-regering duidelik gemaak moet word, veral aan hulle lede
op plaaslike vlak, is dat die geskiedenis van alle Suid-Afrikaners erken en
behoue moet bly.

In die geval van Potchefstroom wat in 1838 gestig is en die eerste
munisipaliteit van die Transvaal was, is die proses onaanvaarbaar en die
voorgestelde naam van Tlokwe, wat na ‘n volstruis verwys, nie aanvaarbaar
nie. Dit is uiters belangrik dat hierdie Huis ‘n sinvolle debat voer oor
naamsverandering in Suid-Afrika. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[What the ANC government should make clear, especially to their members at
local level, is that the history of all South Africans must be recognised
and preserved.

In the case of Potchefstroom, which was established in 1838 and was the
first municipality of the Transvaal, the process is unacceptable and the
proposed name of Tlokwe, which refers to an ostrich, is unacceptable. It is
of the utmost importance that this House has a meaningful debate on name
changes in South Africa. [Applause.]]


                             OPERATION IRON FIST


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Chairperson, Pretoria police arrested 300 suspects for
serious offences over the past weekend as part of Operation Iron Fist.
Amongst those arrested where suspects sought for robbery, rape, murder,
attempted murder as well as various other crimes. Almost 600 illegal
immigrants were also arrested. Firearms and drugs were also seized during
the raid.

Special operations such as Operation Iron Fist - which was conducted with
other law-enforcement agencies - are necessary if we are to control our
streets by tackling the criminals and ensuring a safe environment where
people can live without fear of intimidation.

We congratulate the relevant law-enforcement agencies that conducted these
operations and hope that similar initiatives are conducted on a regular
basis in the provinces throughout the country. We need to get the upper
hand and drive the criminals and criminal activities out of the community.
I thank you.


                         MINEWORKERS’ STRIKE OF 1946


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K MOONSAMY (ANC): Comrade Chair and hon members, last Saturday, 12
August 2006, marked the 60th anniversary of the great mineworkers’ strike
of 1946. The strikers demanded higher wages and better working conditions.
The strike continued for a week in the face of police terror in which,
officially, 1 248 workers were wounded and a very large number killed. The
resources of the then racist state were mobilised, almost on a war footing,
against unarmed workers.
The ANC salutes the gallant mineworkers and the working class of South
Africa for their sterling contribution to the transformation of our
country. I thank you. [Applause.]


                     HEROIC ACTION OF MR ACHMAT HASSIEM


                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): The ACDP wishes Mr Achmat Hassiem, the lifeguard
whose foot was bitten off by a shark at Sunrise Beach in Muizenberg, a
speedy recovery. We commend him and other lifeguards for their commitment
to save the lives of swimmers who get into difficulties while at sea.

The ACDP in particular salutes him for doing what was expected of a
responsible elder brother when he deliberately attracted a shark that was
about to attack his younger brother, Taariq. Although his heroic action
costs him his foot, he surely saved his younger brother’s life.

In view of the increasing number of shark attacks on some of our beaches,
the government needs to urgently review its policy concerning the safety of
thousands of bathers in areas where sharks have been spotted before.

In particular, the ACDP calls on the authorities to extend and improve the
shark-spotting programme and to also consider installing shark nets to
protect the swimmers. I thank you.




                 CESSATION OF HOSTILITIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A HARDING (ID): Mr Chair, a United Nations-mandated ceasefire in Lebanon
took effect at 07:00 South African time yesterday. It is by no means clear
what the immediate consequences of the cessation of hostilities will be and
whether the implementation of the ceasefire will hold. The ID therefore
supports the call by Human Rights Watch on the UN to set up an
international commission of inquiry to investigate Israeli war crimes.

Israel’s ongoing aggression, carried out with open US support, leaves no
doubt that any ceasefire will only be a pause in the Israeli-US drive to
destroy Hezbollah, driving Lebanon towards the status of a protectorate and
thereby creating the conditions for a wider war against Syria and Iran.

The military offensive by Israel has caused more than a thousand civilian
deaths and has turned a million people into refugees. The ceasefire
resolution in no way establishes the basis for a genuine peace. It does not
restore Lebanese sovereignty nor does it condemn Israel’s war crimes.

The Israeli Defence Force – IDF - will be permitted to maintain its
occupation of South Lebanon until the multinational force is assembled. And
that will take weeks. This does not mean that the danger of a new and wider
war is easing either.

The US, facing a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan and Iraq, is locked
into a quest for a global hegemony, and it must be anticipated that ...
[Time expired.]


               FLOODS IN THE WESTERN CAPE AND THE EASTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs X C MAKASI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC conveys its condolences and
sympathy to all residents in the southern parts of the Western Cape and
Eastern Cape who suffered damage and loss of life during the recent floods
in the areas. The areas that were particularly hard hit during the floods
include Mossel Bay, George, Knysna and Port Elizabeth. The damage resulted
in the deaths of at least 10 people in the Nelson Mandela Metro and caused
damage to infrastructure amounting to R115 million.

The floods hampered economic activity. Apart from causing major traffic
congestion, road closures and power cuts, they also led to the closure of
schools and factories in the area for two days. Hundreds of residents from
informal settlements in low-lying areas had their dwellings completely
destroyed by heavy rains.

We appreciate the contribution by the residents who, in the spirit of
ubuntu, donated clothes, food and blankets to needy families. The
establishment of an emergency relief fund for affected areas is likely to
benefit people who lost their possessions and shelters during the floods.

The ANC further calls on the government to accelerate relief measures for
affected areas and to work together with the communities in rebuilding
their lives. [Applause.]




  DELAY IN PAYMENT OF RETIRED TEACHERS’ PENSION BENEFITS IN THE NORTH WEST
                                  PROVINCE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B E PULE (UCDP):Chairperson, hon members, the UCDP has noted with
concern that there are educators in the North West Province who retired at
the end of 2005 and have still not received their pension benefits. As a
result, their debit orders pertaining to car purchases have not been
authorised by banks, hence the vehicles are being repossessed. Their
medical aids and insurance policies have lapsed.

We wrote a letter to the MEC for Education in North West on 1 June 2006 and
he assured us that he would ensure that documents were sent to the pension
section of the Department of Finance in Tshwane. Individual investigations
have indicated that they are in the Department of Finance’s pension
section, although some of them arrived as late as July and August 2006.

The UCDP calls upon the relevant departments to ensure that people are paid
immediately to enable them to salvage whatever property and benefits they
still have, if there are any, and of course to survive.

It is disheartening that most of them had served the Department of
Education for almost 40 years and then had to endure such suffering when
they should have been enjoying the fruits of their labour.


            COMPREHENSIVE ANTI-RAPE STRATEGY IN THE WESTERN CAPE


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M GREEN (FD): Chairperson, hon members, the FD is very encouraged by
the groundbreaking comprehensive anti-rape strategy unveiled by the Western
Cape Provincial Government yesterday. This new strategy will hold many more
role-players accountable to the victims. All government departments will,
for the first time in the history of our country, be involved in taking a
big picture approach to rape in co-operation with nongovernmental and
community-based organisations.

The FD also applauds the 172 new volunteer rape counsellors who will work
at 18 Cape Town city police stations.

The FD would like to recommend that our national government also implement
similar strategies nationally to reduce the incidence of rape throughout
South Africa. I thank you.


                    WORKING AGREEMENT BETWEEN ANC AND ID


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr R COETZEE (DA): Chairperson, a report by the provincial secretary of the
ANC in the Western Cape Mr Mcebisi Skwatsha, exposed today in Die Burger,
talks about how best to implement the working agreement between the ANC and
Patricia de Lille’s ID, which the two parties established after the 2006
election.

In exchange for the ID’s support in all Western Cape municipalities the ANC
would support the ID’s mayoral candidates in five of those municipalities.
This contradicts what the hon Patricia de Lille told the South African
public during negotiations. The ID has been negotiating in bad faith from
day one.

One would have thought that South African politicians would have learnt a
lesson from the hon Marthinus van Schalkwyk, who betrayed his voters in
order to secure a position for himself and destroyed his party in the
process. Well, evidently not.

The Tafelsig by-election showed that the voters recognise that the hon
member cannot be trusted. The ID is now a two-province party and shrinking
fast. After 2009, it will have vanished completely.


            RACIST REMARK ABOUT SOUTH AFRICAN BATSMAN HASHIM AMLA


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E (Cassim) SALOOJEE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC expresses its abhorrence
at remarks attributed to television commentator and former Australian test
batsman, Dean Jones, during a live broadcast of the Second Test between
South Africa and Sri Lanka.

The racist remarks made against Protea batsman, Hashim Amla, happened when
the player took a brilliant catch to dismiss one of Sri Lanka’s batsmen.
Jones, who was commentating at the time, was heard saying: “The terrorist
has got another wicket.”

This incident is reflective of a growing malaise in the world of religious
and racial intolerance, characterised by increasing stereotyping and
discrimination. It further illustrates that sport around the world will
have to deal decisively with players, former players and misfits who
exhibit such unacceptable behavioural tendencies.

The fact that Hashim Amla unconditionally accepted the apology of Jones
speaks volumes for this young South African’s humbleness and the values
taught to him. Under difficult circumstances, and amid an international
outcry over the incident, he has conducted himself in a dignified manner
and displayed good leadership qualities.

The ANC calls on all sportspeople to eradicate racism in sport as a
contribution to the creation of a society based on nonracialism, nonsexism
and human dignity. Thank you. [Applause.]


                         POLLUTION OF MSUNDUZI RIVER


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M W SIBUYANA (IFP): Chair, it is with great concern that the IFP has
learnt that last Thursday industrial effluent was once again deliberately
released into the Msunduzi River. The effluent, with very high alkalinity
levels, was found in the Darvill wastewater treatment plant.
This incident follows one in July when the same type of effluent was
deliberately dumped into Pietermaritzburg drains at night, killing fish and
other river life in the Msunduzi River.

At this point the polluter has not yet been identified but Umgeni Water and
the Msunduzi Municipality are investigating and are close to identifying
the offending factory or business.

The IFP calls on the relevant authorities to impose the strictest sanctions
possible on the offenders as soon as they have been identified. Our laws
make provision for the “polluter pays” principle, and the offender should
also bear the cost of treatment of the illegal wastewater, the
environmental rehabilitation costs and any other extra costs incurred.
[Time expired.]


                   COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE TO SOWETO INVALID


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M M MAUNYE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is heartened by the efforts of
the community of Emdeni in Soweto, who assisted Mr Joseph Mposula after his
plight was highlighted in the City Press last week. Mr Mposula, whose legs
have been paralysed since he was knocked down by a car six years ago, has
been sleeping on the floor as he did not have a bed. With no family to
help, he was left to fend for himself. Occasionally he was visited by a
social worker and a teenager who took pity on him and visited him once a
week.

Since Monday last week help began to come in. A community member, Thembi
Majola, donated a sleeper-couch to replace the makeshift bed Mr Mposula has
been using for the past six years. A delighted Mr Mposula said: ``I am so
happy. This couch is very comfortable. I wish I had received it when the
winter season began. But I’m still very grateful.’’


Members of the Ubuntu Project will, with his consent, make daily house
calls and a care worker will bath him, cook, clean and fetch his
medication.

The ANC calls on members of our communities to join hands with our
government in the effort to build a caring and compassionate society. I
thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]




                   INVOLVEMENT OF PRESIDENCY IN ARMS DEAL


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E W TRENT (DA): According to the latest edition of the Sunday Times,
there is evidence that the Minister in the Presidency, Essop Pahad, met
with Alain Thetart, South African representative of Thales International on
23 February 1999. We also have evidence which points in that direction.

If the meeting did take place, it would have been irregular and constitutes
a possible conflict of interest. The Presidency was clearly deeply involved
in a whole range of arms deal activities, which were not formally
documented or registered. In the interests of transparency and
accountability, he needs to explain why those meetings took place, and what
was discussed.

According to documents in the DA’s possession, the then Deputy President
Thabo Mbeki met with representatives of Thales International in December
1998. Now it appears Minister Pahad also held meetings in 1999. This is the
same Minister who said in a letter to me that these meetings were of such
import that they held no meaningful significance. Now, I ask the Minister:
If they had no meaningful significance, why don’t you tell us about them
and what you spoke about?

This means that two members of the Presidency held irregular meetings with
companies involved in the arms deal. On July 14, in a letter to the DA,
Minister Pahad claimed that this matter had been thoroughly investigated
and dealt with. Clearly, that has not happened.

Apart from the President himself, Minister Pahad and Ambassador Masekela,
there are others that also need to be questioned, for example Schabir Shaik
... [Time expired.]




                      LAUNCH OF SA RUGBY UNION ACADEMY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P M MATHEBE (ANC): The ANC welcomes the official launch of the SA Rugby
Union Academy today at the headquarters of Supersport in Kempton Park,
Gauteng.

The South African Rugby Union Academy will be situated at Bushman Sands in
Alicedale, just outside Port Elizabeth. The construction work on the
facility that will house 60 young rugby players will commence in January
2007. This area in the Eastern Cape is known as the traditional stronghold
of black rugby and boasts a rich tradition of nonracial sports.

During the construction phase, jobs will be created for the local community
and skills training programmes will ensure that locals are employed at the
academy. The academy is based on a joint venture between the SA Rugby
Union, Supersport, government and a local entrepreneur called Adrian
Gardiner, who, together with the provincial government, have turned the
former ghost town into a hive of opportunity that boasts a 98% employment
rate.
The SA Rugby Union Academy plans to annually draw the top rugby players
from the under-19 level upwards from across the country to receive world-
class coaching and tuition whilst based at the facility.

The ANC believes that this is a step in the right direction to ensure that
talented youngsters are groomed from an early stage to ultimately represent
our country. It also serves as an incentive for disadvantaged players to
pursue the game beyond school. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon members, please lower
your voices. I know you haven’t seen each other for a long time, but let’s
pay attention to the business before the House.


                   INVOLVEMENT OF PRESIDENCY IN ARMS DEAL


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, for some time now or quite a long
period of time we have consistently as this House and as the nation, been
bombarded with allegations relating to the strategic defence packages.

I think it is very important at some point, as the people, that we should
be able to say that if there is any concrete evidence that can actually be
tested in the courts of our country or in international courts, such
evidence must be made available. We will remain, as the ruling party, quite
open to a thoroughgoing open process at home or anywhere else around the
world, provided that when we go into such an arena, concrete evidence that
can be cross-examined is then tabled.

I find it absolutely unacceptable that a critical instrument of national
security such as the SA National Defence Force, serving our country at home
and the interests of the people of Africa, should be placed under a
perpetual cloud that evaporates every time you try to go into the matter.

The situation becomes even more intolerable when the head of state of a
democratic South Africa apparently is placed under this kind of cloud
without anybody coming forward, offering a sworn affidavit and saying: ``I
was in this meeting, and this is what happened’’ or  ``This Minister of
Cabinet was with me in the meeting and this is what we agreed to do’’.

I have said to this House before that we sit today with the ignominy of not
having the deputy president of our party here, in deference to the
decisions the court took once evidence was tabled.

Why is it so difficult? Why is it not happening that evidence that is
available can be tested in a similar way? I’d like to appeal to members of
the House to remember that we owe it to our country and to ourselves to be
able to say that we will fight corruption from wherever it comes.
Nevertheless, we need a reliable process that can be followed and can
produce results. I thank you. [Applause.]




            RACIST REMARK ABOUT SOUTH AFRICAN BATSMAN HASHIM AMLA


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I want to respond to two
issues, the Hashim Amla and SA Rugby Union Academy issues.

Hashim Amla is a bona fide and law-abiding citizen of South Africa. He is a
Muslim by choice and our Constitution affords him total freedom to choose
what religion he must associate himself with.

To be attacked as a terrorist is not only an affront to his religion and
our Constitution, but is also a reflection of the stereotype held by some
bigots who shame their own religion and their own country.

Amla displayed magnanimity of the African spirit. He readily forgave this
racist. And we should applaud Amla’s stance, and work very hard to
eradicate racism in sport and the rest of society. [Applause.]

On Alicedale, part of the unique developments in that area was the
evolution in 2002 of a programme that saw a town that had literally died
coming back to life, and the decision to put the high-performance rugby
centre there will definitely contribute to this revival of Alicedale in
Komga.

In our understanding, this is the only example of such development that has
taken place in the whole country. Located as it is this facility, in the
rural areas, will contribute greatly to the betterment of the lives of the
people of Komga. It will also place a high-performance facility on the
doorstep of the largest group of rugby-playing youngsters in our country.

We strongly support the initiative. [Applause.]


    DELAY IN PAYMENT OF RETIRED TEACHERS’ PENSION BENEFITS IN NORTH WEST
                                  PROVINCE


                            (Minister’s Response)

TONA YA LEFAPHA LA THUTO: Modulasetulo, ke dumalana le moemedi wa UCDP fa a
tshwenyega ka go sa duelweng ga barutabana ba ba tlogetseng go ruta. Re re
ee, totatota ba diretse setšhaba mme ga re a tshwanela gore re se ba duele
fa ba setse ba tlogetse tiro ya bona, ba batla go ikhutsa. Re setse re e
buile kgang e. Re dumalane le baemadi ba mafapha a thuto mo lefatsheng la
rona lotlhe gore re tlile go netefatsa gore batho ba, ba duelwe ka nako.
Re setse re buile le Lefapha la Matlotlo, le le tshwaraganeng le go duelwa
ga batho ba. Totatota ke selo se se re tshwenyang thata. Re a leka ka
maatla a rona otlhe go dira gore fa motho a tlogela tiro, a ya go ikhutsa,
a nna kwa gae, a duelwe ka nako. Ke batla go bolelela moemedi gore tiro e,
ke tiro e ke tshwaraganeng le yona. Re tlile go dira gore re siamise selo
se se maswe se, se se re tshwenyang thata jaana. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.]
(Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[The MINISTER OF EDUCATION: Chairperson, I agree with the UCDP
representative for being concerned about the retired teachers not being
paid. We agree that indeed they worked for the nation and it is unfair for
us not to pay them when they have now retired. We have already discussed
this issue and agreed with the representatives of the education department
in our country that we are going to ensure that these people get paid on
time.

We have already spoken with the Department of Finance, which is in charge
of the payment of the people. This is indeed disturbing us. We try with all
our powers to make sure that when a person retires, he receives his money
on time. I want to tell the representative that I am dealing with this
task. We are going to correct this thing; this is really disturbing us.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

    DECISION OF SPEAKER TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INQUIRE INTO
     OPERATIONAL PROBLEMS BEING EXPERIENCED BY THE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC
                                  PROTECTOR

                         (Ratification of Decision)

There was no debate.

Decision of the Speaker to establish an ad hoc committee to inquire into
operational problems being experienced by the office of the Public
Protector ratified.


                              HUMAN TRAFFICKING


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That the House -

   (1)      noting -

        (a) that 2006 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the 1956 Women’s
             March on the Union Buildings in Pretoria against pass laws
             imposed by the apartheid regime;


        (b) that the trafficking of persons has been identified as a serious
             threat to human security and development globally and that the
             effects of human trafficking are manifold;

        (c) the 1949 Convention for the Suppression of the Trafficking in
             Persons and the Exploitation or the Prostitution of Others,
             the 1979 Convention on the Rights of the Child, the 1979
             Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
             Against Women, the 1993 United Nations Declaration on the
             Elimination of Violence Against Women, the 1995 Beijing
             Declaration and Platform for Action, the 2000 Convention
             Against Transnational Organised Crime and the Palermo
             Protocol;

        (d) the regional instruments aimed at eradicating violence against
             women and girl children such as the 1997 Southern African
             Development Community Declaration on Gender and Development,
             the 2002 Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s
             Rights on the Rights of Women, the 2004 Solemn Declaration on
             Gender Equality in Africa; and

        (e) the lack of regional international instruments specifically
             addressing human trafficking;

   (2)      believing -

        (a) that the socio-economic vulnerability of women and children and
             the lack of a protective legal framework render them prime
             targets for trafficking syndicates, that the prevalence of
             gender inequality facilitates the trafficking of women and
             girl children;

        (b) in the need for States to enact national legislation and put in
             place measures to prevent and ultimately eradicate human
             trafficking; and

        (c) that States cannot effectively deal with the human trafficking
             in isolation but require cross-border co-operation, that
             Africa is not only a region of origin for trafficking in
             persons, but also a transit and destination site, that the
             majority of women and children trafficked in Africa are
             trafficked in networks, some of which are linked to global
             syndicates; and

   (3)      resolves -

        (a) to call upon the Executive to establish an inter-ministerial
             Committee on human trafficking to play a strategic and co-
             ordinating role in South Africa’s efforts at eradicating human
             trafficking;

        (b) to call for the urgent tabling of legislation aimed at
             eradicating human trafficking and providing a national
             normative framework to further promote and protect the rights
             of women and children;

        (c) to call upon the Executive to initiate an inter-departmental
             response to developing intervention strategies, including
             access to support services, appropriate repatriation and
             social integration programmes for persons who have been
             trafficked and the adequate training of law enforcement and
             other relevant government officials;

        (d) to call upon the media, civil society organisations and the
             private sector to collaborate in exposing human trafficking
             and raising awareness in society, including raising awareness
             through the 16 Days of Activism of No Violence Against Women
             Campaign and other public campaigns and programmes aimed at
             eliminating violence against women;

        (e) to call upon the Executive to encourage States to collaborate on
             prevention of human trafficking, arrest and prosecution of
             offenders and the eradication of crime syndicates; and

        (f) to call upon the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth
             Parliamentary Association and Pan African Parliament to
             facilitate the introduction of national legislation in all
             Member States and co-ordinate the harmonisation of laws to
             ensure the effective eradication of human trafficking.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon members of the House,
friends and comrades, this year marks the 50th anniversary of the 1956
Women’s March on the Union Buildings in Pretoria against pass laws imposed
by the apartheid regime. More specifically, women were protesting against a
law which extended the obligation to carry the hated “dompasses” to women.

That document was used as a tool to oppress and discriminate against the
majority of the people of South Africa. Today this document, which is now
called an ID, must be seen as one of the most important enabling documents,
a key and a gateway to a better life that gives one an identity and
restores the dignity of South African people.

A number of factors have given rise to the increased prevalence of human
trafficking and its link to the increased exploitation of the most
vulnerable in our society - women and children. These include
globalisation, the growing gap between rich and poor as well as the greater
ease with which people can travel, coupled with a growth in organised
crime. Hence the importance of having a document which identifies who you
are.

The trafficking of persons has been identified as a serious threat to human
security and development, globally. What we do not know, however, is the
extent of this problem. The SA Law Reform Commission is considering policy
options to recommend to government. The process of developing solutions has
had its limitations, given our own country’s environment, in the first
place, and the global issues affecting the debate on trafficking throughout
the globe. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Minister, give me a
minute, please. Hon members, please lower your voices. Proceed, hon
Minister.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: It is after lunch, and it’s understandable.
Key amongst these issues, as noted in recent research and studies, is that
in our country the debate and public discourse is limited by the lack of
information.

The Institute for Security Studies’ critique of our dialogue noted that,
before the process of the SA Law Reform Commission, our country had not had
enough research on issues concerning trafficking both from high-level
conceptual issues such as definition down to the practical issues of
perpetuation and necessary steps that have to be taken.
The study noted that we urgently need information on the extent of the
problem, the prevalent types of trafficking, the profiles of victims and
traffickers, key contributing factors and, generally, the levels of
awareness and knowledge about trafficking.

While not all the recommendations will require legislative intervention, it
should be noted that the Sexual Offences Bill, which is currently before
Parliament, contains provisions aimed at dealing with the trafficking of
persons for sexual purposes. It may be that other recommendations will mean
that we will have to be more vigilant and creative in implementing laws
already on our books in order to protect women and children.

We have, for instance, to be concerned at recent reports that the number of
unaccompanied children crossing our borders is on the increase. These
children, many of whom are refugees, travel without documentation. They run
the very real risk of being abducted or lured by traffickers and exploited.
Our laws do provide that such children are children in need of care and
should be brought before a children’s court. But the sad reality is that
when children do not have documents they may become victims when they
cannot be traced or identified.

I’m pleased therefore that this debate is taking place today before
specific recommendations are proposed and before specific legislation is
debated in Parliament. It is good that we debate the general principles
before we debate the details. We must debate this issue in an honest,
dispassionate and robust manner so that we establish a solid basis for the
eradication of the harmful and unacceptable practice of human trafficking.

Human trafficking is a form of forced migration. As I have indicated, its
basic roots, as with other forms of forced migration, lie in the social
problems of our society such as poverty, underdevelopment, disease and, of
course, prejudice. Trafficking has also been seen to feed wars with many
young children being forced into dangerous situations of being child
soldiers. Of course, in most patriarchal societies it targets women.

We’ve seen children disappearing and surfacing in films being used as tools
for child pornography. Women are forced to work for survival and, in
certain instances, also forced to bear children for the sole purpose of
providing labour for their masters. It is a form of slavery.

Promises of lavish jobs are made and then suddenly women land themselves in
prostitution. It is never voluntary. We are dealing here with well-
organised parasites who have decided to feed on the vulnerability of those
who already suffer great subjugation as a result of prejudice and
oppression. The continued existence in today’s society of great disparities
and unequal development should therefore be the main bearer of the burden
of blame in the rapid growth of human trafficking over the past few
decades.

The world response to this sketch therefore should recognise these
fundamental causes and ensure that any solution that we find is intended to
be comprehensive, to the extent that it can make a contribution in
addressing these ills. Of necessity, such a response and solution should be
global. It should be comprehensive whilst being specific enough to address
certain prevalent trends of the sketch, such as the deliberate targeting of
women and children.

I am sure that is the premise from which the Palermo Protocol of the United
Nations provides a useful attitude in honing this global response. Its
preamble declares correctly, and I quote:

   ... effective action to prevent and combat trafficking in persons,
   especially women and children, requires a comprehensive international
   approach in the countries of origin, transit and destination that include
   measures to prevent such trafficking, to punish the traffickers and to
   protect the victims of such trafficking, including by protecting their
   internationally recognised human rights.

This declaration defines in real terms what the challenges for us are as we
define South Africa’s role. Our response as a country therefore will need
to define in concrete terms what preventive measures we shall take. In
concrete terms, our response should deal with punitive measures for the
perpetrators and, most importantly, the need to ensure the protection of
victims of this vile crime.

I am encouraged by the fact that women in our country are starting to
develop a common programme and institutions that champion issues of women
in a more unified manner. I have no doubt that the recent launch of the
Progressive Women’s Movement of South Africa heralds new opportunities to
propel the aspirations of women to the fore, including those on the issue
of combating violence against women by trafficking.

We recognise the work of nongovernmental organisations and we recognise the
need to work together and to collaborate with government, particularly
around issues of trafficking of women and children.

Once again, allow me to thank you for the opportunity of being part of the
debate. I am aware that what we are starting here today is an important
process that should finally involve the rest of our people in discussing
this issue.

As public representatives, we have a responsibility to stimulate and lead
our people in such public discourse and spur them to action. I am already
convinced that we will not fail. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]
Ms N J NGELE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, invited guests,
ladies and gentlemen, in memory of the Women’s March to the Union Buildings
in 1956, 50 years later on 9 August 2006, women came in their thousands and
marched to the Union Buildings to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the
Women’s March.

The 1956 march to the Union Buildings was to demonstrate women’s
disapproval of the pass laws, and to present a memorandum to the then Prime
Minister, Mr Strijdom.

This debate comes as we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March
to the Union Buildings in 1956. This showed the strength of women at that
time, not forgetting that in 1956 there were no cell phones and no
telephones, no televisions and no radios. The means of communication and
resources were very limited. Through strength and determination, women from
all over South Africa were mobilised to participate in this historic event.


The regime of that era announced that they did not want to see any women in
the Union Buildings that day. Women used all sources of transportation they
could get in order to ensure that they participated in the march. They
travelled by train, by bus and even by donkey.

They managed to mobilise about 20 000 women from all provinces. Those women
who could not make it to the Union Buildings, mobilised themselves in their
provinces in support of the women who were at the Union Buildings. Strijdom
felt the strong impact of the women who were marching.

The march was not solely composed of black women, but of women of all
races. There were women from the ANC, women from white communities, women
from the Indian organisations and also women from the coloured
organisations.

Strijdom could not face the power of women and so he ran away. When the
women could not find him, they left the stairs of the Union Buildings. One
woman requested a moment of silence. That time, you could hear a fly
passing by. Another woman raised her voice and said: ``Hey wena Strijdom:
Wathint’ abafazi! Wathint’ imbokodo uzo kufa!’’ [Strijdom: You strike a
woman! You strike a rock and you will die!]

Women were not there to fight; they were there to hand over the petition
that they were not going to comply with the pass laws. Women felt that the
pass laws ...

...yayifana nelitye elinzima elibekwe phezu kwabo. [...were like a heavy
rock that was put on them.]

Women were visionaries. They could see that the pass laws would lead to
more racial discrimination, influx control, the Group Areas Act, etc. By
imprisoning women for not carrying the passes, the racist regime was able
to destroy black families further. How do you take a mother away from her
breastfeeding children? Who is to ensure that children are fed, that
children go to school, and who is going to do the executive work that is
done by a woman at home?

At this stage, let us salute the women who participated in the 1956 march
such as Lilian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Sophia Williams-De Bruyn, Bertha Gxowa,
Ruth Mompati, Mrs Malindi, and not forgetting those women who worked
tirelessly in the provinces, such as Mildred Lesia and many others.

The lessons learnt by women of today from the women of 1956 are unity,
collectivity, togetherness, consultation and quite a lot more. The
government of today, which is led by the ANC, has prioritised women issues.
We have laws that are gender-sensitive and we have gender machinery, though
we need to assess this machinery. Women are now deployed in strategic
positions. There are women in the Cabinet and in Parliament and women
holding key positions in parastatals and the business sector.

The action of the women who marched in 1956 led to women forming the
Progressive Women’s Movement in 2006. The memorandum that came out of the
conference of 6 to 8 August 2006 was handed over to the President.

UMongameli khange abaleke njengoStrijdom, uye wema wayamkela. [The
President did not run away like Mr Strijdom did; he stood up and accepted
it.]

At this stage, let’s salute Ms Baleka Mbete and Ms Noluthando Sibiya, who
are the co-conveners of the Progressive Women’s Movement of South Africa.
[Applause.] The women’s movement is aimed at uniting the women of South
Africa from all walks of life to fight the impact of patriarchy on women.
Patriarchy creates a series of backlashes such as violence against women,
subordination of women and men’s domination, the feminisation of poverty,
underdevelopment and unemployment, undermining of women, sexual harassment
of women in workplaces, and trafficking of women and children.

On 4 and 5 August 2006, we held a Women’s Parliament. The main focus was to
combat the trafficking of women and children. This was identified as a
serious threat to human security and development, globally. We support the
declaration that came out of the Women’s Parliament. The African continent
looks up to the South African women to lead on the emancipation of women.
[Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, human trafficking is a modern form of slavery.
It is a total violation of human rights and completely disregards our
constitutional right to be free from violence. Trafficking occurs into and
across South African borders and, more alarmingly, it occurs within South
Africa.
It is quite mind-blowing that in a modern democratic South Africa this
crime against humanity is not criminalised under South African law even
through we are signatories to various international protocols. Very few
South Africans even know that there is such a thing as trafficking of men,
women and children and that thousands of human beings are trafficked all
the time all over the world.

What we do know is that this is a major money-making operation for
individuals, gangs and syndicates in Cape Town, Johannesburg, Durban and
other parts of South Africa. It is said that the trade in human flesh is
more profitable than drugs. However, we have very little idea of how many
people are affected.

Many people think that all women who are trafficked are prostitutes. There
have been several examples of women from Eastern European countries who are
held against their will in Johannesburg, without access to their passports
and who are given no option other than to sell their bodies in order to pay
for their survival.

Many women who are trafficked are forced into prostitution against their
will. They are beaten, raped and abused. They go to other countries under
false pretences and promises of good jobs, educational opportunities and
offers of marriage often with the ambition to make a better life for
themselves, their children and their families.

Some women lack the education they need to find a good job while others are
professionals who cannot find work in their chosen professions. They are
students, accountants, nurses and teachers - ordinary people just like us.

Trafficking is not just about sexual exploitation. Throughout the world
human beings are trafficked into forced labour, illegal adoptions and
forced marriages, for begging and criminal activities, to transport and
sell drugs, into gangs, conflict areas and armies, and for their organs and
body parts or for cult rituals.

The Mail & Guardian recently highlighted the miserable death of a 29-year-
old domestic worker, Marie Rachel Kleinveld, who was recruited to work in
Cape Town by an unregistered job agency. It is alleged by the Department of
Labour that more than 300 women arrive in Cape Town from the Karoo every
week with only their labour to sell. Apparently, the Scorpions launched an
investigation into unregistered agencies, which totally ignore statutory
conditions, but this has been dropped until Parliament enacts legislation
barring human trafficking.

Young women from rural towns all over the Karoo, the Boland and the Eastern
Cape are lured with a promise of work. Once employed, they work long hours
for very little pay and are often not paid for the first few months to
cover the agency fee paid by the employees.

Just as Cape Town is seen as a shining city on the hill by unemployed women
in rural areas, South Africa is seen as a magnet for economic prosperity by
people from other African countries.

Abandoned children are particularly vulnerable. Without parents or anyone
else to take care of them, they often end up on the streets. They lack
education, do not have proper identity documents and have no obvious means
of economic support. This situation makes them easy targets for traffickers
who promise them opportunities in another country and an easier life.
Children disappear every day on the streets of our cities and we have no
idea how many of them end up being trafficked.

From the examples given above, it is clear that we don’t only need
legislation to criminalize the gross abuse of human rights but we also need
interdepartmental co-operation and an integrated national policy approach.

Victims of trafficking are often treated as criminals. They are prosecuted
for prostitution and deported while the trafficking syndicates have the
money and influence to escape prosecution. Earlier this year, in a speech
on trafficking, I said:

  Madam speaker, we as Parliament need to urgently deal with this problem,
  get the legislation passed and enacted so that South Africa no longer acts
  as a haven for this terrible crime. Let us make this commitment on
  International Women’s Day, 2006.

The resolution passed at the women’s Parliament earlier this month – and
hopefully by this House later today - makes that commitment. Let’s do it.
[Applause]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Chairperson, hon members, it is fitting that we have
this debate on trafficking of women and children today, just less than a
week after Women’s Day and about two weeks after the conclusion of the
Women’s Parliament for 2006, which had this very topic as its main theme.
These events have again focused our minds and attention on the many
political, social and economic challenges that confront women on a daily
basis.

We welcome the fact that women’s rights and issues have featured so
prominently on the public agenda in the past few weeks but find it
disappointing that the public eye now appears to turn to women’s issues
only when national celebrations, commemorations or conferences take place.
That is simply not good enough. Women’s issues must be the daily focus of
our Parliament, decision-makers and communities.

In the 12 years since the end of apartheid, this Parliament has passed more
than 900 pieces of legislation that have changed the country almost beyond
recognition, from the rights perspective. Yes, great strides have been made
to remove gender discriminatory laws and replace them with affirmative and
progressive laws that entrench the rightful position of women. However, it
is deplorable that in 12 years and after more than 900 new laws we have yet
to pass a law that deals directly and comprehensively with trafficking of
women and children. This, despite the fact that we ratified the Palermo
Protocol that obliged us to create specific anti-trafficking laws as far
back as 2000.

Thus, for at least half of the period of our freedom, we have known about
the need to deal with trafficking in terms of legislation, yet what do we
have right now? We only have a few palliatory clauses in the sexual
offences Bill that has been before this Parliament since 2003. Trafficking
is only dealt with in relation to sexual offences, which are important but
only touch on certain aspects of the wider problem of trafficking of women
and children.

Six years after agreeing to the Palermo Protocol we are still waiting for
comprehensive anti-trafficking legislation that will address the existing
statutory gaps satisfactorily and provide protection and legal recourse to
the victims of human trafficking. Yet, while we are waiting, more than a
million people, every year, are illegally transported across international
borders, including our own.

The IFP therefore calls on the President to instruct the relevant line-
function Ministers to immediately table comprehensive anti-trafficking
legislation in this Parliament to show their commitment and seriousness to
addressing the scourge of the modern-day slave traders who trade in humans,
especially women and children. I thank you.

Ms S N SIGCAU: Sihlalo namalungu abekekileyo, i-UDM iyavumelana nombono
wokuqinisa amatyathanga obuhlobo namazwe aphesheya, ukubekwa kwemithetho
engqongqo ekulunyikisweni koluntu, nokuqiniswa konxibelelwano phakathi
kwamasebe athile. Ke ngoko kufuneka siyisele iso imeko yokuba eneneni
ufuduso nokubiwa kwabantu, kunye nezinye iziganeko njengokudlulisa
iziyobisi kwenzeka lula emideni yeli.

Ukungena nokungeniswa ngokungekho mthethweni kwabantu bamanye amazwe
neempahla kubonisa ukuba bukho ubuthathaka obuthile kwiSebe leMicimbi
yezeKhaya kunye nasemapoliseni. Eli sebe malibambisane kunye
nelezokhuseleko ukuze kunyuswe umgangatho.

Zininzi ezinye iingxaki ezibangwa kukusebenza ngesantya sofudo kwabasebenzi
beli sebe abasemagunyeni nakwamanye amacandelo. Ukuze kuqiniswe iphulo
lokulwa nolwaphulo-mthetho lokubiwa nokuthunyelwa kwamabhinqa kwamanye
amazwe ndicebisa ukuba eli sebe kufuneka lizeke mzekweni. Ndiyabulela,
Sihlalo. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Ms S N SIGCAU: Chairperson and hon members, the UDM concurs with the view
of strengthening ties with overseas countries, the setting up of strict
regulations in warning people, and the strengthening of communication
between certain departments. Therefore, we must look at the fact that human
trafficking, and other incidents like drug trafficking, take place easily
across our borders.

The smuggling in of people and clothes from other countries indicates that
there is some weakness in the Department of Home-Affairs and the police.
The department should work together with the Department of Defence so that
the standard can be improved.

There are many more problems that are caused by the fact that management
workers in this department and other sections are working at a slow pace.
To intensify the campaign against the crime of trafficking women to other
countries, I suggest that this department must follow suit. I thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, the trafficking of women and children is a
global multibillion-dollar industry. It is second only to guns and drugs in
terms of the money that is earned through illicit activities. South Africa
has unfortunately also been brought into this illicit web. As a country we
need to play a leading role in stamping out these activities, which occur
both across and within our borders.

One of the motions today calls on the government to table legislation that
will address this issue. While the ID agrees with this call, there are
existing pieces of legislation that can, in the interim period, be used to
address aspects of this problem.

The section on child trafficking in the recently passed Children’s Act
needs to be fast-tracked. This would make child trafficking an offence and
allow the state to prosecute people throughout the various levels of the
crime syndicate. It will also mean that children will have to be
accompanied when they are returned to their parents, as opposed to simply
being dumped at the border as some of them are experiencing now.

Another piece of legislation that can be used more effectively in combating
and dealing with the effects of trafficking is the Proceeds of Criminal
Activities Act. The ID maintains that the proceeds that are confiscated
from these syndicates must in some way be passed back to the victims of
this crime.

This could be done through a victim’s fund, which provides assistance in
terms of psychosocial counselling, medical and educational assistance and
funding for their economic reintegration into society.

I would imagine that some of these recommendations are contained in the SA
Law Reform Commission’s report on a compensation fund for victims of crime.
I wouldn’t know though, because the Minister of Justice has sat on that
report for the past two years and Parliament has never been able to debate
its findings.

The ID welcomes this debate today, and we will support any action that
helps us stamp out this terrible trade in human beings. It is an assault on
all our dignity and makes a mockery of the ideal of a common humanity. I
thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, the ACDP welcomes the fact that human
trafficking was highlighted during the recent Women’s Parliament. It is
estimated that 4 million people are victims of trafficking worldwide. It is
mostly women and children from the Third World who are sold as prostitutes
and slaves.

South Africa, unfortunately, is a major destination and transit point for
human trafficking. It serves as the economic heart of Africa and provides a
market for the services of victims of trafficking. This modern-day slavery
must be eradicated.

We, as the ACDP, also heed the concerns of the NGO, Doctors For Life, which
has called for tough laws to stop trafficking, particularly in view of the
2010 World Cup to be held in South Africa. According to this NGO, an
estimated 40 000 women were trafficked from the Far East and east bloc
countries into Germany to work as prostitutes during this year’s World Cup.


The ACDP welcomes the fact that as an interim measure and pending the
adoption of legislation to comply with our international obligations, the
Criminal Law Sexual Offences Amendment Bill for the first time criminalises
trafficking in persons for sexual purposes. However, there are various
other offences such as trafficking of persons for labour and bodily organs
that are not covered by this Bill. There is thus an urgent need for
legislation to deal comprehensively with human trafficking.

We need to act swiftly as lawmakers as we cannot fail our vulnerable women
and children. The ACDP will support this motion. I thank you.

Mr M I MOSS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [HON MEMBERS: [Praise!]

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, I am privileged to
participate in this very important debate. I dedicate my speech to all the
women, especially those who are not with us any more - the stalwarts who
played a big role in our liberation struggle and still play a big role to
this day - and the ordinary women who have sacrificed their lives for our
beloved country.

Women are faced with many challenges, as correctly pointed out by speakers
before me, especially the Minister of Home Affairs. When one thinks of the
trafficking of women and children, domestic violence, poverty,
unemployment, HIV/Aids and many more issues, it is crystal clear that the
total emancipation of women in general is needed to overcome these
challenges.

I participated in the Women’s Parliament on 3 and 4 August in the Old
Assembly Chamber. There were women and men from all over our country and
from all walks of life. The topic under discussion was: “Protecting the
rights of women and children: Combating the trafficking of women and
children”. That is what I would want to concentrate on today.

The trafficking of people, especially women and children, is, in layman’s
terms, when people are taken against their will to unknown places and
destinations in other countries under false and untrue pretences. They are
then exploited in many ways, for example prostitution and sexual
exploitation, forced labour and other activities.

Trafficking takes place everywhere and anywhere. It affects all classes of
society, especially the poor and the vulnerable. A case study done by the
SA Law Commission on trafficking in South Africa has revealed that there
are no official statistics on the number of persons being trafficked either
into or out of South Africa.

This makes it difficult to give an accurate overview of the problem and
determine its extent and nature. Further, the majority of known trafficking
cases involve women and children who have been trafficked for sexual
exploitation.

The trafficking of men in South Africa and across the borders is under-
reported, because most NGOs, if not all, are rendering services to women
and children victims of trafficking only. The ANC is a caring party,
especially when it comes to families. We are addressing all these problems
that children and vulnerable persons are facing in our country. It is not
right that children are taken away from their parents and society and
placed in difficult conditions.

One must distinguish clearly between trafficking in persons versus
smuggling in persons. Trafficking involves the continued exploitation of
the victim, whilst smuggling is the procurement of illegal entry into a
state by a person who is not a national or a permanent resident of that
state. In this case the territorial integrity of the state is at stake.
The smuggler is loosely paid a fee or other reward, and his or her
involvement with the smuggled person ends once the illegal entry into the
country has been secured. Therefore, the intention of the smuggler is not
to exploit nor otherwise to subject the smuggled person to abuse of any
kind.

The SA Law Commission noted that the distinction between trafficking and
smuggling in persons is not always clear. A trafficking case may start off
as smuggling, but once the person has been smuggled into the country of
destination, the smuggler may decide to force him or her to work in the sex
industry or another exploitative practice.

Chapter 18 of the Children’s Act, recently assented to by the President,
although not yet in operation, addresses the issue of trafficking in
children. The Act gives effect to the UN Protocol on Trafficking in
Persons, criminalizes child trafficking and provides for a fine or
imprisonment of up to 20 years, or both a fine and such imprisonment for
anyone convicted of this crime. This is in addition to any other offence
for which a person may be convicted. This means that if a person convicted
of the crime of trafficking in children has also raped the victim, that
person can also be prosecuted for the crime of rape.

The legislation development process is evidence of the seriousness with
which South Africa views this global challenge. Parliament now seeks to
highlight this problem by building it into the focus of the Women’s
Parliament, ensuring growing awareness towards both preventing and
correcting this wrong.

This is also consistent with the consolidation of Parliament’s Africa
agenda for human rights and equality. With human trafficking on the
increase across the world and here at home, South Africa is under pressure
to enact legislation in combating it. More legislation is needed in this
regard.

In spite of the fact that the overwhelming majority of women of this
country suffered triple oppression under apartheid laws because they were
black and women, women have made big achievements, especially since our new
democracy after 1994. In Parliament, women occupy senior positions. The
Leader and Deputy Leader of Parliament, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, are
both women. The Deputy President of our country, who intimidated me before
I came to speak, is a woman. Several Ministers and Deputy Ministers in
Parliament are women. Amongst the leaders of committees in Parliament like
chairpersons of committees and whips there are also women.

Hon Bloem, are you not applauding? The heads of government, like directors-
general ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon member. Do you have a
point of order, hon Skhosana?

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Chair, it’s just a question to hon Moss.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Let’s first find out whether he
will take a question. Hon Moss, will you take a question?

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, I will take a question when I am finished. I
think I will have time for that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Unfortunately, hon Skhosana, you
will have to wait.

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, the heads of government such as directors-
general, deputy directors-general, chief directors, directors and other
senior positions are also filled by women, including chapter 9
institutions.

In business, the private sector, sports and administration women have also
made their mark. While men are still dominating many of the above
positions, women are still faced with many challenges. Women’s Day has come
and gone. This month of August is the month of women. A lot is being done
to highlight the many difficult issues faced by women in South Africa. The
plight of women should be highlighted every day for 365 days of the year.
Every day must be a women’s day. [Applause.] You may ask your question, hon
member.

Mr W M SKHOSANA: Chairperson, I was interested in the specific form of
intimidation which the Deputy President meted out to hon Moss. What did she
say?

Mr M I MOSS: Chairperson, maybe what I should say is that the Deputy
President visited my constituency during the constituency period and she
once more highlighted the role women should play. Girl learners from
surrounding schools came to my area and she emphasised the point that there
are opportunities. They can become pilots, a field being dominated by men.
I think she actually wanted me to say that. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, elke spreker wat vanmiddag hier gepraat
het, het met erns gepraat oor ’n baie ernstige probleem in Suid-Afrika.

Ek dink nie daar is een regdenkende mens in Suid-Afrika, en ek wil eintlik
sê in die wêreld, wat nie sal saamstem dat daar streng opgetree moet word
teen die aspek van mensehandel, spesifiek waar dit gaan oor die handel van
vrouens en kinders nie.

Ons moet ook vir mekaar sê dat as ons ernstig met mekaar hierso in debat
tree, dan moet ons ook vir onsself vra wat was gedoen tot nou toe om te
verseker dat dit nie plaasvind nie? (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, everybody who has spoken here today,
spoke in earnest about a very serious problem in South Africa.

I don’t think there is a single right-minded person in South Africa, and I
actually want to say in the world, who would not agree that strong action
needs to be taken with regard to human trafficking, particularly the
trafficking of women and children.

We should also tell one another, as we seriously engage with one another,
that we should also ask ourselves what has been done up to now to ensure
that this does not happen?]

I want to quote from News 24 of 22 May 2002:


  Parliament’s Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and Status
  of Children on Wednesday called for more information about the extent of
  child trafficking in South Africa, days after Safety and Security
  Minister Charles Nqakula denied its prevalence.


As die agb Minister van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit die voorkoms van
kinderhandel misken of ontken en nie behoorlik aandag daaraan gee nie, hoe
kan ons dan nou vandag hier ’n debat kom voer en vertel hoe ernstig is die
probleem? Dit was al in 2002.

In 2004 word die projek Priscilla geloots en word daar ’n direkte lyn
beskikbaar gestel vir kinders wat dalk ontvoer word, wat dan kan skakel.
Ons is nou weer twee jaar daarna. My vraag is aan die agb lede van die
uitvoerende gesag, die agb ministers wat vrouens is, die agb Minister van
Onderwys, die agb Adjunkpresident, die agb Minister van Landbou, die agb
Minister van Binnelandse Sake - wie se man die Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit is. Wat doen u in die uitvoerende gesag? Is u magteloos om iets
te doen? [Tussenwerpsels.] [Tyd verstreke.]] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows)

[If the hon Minister of Safety and Security fails to appreciate or denies
the prevalence of the trafficking of children and does not attend to it
properly, how can we now debate it here today and say how serious the
problem is? That was back in 2002.

In 2004 Project Priscilla was launched and a direct line was made available
for children that may have been abducted, who could then use it. It is now
two years later. My question is to the hon members of the executive, the
hon ministers who are women, the hon Minister of Education, the hon Deputy
President, the hon Minister of Agriculture, the hon Minister of Home
Affairs – whose husband is the Minister of Safety and Security. What are
you doing in the executive? Are you powerless to do anything?
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]]

Mr T M LIKOTSI: Deputy Chairperson, human trafficking, especially in women
and children, has become a lucrative business to some criminal elements
internationally. It is estimated that, annually, up to US$19 billion
changes hands in this industry. The continent of Africa has not escaped
unscathed from this beastly industry. According to research, annually,
between one and four million people are trafficked internationally.

This debate is aimed at raising awareness of trafficking for us as
legislators and the nation at large. Although Chapter 2 of our Constitution
- the Bill of Rights – enshrines the protection of the dignity, equality
and freedom of our citizens, this institution has still to legislate on the
trafficking of women and children.

The International Organisation for Migration describes human trafficking as
a modern-day form of slavery. The PAC of Azania’s position on human dignity
is very clear. A man is a social being and not an economic animal. I thank
you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Igama lamakhosikazi! [In the name of women!] Chair, the MF
expresses its disgust and contempt for all forms of trafficking in women
and children. Traffickers are in no way human and the fact that human
trafficking is one of the most lucrative means of profit for organised
crime internationally is appalling.

In acknowledging the seriousness of human trafficking globally, the MF
feels that South Africa needs to take a more active stand in combating it
by initiating research into the statistics of human trafficking in South
Africa. At present, however, the fact is that South Africa is being
utilised as both a destination and a transit point for human trafficking.

We call on the House to fulfil its undertakings made in signing and
ratifying the United Nations Palermo Protocol by introducing legislation
that would establish a regulatory framework for both victims and
perpetrators of trafficking. This legislation should also provide for
foreign victims of trafficking being harboured in South Africa. We also
need to establish proper facilities to assist victims and to train law-
enforcement officers in handling victims with care.

Further, noting the seriousness of HIV/Aids in South Africa and the
vulnerability to infection posed by trafficking, the MF once again calls
for immediate action to be taken against the trafficking of women and
children. Thank you, Chair.

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chair, this issue of trafficking in women and children
is a phenomenon that has been haunting us for centuries, despite courageous
efforts from most governments of the world. Legislation to combat this
practice in itself should not be seen as the final solution, as it has to
be effectively policed and that is easier said than done.

The United Party of SA is of the opinion that this issue needs to be made a
greater priority of the relevant law-enforcement agencies. Perpetrators -
those who misuse women and children - must feel the full force of the law
and they should be stripped of every economic benefit they acquired through
this practice.

The private sector, churches and NGOs that are currently combating this
issue of trafficking in women and children are to be congratulated and they
must continue with their noble efforts, as it is usually the vulnerable and
poorest of our community who are caught up in this vile net.

The current resources and programmes available to combat this inhumane
practice are, to say the least, inadequate. Government needs to be more
resourceful in the allocation of its finances in order to create adequate
infrastructure to effectively combat this practice. Government has to be
mindful that it has an obligation to protect the basic human rights of
these victims as enshrined in our Constitution.

Failure to effectively combat this practice will further add to the
escalation of the HIV/Aids pandemic, and therefore there is no room for
failure in this matter. I thank you.
Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon members, the FD believes that our government
has sufficient information on the trafficking of women and children to act
decisively and to outlaw this scourge.

What we as members must ask our government today is when a draft Bill on
the prevention of trafficking in women and children will be submitted to
Parliament, so that we as public representatives will have the opportunity
to deal a decisive blow to the trafficking of women and children.

Our Parliament has been debating this issue for the past 10 years, yet very
little has been done to stop this scourge. We have signed and ratified all
the international charters, which elevates South Africa’s international
status, but does nothing for the women and children who are being
trafficked by international syndicates on a daily basis.

The International Organisation for Migration published research in 2003
stating that South Africa is a main destination for trafficked women and
children. Traffickers operating in South Africa include Nigerian networks,
Chinese triads, Russian and Bulgarian mafia and various groups of organised
criminal syndicates. Victims trafficked in South Africa often end up in
Europe and Asia.

In South Africa there is some legislation that outlaws sexual acts with
children, such as the Child Care Act. The Immigration Act does criminalize
trafficking, and the Sexual Offences Act is being reviewed in order to
include legislation and penalties relating to trafficking.

However, the 2004 Issue Paper by the SA Law Commission recommends protocols
to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women
and children, and this has not been authorised by our government. The FD
supports this draft resolution, and we hope that our government will take
action without delay. I thank you.

Mrs S M CAMERER: Chairperson, for the past three years the DA has been
campaigning in Parliament for the passing of legislation that outlaws the
trafficking in women and children.

In April 2003, we submitted a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Child Care
Act in order to render trafficking in children a criminal offence. This was
approved by the Private Member’s Legislative Proposals Portfolio Committee
and forwarded to the relevant departments, namely Justice and Social
Development, for action.

The new Children’s Act contains a comprehensive provision that outlaws
trafficking in children; which is a start. But I understand though that the
Act has now been signed into law and has not yet been implemented.

When the Sexual Offences Bill was before the Justice Committee in 2003, the
DA proposed - and it was agreed - to include a provision outlawing
trafficking in women and children for the purposes of sexual exploitation.
This has now been included in a revised Bill, which is presently before the
Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development. We are doing
our best to ensure that this Bill becomes law before the end of the year.

Some organisations that are concerned with violence against women and
children have argued against the inclusion of this provision on the basis
that it is too narrow in focus, dealing as it does with trafficking for
sexual exploitation. They pointed out that the full gamut of trafficking
for domestic work and other forms of labour, forced marriages, adoption,
organ sale and so on is not covered. They have asked us to delay until the
SA Law Reform Commission drafts the comprehensive piece of legislation.

The DA believes that this is too long to wait. The commission has only just
published its discussion paper on trafficking in persons for comment. It
may be years before we have proposals for the commission for the
comprehensive legislation that we would all like to see. We believe,
however, that a start must be made.

The SAPS has, for years, been calling for a specific law to outlaw
trafficking. Last year the SAPS’s Sexual Offences and Child Protection Unit
as well as specialists in sexual offences from the National Prosecuting
Authority briefed Parliament, both deploring the fact that South Africa has
no specific legislation to outlaw trafficking in persons in spite of years
of requests by these authorities.

The NPA pointed out that it is extremely difficult to prosecute
successfully for trafficking in the current legal environment. The SAPS
also made the point that sexual exploitation appears to be the main form of
trafficking in South Africa at this point in time though this may change.

Accordingly, although Parliament’s approach has been somewhat piecemeal,
the DA believes it is important to get the prohibition of trafficking
contained in the Sexual Offences Bill on to the Statute Books and to get
the Children’s Act provisions implemented to give the police that extra
weapon to fight the scourge.

There is widespread evidence that trafficking is on the increase in our
country and in our sub-continent. The International Organisation for
Migration contends that there is one ``long grass’’ pathway between the DRC
and Cape Town with minimal border control and the main destination of
victims of trafficking from sub-Saharan Africa is South Africa.

The bottom line is that as things stand now South Africa has also not
complied with its international obligations to criminalize trafficking and
the government has not yet provided adequate assistance to law enforcement
agencies to combat this growing scourge in our sub-continent.

We cannot wait for the SA Law Reform Commission. We must pass this
legislation now. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Hon Chairperson, before I start with my
presentation, I would like to point out to the hon Groenewald of the FF
Plus that he should not point fingers at our women Ministers in the
Cabinet. We have learnt from our women, especially those in Parliament,
that the demand for sexual exploitation comes from men and that men in this
House should stop demanding and help us eradicate this problem. Don’t point
fingers at us as women, please. [Applause.] Thank you very much.

From this debate this afternoon we can agree that the issue of trafficking
of women and children is a serious issue. Trafficking means the
recruitment, transportation, transferring, harbouring or receipt of persons
by means of threat or use of force or other forms of cohesion, abduction,
fraud, deception, the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or
of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent
of a person having control of another person for the purpose of
exploitation.

In simple language, it is when a woman or a child is taken away forcefully,
without consent and taken to a place that she or he does not know, to be
used for sexual exploitation or forced labour. In other cases a woman or
child is sold for money or promised money without that woman or child’s
consent and taken away.

In cases that we have heard of during the Women’s Parliament young people,
in the hope of finding employment, see an advertisement in the newspaper
for jobs in places like Dubai. On arrival in Dubai, they are forced to do
work that they didn’t expect to do or have to work as sex slaves.

In this case, one mother who was a participant in the Women’s Parliament
mentioned that her daughter, who was working in Dubai, wanted to leave the
country, only to find that the agency refused to give back her passport.
The daughter was then told that she owed huge sums of money to the
recruitment agent and that she had to pay back travel money and she must
stay to work to pay back that money. Fortunately the mother had a friend in
Dubai who was able to assist the daughter to get away. But what about our
many other young people who are stuck in unpleasant situations with no
means of coming back home?

Trafficking happens all over, in places that we as parents are not even
aware of. Many parents drop their children at shopping malls and leave them
there, little knowing that these are the malls targeted by traffickers.
Those involved in trafficking can be people whom we trust such as teachers
and pastors. We need to know and we need to inform our constituencies that
we serve that at all times we must know where our children are. We must
know that our children are safe.

We also heard about young women who are being sent back to their
communities to recruit other young people so that they can earn money.
Young girls are lured by the promise of nice clothes and money that the
person who is doing the recruitment is talking about.

We also need to understand that trafficking of humans, regardless of sex or
race, is also a way to obtain organs without consent. We have cases of
people going missing and being killed for their organs. These cases all
involve money. People are willing to pay for organs, and people are willing
to traffic in humans for the sake of money, but our people do not realise
that when they sell their children or when their children go missing it is
because of organs that other people need. There are many doctors who are
involved in trafficking of organs. Many of the doctors will find a match
for organs and will sell these organs because they are getting paid for
them.

Disabled people are not exempt from trafficking. We have heard of blind
people from neighbouring countries are being brought here and used to beg
for money on the streets. Money received is not used for themselves, but
that money goes to the person who brought them into South Africa. How much
worse for a person who cannot see and cannot speak English or any of our
African languages and therefore cannot ask where they are? Deaf women are
used to marry someone from another country, then trafficked out of South
Africa. There was a request that accessible information goes out to people
with disabilities about the issue of trafficking.

In our South African Constitution, there are a number of sections that are
relevant to the protection of women. For example, section 9 deals with the
right to equality, section 10, the right to dignity, and section 12, the
right to freedom and security of persons, especially the right to be free
from all forms of violence, from either public or private sources.

The Constitutional Court has held that equality is the cornerstone of our
Constitution. In addition, equality has been interpreted by the court to
have a substantive rather than a formal meaning. This may well impose
duties on government to ensure women’s safety rather than to refrain from
interfering with women’s safety. This means that the citizens can demand
that resources be allocated to shelters, victim empowerment programmes,
training of law-enforcement agents and other projects aimed at the
protection of women and children from violence.

The ANC has always called for a caring society, a better South Africa, a
better Africa and a better world. In 2005, the Women’s Parliament took
place against the backdrop of the 10th anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action as well as the United Nations
Conference on the Commission on the Status of Women, which took place in
2005.

One of the themes of group discussions was the trafficking of women and
children. Out of the discussions, key challenges were mentioned, such as
legislation, children, rehabilitation services, government and civil
society, sex workers, illegal immigrants, and recommendations were made for
victim support, legislation, awareness campaigns and building partnerships.

When the hon Speaker made her closing remarks, she remarked that the
trafficking of women and children emerged as the single biggest challenge
facing the continent. The Women’s Parliament resolved to do as much follow
up as possible. We as the Women’s Parliament and as Parliament need to give
hope to the victims and to wage war against human trafficking. Therefore in
the Women’s Parliament of 2006, the full theme of this Parliament was “The
trafficking of women and children”. The main objective was to raise
awareness of and the mobilisation of South Africans against the
exploitation of women and children through trafficking.

I would like to thank the Office of the Speaker for having this topic,
namely “Trafficking of Women and Children” as a way of highlighting this
serious issue. This issue is not new; it’s an old issue.

Hon Chairperson, I would like to mention to the hon members that when I was
a young teenager, I took out a book from the library about the white sex
slave trade, where white women were taken from their homes and sent as sex
slaves to other countries. After that, I studied in America about slavery
and the abolition of slavery. Well, I thought that the white sex slave
trade had been abolished, only to read about human trafficking today, this
time about trafficking of women of all races and ages, and also of
children, both boys and girls.

Therefore, it is important to repeat that many of us in this House, and
people on the ground, are not deeply aware of the seriousness of
trafficking in women and children. I would also like to pay tribute to the
women who attended the Women’s Parliament in 2006 for their important
contributions.

The ANC has for many years acknowledged that true transformation of our
society will only have meaning if it addresses the state of the triple
oppression suffered by women. The struggle for women’s emancipation has
always been linked with that of the struggle for national liberation in
South Africa.

Our President has signed the Children’s Bill into effect. There is an
important section in the Children’s Bill that mentions trafficking of
children. This Bill now needs to be implemented so as to prevent
trafficking of children within and outside of South Africa.

Our President said at the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the 1956
Women’s March at the Union Buildings, “South Africa will not be free until
the women of our country are free”. [Applause.] He also said:

   That we are to refrain from hurting the women of our country and to
   comfort those who are sad means that we must approach the task of
   achieving gender equality, of the emancipation of women, the guarantee of
   their safety and security, the eradication of poverty and the enhancement
   and defence of the human dignity of the women of our country with the
   greatest determination and unwavering commitment.

He went on to say that not only government, the police and social workers
face this challenge, but that it confronts all of us as South Africans.

As we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March, we have to
address the scourge of women and child abuse. We have to defend the view
that women’s rights are human rights. We have to unite to defeat poverty
and poor access to resources experienced by many of our womenfolk.

Together as a nation, we must uphold the view that none of us is free
unless the women of our country are free from race and gender
discrimination, free from poverty and the loss of human dignity, and free
from fear and violence.

Like the women attending the Women’s Parliament 2006, who adopted the
declaration to urge our government and Parliament to eradicate human
trafficking, so should we as Members of Parliament work to make sure
trafficking of women and children of South Africa, Africa and other
countries is indeed eradicated. Hon Chairperson, I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.


           2010 FIFA WORLD CUP SOUTH AFRICA SPECIAL MEASURES BILL

        SECOND FIFA 2010 WORLD CUP SOUTH AFRICA SPECIAL MEASURES BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Chairperson, hon Deputy
President, and hon members, this Bill endeavours to give effect to the
organisation association agreement of 2004, which was signed between the
Fédération Internationale de Football Association, Fifa, and the SA
Football Association, Safa, for the hosting and staging of the 2010 World
Cup in South Africa. The Bill also provides a legal framework to give
effect to the guarantees issued to Fifa by a number of government
departments, and collectively by our President.

The only institution in the world with whom the authority to organise,
promote and supervise football resides is Fifa. South Africa, through Safa,
placed a bid to host and organise the 2010 World Cup on behalf of Fifa. The
latter then provided Safa with a list of requirements regarding the staging
and hosting of the final competition of the 2010 World Cup.

The government of South Africa supported Safa, and undertook to issue all
guarantees requested in the list of requirements to ensure the success of
the 2010 World Cup in South Africa. Our government also guaranteed to take
all measures necessary in order to comply with these guarantees.

Our government saw, in the opportunity to host the Football World Cup, a
whole range of benefits for South Africa and the African continent. In
anticipation of such positive spin-offs, President Mbeki dubbed the 2010
World Cup an ``African World Cup’’. The notion of an African World Cup
captured the imagination not only of Fifa and the African countries, but
also of our fellow Africans in the diaspora. The notion of an African World
Cup has been well received by most South Africans, especially young people.

We believe that hosting the 2010 World Cup affords us the biggest
opportunity to banish Afropessimism. Hosting the biggest event in the world
will go a long way, we believe, in strengthening our bond as one nation,
and boost our image amongst the nations of the world.
Although we do not intend to replicate Germany 2006, or to compete with the
Germans, we firmly believe that the same spirit of national pride that we
saw and experienced in Germany can be achieved in South Africa. This, if we
work together, can be achieved with a unity of purpose.

Hosting the 2010 World Cup, we believe, provides our government with a
golden opportunity to boost our tourism and sports industries, and push our
economic development to a higher notch. The tournament assists us to
address the infrastructure backlogs such as roads, transport facilities,
telecommunications and broadcasting networks.

Our electricity and water needs and upgrades will receive a great boost. In
a word, hosting the 2010 World Cup will fast-track the attainment of some
elements of the 2014 Millennium Development Goals and those of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa.

In 2010, 31 countries will converge on South Africa. In terms of languages,
follow-ups of the national teams will exceed 32 competitors, South Africa
being the 32nd competing nation. This affords an immense opportunity for
our young people to learn foreign languages and the cultures of other
people. This, together with the skills they must be trained in, will
improve the skills base of our young people. It will also expose them to
other cultures and teach them to respect diversity even more. 2010 will
help us fight xenophobia and unite the African people.

Social services such as disaster management, public health services, safety
and security and so on are already in advanced stages of planning for the
2010 football tournament. These services will be accessible not only to the
followers of football, but to our people before and long after 2010.

I am trying here to articulate some of the issues that our government took
into account in our support for Safa’s bid to host the World Cup in South
Africa in 2010. We were acutely aware of what the preparations would
contribute to our broad plans of transformation and development. We are
alert to the contribution this programme will make towards social cohesion
and nation-building. Seeds of this are already discernible in some areas.

Since June 2004, both Safa and our government have been involved in
discussions on the list of requirements for hosting the World Cup. A number
of departments have been involved in these discussions. As such, this Bill
traverses a number of functions that belong to departments other than Sport
and Recreation South Africa.

This Bill is one of the very keys to whether or not Fifa should continue
entrusting us with their World Cup in 2010. So far, Fifa is very pleased
with our preparations, and they are pleased, not as observers, but as
participants in all our Local Organising Committee meetings.

The Bill is designed to facilitate the hosting and staging of the Fifa
World Cup in South Africa in 2010. It enables and empowers the Minister of
Trade and Industry to stipulate a date later than one month after the
competition has been completed as the date on which the protection of the
2010 World Cup as a protected event ends.

The Bill empowers the Minister of Sport and Recreation to declare, by
notice in the Gazette, certain stadia and venues as stadia and venues that
have been identified and selected to host matches, under the auspices of
the LOC, of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa.
The Bill also ensures that all national flags and anthems of the countries
represented by a team at the World Cup may be flown or sung. It also
facilitates the issuing of visas and work permits by the Department of Home
Affairs to Fifa delegates, and permits by the Department of Home Affairs to
personnel and commercial affiliates of Fifa. The Bill also suspends, during
the duration of the World Cup, such restrictions regarding marketing,
distribution and consumption of liquor, sale of unregistered medicines,
etc.

The Bill also facilitates the accreditation of foreign medical contingents
and the approval of certain permitted and scheduled substances and medical
devices. The Bill provides for the promulgation of regulations by the
Minister of Sport and Recreation and the Minister of Safety and Security.

The opportunity to host the Fifa World Cup may never be afforded to South
Africa again in the lifetime of most of us who must determine the fate of
this Bill. To support this Bill is a legacy in its own right. Let us all be
part of that legacy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you very much Chairperson and the Deputy President.
Baba Skosana, I am not going to be intimidated, because the Deputy
President has invited me to go and play soccer with her because, as she
said, she is a good goalkeeper.

Firstly, the ANC and the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation would
like to send a message of support to hon Donald Lee, his family and his
party, the DA. Hon Donald Lee was with us for the past two weeks when we
were in recess and deliberating on the Bill. At the moment he is ill in a
hospital in Port Elizabeth. We wish him a speedy recovery. We need him to
be part of this army that is tackling the 2010 Fifa World Cup. [Applause.]

I did talk to hon Donald Lee after he was taken out of the oxygen unit.
Before he left the meeting on the last day of our deliberations on the
Bill, just as we were finishing, he said to me ``Butana, I want to ask a
question.’’ I said ``You can ask the question, Mr Lee.’’ He said: ``I want
to ask all the departments that are here: Are you satisfied with the manner
in which this committee has dealt with the Bill to enable you to meet the
guarantees that your Ministers have signed to host the World Cup?’’ He went
on and said: ``We must put all our efforts into making sure that the pieces
of legislation that are here will be enabling legislation for us to be able
to stage this legacy of the 2010 World Cup without a waste of time.’’ We
appreciate that a lot, and we convey that to his party.

We would like to thank all the parties that were involved. General
Holomisa, your inputs were very valuable during our deliberations. We
appreciate your time spent with us up until the end of the deliberations.
We would also like to thank the MF and all other parties. In particular, we
would like to send a message of appreciation to members of the ruling party
- the ANC - because without any of them we could not have managed to pass
the Bill in time.

We made history against the odds by beating the dateline in passing this
Bill. We were delighted and were singing because we managed to pass the two
Bills four days before the time to prove to our opponents again that they
were wrong.

The committee went on to call for public hearings on these two Bills,
precisely because there is a lot of interest to South Africans,
businesspeople and ordinary people who are neither businesspeople nor any
but ordinary citizens of this country. I would like to report to this House
today that it was amazing that we got such a vibrant and very committed
group of people who came to the committee to make their submissions.

One of the most important submission was made by an individual called
Advocate Holiday. After he made his submission, he asked the committee
``Why do South Africans need this legislation?’’ We replied that we needed
the legislation because the original legislation, as it stands, is not
necessarily creating enabling conditions for us to stage the World Cup. And
then he asked: Do we have any experience of the pattern around the world
where the World Cup has been hosted? We said we had the pleasure, as
members of the National Assembly, of being allowed to go to France and
Germany. All those countries had passed a similar Bill because this is a
piece of legislation that relaxes strict measures that the countries had in
their original legislation. Then he said: ``Now, I understand why we have
to have this kind of legislation.’’ We were very impressed about that.

The key element of the Bill that the Minister spoke about is that the
Minister of Trade and Industry is going to stipulate the dates before and
after in which this Fifa event will not be a protected event. Between those
dates this will be a protected event in terms of a proclamation by the
Ministry of Trade and Industry. Therefore, the Bill also provides that the
Minister of Trade and Industry must be able to stipulate a date when this
protected event of Fifa is going to lapse.

The Bill also provides that the Minister of Sport and Recreation must
declare the stadia or any other venues, because if those are not declared
in a Gazette, they might not necessarily be the venues that are going to
host this very important occasion of the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

We were confronted at the public hearings by businesspeople, Absa, Vodacom
and others. The most important matters raised during these debates were
that as Absa and Vodacom, who have built their names for the past 13 years
in South Africa around sport, what they are requesting is that they don’t
want money from Fifa but are asking the Minister what their role could be
during the 2010 World Cup, like any other person.

Many roles were clarified, thanks to our own Danny Jordaan, because during
the public hearings he had the entire Fifa delegation come and explain
their understanding and our own understanding of the interpretation of
these pieces of legislation, so that we do not go wrong because we think
that we are creating conditions that are going to enable South Africa to
host the 2010 Fifa World Cup, yet we are preventing such conditions. That’s
why we had to call in the Fifa delegation so that they could give us a more
detailed explanation of what their conceptualisation and understanding
around this World Cup is.

The police were called in and they gave their own understanding of the
guarantees that were signed by the Ministers of Safety and Security,
Foreign Affairs, Home Affairs, Trade and Industry and Health.

Parts of this legislation before us today relate to an inquiry following
the Ellis Park disaster, when people died there. Therefore, this piece of
legislation provides that in the event of such a disaster occurring, we
must minimise the scale of that disaster through this piece of legislation,
because one matter that the police raised, and that was also raised in the
commission, was that helicopters had to be able to land at the stadium, and
ambulances had to be able to move freely. There was a blockage preventing
free movement of ambulances there, hence quite a number of people died.
Otherwise, that could have been prevented. Therefore, the police are now
requesting the search and seizure, the removal and refusal of vehicles that
are likely to obstruct the open area that would be designated for such
eventualities.

With regard to health, there are assistive devices that are going to come
with the 32 teams that will be coming to South Africa. Therefore, this
piece of legislation provides that when those people come into this country
with medical devices we must be able to ask them to take them back. Because
if we do not do that, Deputy President, it is said, in terms of the
original Act, that we will have to pay for those assistive devices.

... asizifuni ngoba bezize ebholeni. Sicela ukuba babuyele nazo emva. [...
we do not want them, because they brought them to the World Cup. We ask
them to take them back.]

Therefore, this is enables them to take those devices back home – after the
event.

However, the most important thing was the very vibrant debate around the
issue of flags, which was clearly explained to us by Foreign Affairs so
that there is no ambiguity about it. The flags that are going to be flown
during the World Cup are the national flags of the countries – not any
other flag. So, let us not blow this out of proportion. It is very clear
and we have accepted that as a fact and there should be no ambiguity about
the issue.

The committee, however, proposed that in the regulations we must outlaw any
other flags or symbols that might antagonise some people and thus spoil
this very important event. Therefore, regulations will deal with that,
because it could not be placed in the original Act or in this one. We will
check, Minister, to see if it is there.

The issue of designated areas was dealt with the police and also by the
local organising committee. People were saying that Fifa wants a 1 km-
designated area and that issue was cleared up during the deliberations.
According to Fifa the fence surrounding the stadium is the beginning of
that area and anything inside that fence falls within the jurisdiction of
Fifa. Anything that is outside the fence does not, as Mr Palma explained,
fall within the jurisdictions of Fifa. The reason is that members were
asking: What will happen to the boerewors, peanuts, tshisanyama, hats,
ginger beer and other things that our people sell at the stadiums?

Fifa was forthright and said that they were not going to interfere with
those people that sell boerewors and other things. The bonus is that, in
any event, there is no conflict of interest and there will be no boerewors
sponsor of the Fifa World Cup. Therefore people can go and sell the
boerewors and eat it; there is nothing wrong in doing that. Therefore those
that come to the World Cup feeling hungry ...

... julle moet die boerewors kry, manne. Daar is nie probleme met daardie
pap en boerewors van julle nie. [... you must get the boerewors, guys.
There is no problem with that pap (porridge) and boerewors (sausage) of
yours.]

So, I think that is what was important. The other matter that was very
important was that Fifa said that people who are part of SMMEs, in terms of
the original Act of Trade and Industry, and those who want to sell things
that have Fifa trademarks, should apply and be given a licence and a
certain space where they could sell these items.

Fifa does not have the capacity, Deputy President, to go and sell their T-
shirts at the stadium. But everybody who is a South African citizen will
have to apply through the proper channels and will be given a place where
he or she can sell the T-shirts during the 2010 World Cup. Those articles
belong to Fifa and people must get permission to sell them. So, we can all
benefit from the Fifa event and it is not as dark and gloomy as we probably
thought it would be.

We are absolutely delighted today to address this House to assert,
Minister, that the ANC totally supports these two Bills.

On 7 July 2006, the President received a torch in Germany, which had to be
taken to South Africa. On the very same day, South Africa unveiled the
World Cup 2010 emblem. What is important is that at the time Germany did
not unveil its logo on time. Yet, South Africa unveiled its logo when they
were receiving the torch and there was no major reaction as a result of
that. There was no agitation in saying that Germany was late and so on. It
unveiled the banner long after it was supposed to do so.

We had requested Parliament that we wanted to go and see the teething
problems that were facing people in Germany during the World Cup. When we
arrived in Germany we found that the stadium was not yet completed – six
months before the World Cup – and that they were busy building a grand
international train station. The German people were still dealing with the
construction of that grand train station because they were running against
time - but nothing happened and nobody complained. There was no train
smash.

On the other hand, we have just received the torch and the green light on 7
July, to deal with the issues of Fifa. It is only the 8th month today, but
the kind of pressure put on the South African government and the people of
South Africa is amazing. We have made many gains during this short period
of time and I think we need to pat ourselves on the back and say we are
ready.

Finally, Minister, the message that the committee sends to you is that we
join the President in saying that Africa is truly ready and that South
Africa is ready. It is our time. We must rise with the tide and make it the
best World Cup so that people will never forget it. We thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr S J MASANGO: Deputy President, you are going. Chairperson, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers, hon members, it is now just under four years before South
Africa hosts the 2010 Fifa World Cup. No doubt, it will be a memorable
occasion; a chance for South Africans from all walks of life to celebrate
hosting a once-in-a-lifetime tournament in our own country.

The mere fact that today we are debating the 2010 Fifa World Cup South
Africa Special Measures Bill should serve as an indication to all those
involved in preparations for the 2010 Fifa World Cup that South Africans
and Africa as a whole want to see this tournament being run successfully,
and not fail.

As the chairperson has said, the Bill in front of us today “seeks to relax
a specific set of laws and regulations that are necessary to facilitate the
hosting and staging of the World Cup”. In fact, there is little to debate.
The Bill simply sets out what we have already agreed to in the guarantees
we have signed with Fifa.

Passing this Bill is more of a legal obligation than a result of a
considered independent process. However, that doesn’t mean that it is not
important, or that the content should not be analysed and discussed.

The Bill achieves a number of different practical objectives, but also
represents an undertaking, a commitment by South Africa, to deliver a set
of conditions and an environment in which it is possible to host not a good
World Cup, not an excellent World Cup, but the best World Cup.

There is something very particular and specific about a guarantee. Apart
from the legal obligation, it means that we have given our word that we
will deliver. Every element of our society must now do its part to ensure
that we make good on our promises. We should use this tournament to show
the rest of the world just how good we are.

The tournament in Germany has been one of the most successful, not just for
the ball skills displayed on the field, but also for the wonderful
organisation that was done behind the scenes. South Africa should continue
where Germany has left off, but, unfortunately, there is still a lot to be
done to get where the Germans have left off.

Five departments were involved in the drafting of this Bill, and they
participated through their input. Those five departments must now ensure
that every effort is made not just to comply with the requirements of this
Bill, but to exceed them. That should be the approach that defines the 2010
Fifa World Cup for South Africans and the rest of the world, that we’ll not
just do that which is necessary, but we’ll take the organisation and the
running of this famous tournament to a new level. We’ll raise the bar and
we’ll exceed every expectation, and we’ll be the best.

The Department of Sport and Recreation, as the hosting department, must
take most of the responsibility. Together with a whole range of departments
and the local organising committee, it needs to ensure that the venues are
available and in order, and on a par with Fifa requirements.

The Deputy Minister of Finance, Mr Jabu Moleketi, who heads a technical
task team, including senior officials from all the Ministries involved in
the 2010 project, is responsible for ensuring that South Africa meets the
17 guarantees made to Fifa. He has an awesome responsibility, but at the
same time he has an awesome opportunity.

That is a challenge that faces every South African. It is time that South
Africans came together in support of a successful 2010 Fifa World Cup. We
can do this by rallying behind the local organising committee - the DA will
definitely do that – the SA Football Association, Safa, the coach and his
technical team and, lastly, the team. Bafana Bafana, siyavena! [Bafana
Bafana, we are winners!] Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, there’s no doubt about the mass appeal that
football has. It is played by over 240 million players, in 1,4 million
teams and in 300 000 clubs across the world. This is without doubt the most
favoured sport, and we, in South Africa, are in the privileged position of
hosting the Fifa World cup in 2010.

This event is broadcast to hundreds of countries around the world, with
billions of people watching the many games. Although we have successfully
hosted major international sporting events in the past, such as the Rugby
and Cricket World Cups, no single sporting event comes close to the mass
appeal and sheer size of the Fifa World Cup.

The excitement and publicity that this tournament generates was obvious for
all to see with the recently completed event that was successfully hosted
by Germany.

I think that we can also remember clearly the euphoria that was experienced
when South Africa was announced as the hosts for the 2010 event. The
organisation and hard work that go into the successful hosting and staging
of a tournament of this magnitude is mind-boggling. These two Bills before
us today have been drafted to facilitate the hosting and staging of this
event.

The eyes of the world will be focused on South Africa and Africa for the
duration of the tournament. It is, therefore, imperative that we use the
resources at our disposal to successfully host this tournament and prove to
many pessimists, who are saying that we are not ready to host the World
Cup, that we are capable and we’ll stage the best event yet.

These Bills will go a long way towards assisting our cause. Much has been
said about the many benefits and opportunities that will come about as a
result of the event. There will be increased revenue from advertising,
increased occupancy at hotels and other lodgings, as well as numerous other
benefits. It is, however, important that all South Africans, and not just a
select few, benefit from these opportunities.

We must also do our utmost to ensure that the positive effects and spin-
offs of the World Cup will last long after the event is over and will have
a sustainable effect. We don’t want a situation where the unemployment rate
increases drastically after the tournament. We must strive for
sustainability.

As much as I’d like to go on about all the positive effects and spin-offs
that this tournament will generate, not just for South Africa, but,
hopefully, for the entire continent of Africa, the harsh reality is that
there is still an enormous amount that has to be done and much that has to
be corrected before we are ready to host an event of this magnitude.

We have to look at the situation and ask ourselves, honestly, whether we
will have the capacity to deal with this influx of tourists. Will our
police service have the capacity to ensure that many visitors will have a
safe stay? Will our transport services have the capacity to transport
tourists safely and comfortably to their destinations? Will our airports
cope with the added visitors? These are just a few of the many genuine
concerns that we must find solutions to.

Besides all the hard work that is necessary to ensure that the actual
football tournament itself is to be conducted successfully, for example the
completion and readiness of the stadia and facilities to be used directly
in the tournament, we must also remember that there is going to be an
unprecedented number of visitors to our country at one time. Their stay in
South Africa must be as pleasant an experience for them as possible to
ensure that they will come back to our country for a return visit after the
World Cup.

Although we are faced with many challenges and obstacles, I do believe that
with the relevant stakeholders working together and being open and honest
when identifying these obstacles and areas of weakness, we will be ready to
host the 2010 Fifa World Cup successfully.

The thought of hosting the World Cup is a very daunting, but even more
exciting prospect, especially for a continent such as Africa with such a
great love for the game of football and home to many great players, who’ve
brought joy to the people over the years. This is our chance to show the
rest of the world what we are capable of.

To make this a truly memorable World Cup, we must do all we can to ensure
that this event is affordable to, and can be enjoyed by, the average
person. Although it is important to learn from the experience of other
countries, it is imperative that we do not replicate them. This is an
African World Cup and as Africans we have a different rhythm, a different
climate and a unique way of doing things. Let us embrace our uniqueness and
make this a proudly African World Cup.

We, in the IFP, believe that with the right support and dedication, South
Africa will be ready to host the most successful World Cup yet. These two
Bills before us today assist in making this a reality. We support these
Bills. I thank you. [Applause.]

Die ADJUNKMINISTER VAN SPORT EN ONTSPANNING: Voorsitter, as ons na hierdie
twee wetsontwerpe voor ons kyk, dan moet ons die land en die Huis meedeel
dat ons as regering en die Ministerie van Sport en Ontspanning so vinnig
was dat Fifa ons, ná twee regswerkswinkels met hulle, gevra het om nie in
Desember verlede jaar nie, maar eers vanjaar hierdie wetgewing voor die
Parlement te bring omdat hulle ons van sekere antwoorde moes voorsien.

Om dit reg te kry moes ons baie spesiale samewerking kry van die Leier van
Regeringsake, die Speaker en die Voorsitter van die Nasionale Raad van
Provinsies, die Swepery, die Parlementêre Adviseur van die President, mnr
John Jeffery, en natuurlik die portefeulje- en gekose komitees, en ons sê
baie dankie vir die samewerking en ondersteuning wat ons gehad het as
departement om hierdie wonderlike wetsontwerpe vanmiddag voor ons te hê.

Fifa, wat die wêreldbeheerliggaam van sokker is, is wêreldwyd daarvoor
verantwoordelik om deur middel van opvoedings- en ontwikkelingsprogramme
die sport sokker te bevorder en toesig oor internasionale wedstryde te hou.
Die wetsontwerpe voor die Huis is opgestel om die gasheerskap van die 2010-
Fifa-wêreldbeker in Suid-Afrika, ons wonderlike mooi land, te akkommodeer.

Kortom, dit is wetsontwerpe op spesiale maatreëls wat multidissiplinêre
wetgewing is en daarop gemik is om die 17 regeringswaarborge aan Fifa te
beliggaam. Die regering van Suid-Afrika het hierdie waarborge verskaf omdat
ons ’n plig het om belangrike ontwikkelingsdoelwitte na te streef. Trouens,
die Grondwet vereis dit van ons as ’n regering.

Die verdere breë inisiatiewe van die regering om armoede teen 2014 hok te
slaan word deur die mense van Suid-Afrika en ook die Verenigde Nasies
wêreldwyd onderskryf. Die uitdaging wat ons as regering het, is om met die
toepassing en implementering van ons waarborge ’n balans te handhaaf tussen
die breë nasionale belang en die spesifieke belange van Fifa. Ek glo ons
het daarin geslaag met die daarstelling van die artikel 75- en 76-
wetsontwerpe.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, when we look at
these two Bills before us, then we have to inform the country and the House
that we as government and the Ministry of Sport and Recreation were so
quick that Fifa asked us, after two legal workshops with them, not to bring
this legislation before Parliament in December of last year, but rather to
do so this year, because they had to provide us with certain answers.

In order to accomplish this, we had to get very special co-operation from
the Leader of Government Business; the Speaker and the Chairperson of the
National Council of Provinces; the Whippery; Mr John Jeffrey, the
Parliamentary Counsellor to the President; and, of course, the portfolio
and select committees, and we are very grateful for the co-operation and
support we have had as a department in order to have these wonderful Bills
before us this afternoon.

Fifa, which is the world governing body for football, is responsible for
promoting the sport of football around the world through education and
development programmes and supervising international matches. The Bills
before the House have been drafted to facilitate the hosting of the 2010
Fifa World Cup in South Africa, our wonderful country.

In short, these are special measures Bills which are multidisciplinary and
are aimed at encompassing the 17 guarantees given by the government to
Fifa. The government of South Africa gave these guarantees because we have
a duty to pursue important development goals. For that matter, the
Constitution requires that of us as a government.

The additional broad initiatives by the government to eradicate poverty by
2014 have been endorsed by the people of South Africa and also the United
Nations around the world. The challenge that we face as a government is to
strike a balance between the broad national interests of the Republic and
the specific interests of Fifa when applying and implementing our
guarantees. I believe we have accomplished this with the introduction of
these section 75 and 76 Bills.]

When Fifa decided in 2001 that the 2010 World Cup should be held on African
soil for the first time, the continent of Africa rejoiced, not only for the
love of the game, but also knowing that it would help us make this a
century of African growth and development. The 2010 World Cup brings the
unique opportunity to ensure that the world learns more about the strengths
and opportunities of a country and a continent undergoing far-reaching
reconstruction and development.

In 1996 President Mbeki captured Parliament and the world when he delivered
a speech and declared: “I am an African.” That speech is, like the Minister
of Sport and Recreation says, simply indelible on the mind. “I am an
African,” the African Renaissance, Nepad and the African World Cup of 2010
seem to fit into one another. They give us as Africans a rare opportunity
to look into the President’s logical, systematic and brilliant mindset.

This characteristic of being an African engenders caring, compassion and
sharing. It gives birth to the model order of empathy, helping others and
having feelings for them. In a nutshell, this is ubuntu, a philosophy of
the collective, of the community as opposed to individualism.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa has been marketed as an African
World Cup, so the preparations for this tournament, its hosting and long
thereafter must bequeath to our people and our nation a legacy we can all
be proud of. Let me say that part of the legacy we must leave behind is to
eradicate and root out racism and tribalism. The challenge for us as South
Africans is to make the best of the opportunities offered by 2010.

Geleenthede gaan veel verder as net die aanbied van ’n suksesvolle 2010-
wêreldbeker. As regering kyk ons na waar Suid-Afrika een dekade ná 2010
moet staan. Die aandag van die wêreld is op ons gevestig. As regering het
ons die planne, die strategie, die strukture en die wil om ’n blywende en
volhoubare erfenis te skep en na te laat. Deel van die erfenis wat ons moet
nalaat, is die uitwissing van rassisme en diskriminasie.

Die vraag is of ons as Suid-Afrikaners verenig is in ons strewe om 2010 ’n
sentrale punt van ons vaderlandsliefde en van ons patriotisme te maak.
Patriotisme is mos wanneer ’n mens die belange van die land ’n hartsaak
maak en dan dienooreenkomstig optree. Die vraag is: streef ons almal na
dieselfde eenheidsgevoel van trots wat ons in 1995 gehad het toe die
Springbokke die Rugbywêreldbeker gewen het? Want toe, in 1995, het almal
gejuig en ons het almal één gevoel. Almal was toe trots Suid-Afrikaans.

Die vraag is: is ons almal eenparig in ons strewe om 2010 ’n nasionale
doelwit en ’n nasionale sukses te maak? Juig ons almal regtig en is ons
almal nog so trots Suid-Afrikaans soos in 1995? Ek vra hierdie vrae en
elkeen van ons hier in die Huis en daar buite sal eerlik hierop moet
antwoord. Natuurlik is dit so dat elke goeie Suid-Afrikaner wil hê dat Fifa
se 2010-sokkertoernooi moet plaasvind en dat hulle alles moontlik sal doen
om dit te laat geskied, maar die ander kant is ook waar.

Ongelukkig is daar ook diegene wat deur allerlei foefies en eierdansery ’n
stokkie daarvoor wil steek. Ek sê vir hulle, vir daardie eierdansers, hulle
moet gereken word saam met die vyande van ons land. Die tyd het aangebreek
dat politieke leiers oor die spektrum heen uitstyg ... [Tussenwerpsels.]
Ja, die agb mnr Tony Leon ook! [Tussenwerpsels.]

Die tyd het aangebreek dat u ook ingelig word en die inligting wat u het,
lees en reg aan die media oordra. Die tyd het aangebreek dat politieke
leiers oor die spektrum heen uitstyg bó eng partypolitieke belang en hulle
ondersteuners aanmoedig om die geleenthede wat 2010 bied aan te gryp.

Kom ons neem een voorbeeld: gaan uit, mnr Leon, gaan uit, dr Mulder, gaan
moedig u mense aan om breë swart ekonomiese bemagtiging te bevorder, aan te
help en te skep. Moenie vrees nie, daar is geleenthede vir almal daar
buite. [Tussenwerpsels.] President Roosevelt het gesê die grootste ding wat
ons moet vrees, is vrees self.

Kortom, die bome van Suid-Afrika het genoeg koelte vir almal in die somer
en hulle laat genoeg son deur vir almal in die winter. Ons moet dit net
erken en vir mekaar gun in die gees van ubuntu.

Die borge van 2010 het reeds $2 miljard by Fifa gedeponeer. Dis nou die tyd
om, soos die borge van 2010, vertroue in die regering, die land en die
organiseerders te toon en jou energie, jou entoesiasme te deponeer en so te
help dat 2010 ’n sukses vir almal is. Almal van ons het ’n plig om ’n
versoeningsbydrae te lewer tot ons demokrasie. Ek is van oordeel dat sport
in die algemeen, en dan meer spesifiek die 2010-sokkertoernooi, ’n waardige
voertuig is om hierdie belangrike inisiatief ’n hupstoot te gee.
Ek is egter erg bekommerd dat Afrikaanssprekende kinders nie die
geleentheid kry om op skool kennis te maak met sokker nie. Dis die geval
bloot omdat daar nog skoolhoofde is wat die sportsoort van hulle
skoolterreine uitsluit. Hierdie gesindheid en ingesteldheid impakteer nie
net op die geleenthede wat ons kinders ontneem word nie, dit kortwiek ook
transformasie.

As ek na die media in Suid-Afrika kyk – en ek is nie in ’n geveg met hulle
nie, ek maak net ’n punt – en die Afrikaanse koerante lees en by die
sportblaaie kom, dan sien ek rugby, rugby, rugby en so ’n klein beriggie
oor sokker. Lees ek die Engelse media, byvoorbeeld die Sowetan, dan sien ek
net sokker, sokker, sokker, ’n bietjie krieket en so ’n klein beriggie oor
rugby. Die vraag is: moet ons nie begin om eweredig, gelykhandig te
rapporteer nie?

Luister ek na RSG, dan saai hulle baie min sokker uit. Die vraag moet gevra
word of ons nie miskien Woensdagaande, wanneer die Premiersokkerliga aan
die gang is, dit op RSG en miskien selfs ook op SAUK3 moet uitsaai nie.

Ons spreek hierdie leemtes aan in ’n gees van versoening op pad na 2010 en
daarná. Ons koester regtig die hoop dat ons as Suid-Afrikaners die
struikelblokke self sal oorkom. Dan alleen sal ons as Suid-Afrikaners
saamdrink by die fonteine van nasietrots en sal ons ’n eenheid wees in ons
verskeidenheid. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)
[Opportunities embody more than merely the hosting of a successful 2010
World Cup. As government we look at where South Africa should be one decade
after 2010. The eyes of the world are on us. As government we have the
plans, the strategy, the structures and the will to create and leave behind
a lasting and sustainable heritage. Part of the heritage that we have to
leave behind is the eradication of racism and discrimination.

The question is whether we as South Africans are united in our endeavour to
make 2010 a pivotal point in our love for our home country and our
patriotism. In fact, patriotism is when one takes the interests of the
country to the heart and then acts accordingly. The question is: Are we all
pursuing the same united sense of pride which we had in 1995 when the
Springboks won the Rugby World Cup? At that time, 1995, we all rejoiced and
had a sense of unity. Everyone was proudly South African.

The question is: Are we are all unanimous in our endeavour to make 2010 a
national goal and a national success? Are all of us really rejoicing and
are all of us still as proudly South African as we were in 1995? I am
asking these questions, and all of us in the House and out there will have
to answer them honestly. Of course, every good South African wants the Fifa
2010 Soccer Tournament to take place and will do everything in their power
to make it happen, but the opposite is also true.

Unfortunately, there are also those persons who want to hamper the process
through various gimmicks and egg-dancing. I say to them, those who are
guilty of egg-dancing, that they should be counted among the enemies of our
country. The time has come for political leaders across the spectrum to
rise above ... [Interjections.] Yes, the hon Mr Tony Leon as well!
[Interjections.]

The time has come for you to be informed as well and to read the
information that you have and convey the correct message to the media. The
time has come for political leaders across the spectrum to rise above
narrow party-political interests and encourage their supporters to embrace
the opportunities which are presented by 2010.

Let us take an example: Go out there, Mr Leon, go out there, Dr Mulder, go
out and encourage your people to promote, further and create broad-based
black economic empowerment. Do not be afraid; there are opportunities for
everyone out there. [Interjections.] President Roosevelt once said that our
greatest fear is fear itself.

In short, the trees in South Africa cast enough shade for everyone in
summer and let through enough sun for everyone in winter. We just have to
recognise this and not begrudge anyone this in the spirit of ubuntu.

The sponsors of 2010 have already deposited $2 billion with Fifa. Now is
the time for us, like the sponsors of 2010, to demonstrate confidence in
the government, the country and the organisers, and to deposit our energy
and enthusiasm and thus help to ensure that 2010 is a success for everyone.
All of us have a duty to make a reconciliatory contribution towards our
democracy. I am of the opinion that sport in general, and the 2010 Soccer
Tournament in particular is a worthy, as a worthy vehicle to boost this
important initiative.

I am, however, deeply concerned that Afrikaans-speaking children do not get
the opportunity at school to get to know soccer. This is the case simply
because there are still school principals who exclude the sport from their
school grounds. This attitude and predisposition not only impacts on the
opportunities which our children are deprived of, but also handicaps
transformation.

When I look at the media in South Africa – and I am not quarrelling with
them, I am merely making a point – and read the Afrikaans newspapers and
come to the sport pages, then I see rugby, rugby, rugby and a short article
on soccer. When I read the English media, for example the Sowetan, then I
only see soccer, soccer, soccer, a little bit of cricket and then a short
article on rugby. The question is: Should we not start to report in a
proportional, symmetrical way?

When I listen to RSG, they do not broadcast much soccer. The question must
be asked whether we should not perhaps, when the Premier Soccer League is
taking place on Wednesday evenings, broadcast matches on RSG and maybe even
on SABC3.

We are addressing these shortcomings in a spirit of reconciliation on the
way to 2010 and thereafter. We are really hopeful that we as South Africans
will overcome the obstacles ourselves. Only then will we, as South
Africans, drink together from the fountains of national pride and be united
in our diversity.]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup must leave behind a South Africa and Africa that
are better than we have now. Both the Millennium Development Goals and the
national development plans must guide what we do, and ultimately we must be
united in our diversity. We cannot fail. Afrika, ke nako! [Africa, it’s
time!] Together we shall deliver the best Fifa World Cup ever in 2010. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L R R REID: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy Minister and hon
members, South Africans are sport mad and we’ve had numerous international
sporting events in South Africa. We’ve also hosted certain World Cup
events, such as the Rugby World Cup in 1995, the Cricket World Cup in 2003
and, last year, the Ladies Golf World Cup. These World Cup events cannot be
compared with the Football World Cup, because the scope of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup is of such magnitude that it requires special measures to allow
South Africa to stage the world‘s biggest sporting spectacle in 2010.

I must also say that our people out there are very optimistic about 2010,
to such an extent that last Friday in Johannesburg, where we attended a
conference of Women in Sport, the women demanded that Fifa should also
stage a World Cup for women at the same time as the World Cup for men. With
this great sense of optimism, amongst the majority of the people of this
country, it’s about time that those ultra pessimists, who question our
ability to host a successful World Cup, have a change of heart. It’s about
time for them to start embracing this World Cup, because as the Freedom
Charter says, South Africa belongs to all who live in it, black and white.
This also says that this World Cup belongs to all South Africans, black and
white. [Applause.]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill, both the first
and the second one, are in compliance with the government’s guarantees.
That was said by the Fifa delegation that met with us at the portfolio
committee. These Bills are enabling legislation, because they make
provision to remove all the red tape in allowing persons to come to South
Africa to watch soccer or to work during the World Cup.

In terms of clause 4 of the Bill, the Minister of Home Affairs may grant a
visa in terms of section 10(a) of the Immigration Act to a person from a
country that is not exempted from complying with visa requirements to
attend the 2010 Fifa World Cup. I think this is very much important,
because only a handful of countries are exempted, for example, Australia,
the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland and other British overseas
territories, whereas players from the majority of soccer-loving countries,
in South America and right across the world, need to comply with visa
control regulations.

Any person, including team members, intending to perform work in the
Republic in connection with and also for the duration of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup in South Africa, must submit a letter to the Minister of Home
Affairs from Fifa approving the work to be performed. The Minister of Home
Affairs may also allow dignitaries identified by Fifa to be admitted to our
country for the duration of the 2010 Fifa World Cup in South Africa in
terms of section 31(2) of the Immigration Act.

A list containing the personal particulars of dignitaries prepared by Fifa
should be received by the Minister of Home Affairs at least 30 days before
these dignitaries arrive in the Republic. We know that many of these people
who will be coming here, will be performing work to earn money. Therefore,
these measures also make provision for those people who intend to perform
work or invest in businesses in our country for a period exceeding six
months in connection with the 2010 Fifa World Cup. When they apply for a
work or business permit, they must provide the Director-General of Home
Affairs with proof of accreditation by Fifa at least 30 days before they
travel to the Republic.

As I said earlier, only a few countries are exempted and these special
measures would make it possible for players and visitors coming from the
rest of the world to attend this Fifa World Cup.

In terms of declaring, this excludes those around or adjacent to a stadium,
a venue or other place or facility. One must also state that in those
areas, only prescribed commercial activities will take place as identified
by the LOC and those not in possession of such accreditation will be
prohibited from doing business in such an area.

In terms of drawing up the perimeters of these exclusive zones, the LOC
will take into account local conditions in a particular area and, as such,
those areas won’t include residential areas or small businesses around the
stadium. In an area like Durban, for example, where we have the ABSA
stadium and where the new stadium is being build right next to the ABSA
stadium, the perimeter will not include the ABSA stadium, but will be
between the new stadium and the ABSA stadium.

That also creates a problem because the ABSA stadium has certain ABSA
branding on it, and when the TV cameras are out there, they will be
focusing on those areas. Therefore, ABSA will get an unfair advantage over
the official sponsors of the event. In terms of the cleaning of the stadia
procedure, those signs will be removed.

As regards tickets for the World Cup - and that is being raised all the
time - there will be 3 million tickets printed by Fifa. One third of those
tickets will be available to ordinary South Africans. I must state that the
availability of tickets and not the cost of tickets is the determining
factor.

As regards the 3 million tickets, that number is determined by the sitting
capacity at all our stadia for the entire duration of the World Cup. More
tickets could not be printed to accommodate every person; even fans from
international teams will not all be accommodated in our stadia.
[Interjections.] You better listen, then you will get a better
understanding of what is happening here! [Interjections.]

I have difficulty with people who never attend any portfolio committee
meetings to speak about sport. You know that Danny and his team were blamed
that South Africa was not ready while the World Cup was being played in
Germany. If they had attended the portfolio committee meetings, they would
have known that there was a request from Fifa that we should not overshadow
Germany. That is why we can only start implementing our plans now. Next
time, you must come to our committee and you will get clarity.
[Interjections.]

This person who is speaking was a Minister of Local Government in the
Western Cape and he made a mess of it. [Interjections.]

As regards providing facilities to see these matches, local municipalities,
especially those in the remote rural areas, should ... [Interjections.] I
am not interested in you, man! I am talking to my own people!
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Please members. Order! Please.

Mr L R R REID: You were one of the people who questioned our ability to
host this World Cup, sending out a negative message to the entire world.
Where is your loyalty to South Africa? [Interjections.] What are you
saying? What are you? What are you? [Interjections.]

As I said, municipalities should interact with the local organising
committees to enable them to host fanfares. These fanfares should ensure
the creation of atmosphere at our stadiums. [Interjections.] Listen here! I
am not paying attention to what you are saying. [Time expired.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon Deputy Minister, hon
members, I want to say to the hon chairperson of the committee, Butana
Komphela ...

... siyabulela Mhlekazi ngokusikhokela kakuhle kule komiti. [... we thank
you, sir, for youra good leadership in this committee.]

The UDM supports the section 75 and 76 special measures Bills. These Bills
are meant to pave the way for South Africa’s hosting of the 2010 Soccer
World Cup and give expression to the guarantees given by government to
Fifa. As hosts, we have an obligation to provide such guarantees but,
simultaneously, we must balance the pursuit of these agreements with Fifa
against the overwhelming developmental needs of the country in general. It
means that there are potentially huge spin-offs and also that we face huge
challenges to ensure a successful event.

However, I must express my fears regarding the commitment and discipline of
the Department of Sport and Recreation officials. How can we trust them to
properly implement these laws and related matters when the tardiness and
lack of participation by senior officials was a major delaying factor in
processing these Bills? I doubt if they are even here in this House today
but we will leave that to the Minister.

Equally disturbing was the seemingly contradictory legislative goals of the
Department of Trade and Industry versus those of the Department of Sport
and Recreation. How is it possible that, at this late stage, these two
departments seem not to be communicating about such a major initiative?
[Interjections.] Chairperson, could you please talk to the people on my
left because they are making a noise.

We have taken note of the composition of the local organising committee.
However, the President might need to delegate a senior member of the
Cabinet to co-ordinate the efforts of the various government departments
involved and those of the LOC. If needs be, the whip must be cracked to
ensure that everybody is pulling in the same direction.

The football establishment in South Africa, under the leadership of Safa,
is also expected to implement a plan to develop a competitive national team
to participate in this event. It is unfortunate that R61 million donated by
Fifa for the development of the Bafana Bafana squad is now being used to
build Safa offices. This demonstrates their priorities. Hopefully, the
taxpayer’s money is not going to end up cross-subsidising this type of
extravagance.

These Bills have made reference to the financial implications without
spelling out the details. However, we are informed that the Department of
Finance might soon submit a Bill and we hope that this will explain in
detail the financial arrangements related to this event. This should
include specific mechanisms for recouping the taxpayer’s money invested in
privately-owned stadiums which are to be upgraded.

We would also expect clarity on the exact tender procedures that will be
followed in the awarding of all contracts, especially because government
will be working closely with Fifa and local football officials. One assumes
that government tender procedures will take precedence since the taxpayer
will be footing the Bill. The onus is now on all those involved, and who
are in the know, to begin to educate the public on the expected spin-offs,
especially in the field of the economy and job creation.

There is a perception, rightly or wrongly, that our police service lacks
proper crowd control skills. Everybody in this House has seen the footage
of how they have dealt with community protests and labour protests.
Government now has the opportunity to immediately start improving crowd
control skills and methods of the SAPS in general. Such a reorientation of
the SAPS away from the “skop, skiet en donner” attitude to crowds would
benefit the image of the SAPS and the country long before and quite apart
from the 2010 World Cup.

In conclusion, big business now also has a chance to connect and work with
the LOC, government and local communities to grab sponsorship
opportunities. For instance, they could buy stretches of highways that lead
from airports and points of entry to stadiums and beautify them by planting
trees and flowers. These types of sponsorship investments need not wait
until just before 2010, they can start today and then South Africans can
immediately see the spin-offs and job opportunities. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon Holomisa. Although
two minutes were added to your time you didn’t utilise all of that time.

Mr V C GORE: Hon Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the two Fifa special
measures Bills before this House today are crucial for South Africa’s
preparation for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. Despite the technical nature of
these two Bills, it is essential that they are viewed as an integral part
of this country’s commitment to this tournament.

These Bills will serve to cement the assurances South Africa has given to
football’s world-governing body in order to be awarded the privilege of
hosting this prestigious event. It is essential to the success of the
tournament that all South Africans and all sectors of South Africa’s
society rally behind this initiative.

It is the ID’s desire that the passing of these Bills act as an example for
the rest of the country in supporting and building toward a memorable event
for all. Here, hon Minister, I would like to pause for a moment and ask to
make an impassioned plea to you to make this event accessible to all
people, including people with disabilities, particularly around the issues
of transport and accessible stadiums, and not to make the mistakes that
were made during the Cricket World Cup and Rugby World Cup. It is essential
that everyone commits themselves and follows the lead given by the national
legislature, and that that filters through to the provincial and local
legislatures and administrations.

It is extremely unfortunate and disappointing that even at this late stage
there are certain sectors of this society that choose to be negative and
prefer to be obstacles to our success. The ID is extremely excited about
making Soccer World Cup 2010 a once-in-a-lifetime event for this country. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S M RASMENI: Ministers and Deputy Ministers, members of Parliament, the
chairperson Mr Komphela ...

... re ya leboha ka kenyakenya ena ya mosebetsi eo o e tshwereng. Setulo
sena se o se dutseng se se holo ha holo. Ha e sale sa Komiti feela ya tsa
dipapadi, ke ya dikomiti tsohle tse shebaneng le kenyakenya ena ya
mosebetsi wa 2010 Fifa World Cup. Rona ba tswang lefapheng la Dithekiso le
Indasteri re ya leboha ka ketello-pele ya hao ntate. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[... we are grateful for this huge responsibility that you are facing. The
position that you are holding is crucial, not only for the sports
committee, but for all the committees that are working on this immense
project, the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We, as the Department of Trade and
Industry, are very grateful for your leadership.]

The 2010 Fifa World Cup marks yet another milestone in celebrating our
second decade of freedom. This occasion does not come just as an event; it
is indeed a culmination of struggles waged by our people, led by the ANC,
to free our country from apartheid oppression, and to integrate our nation
with the people of the world.

We salute and pay tribute to the women of our country who have since the
early 1900s engaged in different struggles. I refer in particular to the
one on 9 August 1956, when they staged a protest march in Pretoria and when
they said ``Passes mean suffering and misery for every African family.
Passes mean hunger and unemployment. Passes are an insult.”

The strategic consideration of the 2010 World Cup should seek to redress
the legacy of apartheid and its pass laws that caused suffering and
unemployment in our country. In terms of the Merchandise Marks Act and the
Trade Practices Act, the Department of Trade and Industry has designated
the 2010 Fifa World Cup a protected event. The prohibition of ambush
marketing, marketing by association with the event but without the
permission of the organisers or without being the sponsor of the event,
will apply.

Hare e hlalosa, ho tla ba le mabala a dipapadi ao dipapadi di tla
tshwarelwa ho ona jwalo ka Rustenburg. Re tshwanetse re hlokomele hore
ambush marketing ena e bolela eng? E bolela hore ha batho ba bang ba ka
rungwa ke khampane e nngwe e ba rwesa dikepisi tsa yona hore ba lo dula
mane empa khampane eo esa tshehetsa mosebetsi. Ke yona ambush marketing eo.
Kapa khampane enngwe esa tshehetseng mosebetsi e be e beha folaga ya yona
ere e tshehetsa Fifa World Cup lebaleng la papadi empa e sa dumellwa le
hona ke ambush marketing. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[What this means is that there will be stadia where matches will be played,
such as Rustenburg. Therefore we need to understand what ambush marketing
is. Ambush marketing is when a company sends people to sit on the stands,
wearing caps that have its logo, while it is not supporting the event. If a
company that is not supporting the event hoists its flag at the stadium,
claiming to support the Fifa World Cup, without having permission, that is
also ambush marketing.]

The protection also prohibits the producing and selling of counterfeit
goods. The Department of Trade and Industry is also required to suspend
certain restrictions regarding marketing ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are you raising a point of order,
hon Skosana?

Mr M B SKOSANA: It is just a question, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are you prepared to take a question,
hon Rasmeni?
Mr S M RASMENI: Yes, Chairperson.

Mong M B SKOSANA: Ke utlwa Mohlomphehi Rasmeni are ``ambush marketing’’ ke
ha batho ba ka tla mono ba ronngwe ke ba bang, ba kentse dikepisi tsa bona
jwalo jwalo le dikipa batlo rekisa ke ambush marketing. Jwale ke ne ke
batla ho tseba, ke teya mohlala, bomme lapeng mane ha ba bona re le bangata
re tlile bolong, ba be ba se ba impopa ba etsa diphaphatha tse ngata mono,
ebe ba isa mono ba lo rekisa, na batla tejelwa le bona?

Ke nahana hore e utlwahetse potso ena, ntate Rasmeni o ka araba.

Mong S M RASMENI: Ntate ha ba no tebelwa, empa ho tla ba le melao hore ha
batlo rekisa sebakeng sa thekiso - “restricted zones” – ba tla tlameya ho
latela melao hore ba rekise diphaphatha. Ha ke ntse ke tswela pele ke tla e
hlalosa taba ena ke ya leboha. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows)

[Mr M B SKOSANA: I heard hon Rasmeni saying that ambush marketing is when
people come to the stadium following somebody’s orders to sell, putting on
caps and wearing T-shirts. Now I would like to ask this question, using
this example: If women from households see people coming to the stadium in
large numbers, and they group themselves to bake vetkoek to sell, will they
be chased away?

I think that question is clear, hon Rasmeni, you can respond.
Mr S M RASMENI: Hon member, they will not be chased away, but there will be
rules concerning selling in the “restricted areas”, and they will have to
abide by those rules when selling their vetkoek. I will explain this, when
I continue, thank you.]

You got me lost, hon Skosana, but I will be fine.

Chairperson, it is important to underline that the 2010 Fifa World Cup
South Africa Special Measures Bill should be seen in the context of
facilitating the event, and harmonising the requirements of Fifa with the
laws and polices of our country, South Africa. While it is important to
facilitate the efficient hosting of the 2010 World Cup, this should not be
at the expense of socioeconomic development of our people.

Jwalo ka bao o neng o ntse o bua ka bona Mohlomphehi Skosana. Ke hona moo
ba tshwanetseng hore le bona ba une molemo ho ya ka maano a naha ena ya
rona. [These are the people that you were talking about, hon. Skosana.
That’s where they should benefit, according to the policies of this
country.]

The Asgisa - the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa
- principles are going to apply. There must be continuity in the support
for small, medium and micro enterprises, continuity in the support for co-
operatives, and continuity in the support for preferential procurement
programmes. In fact these programmes must actually benefit from the 2010
Fifa World Cup. Asgisa principles must apply.

We must ensure that growth and economic benefits of the 2010 World Cup are
shared with the ordinary citizens of our country. We call on all of our
people, especially the disadvantaged communities, to position themselves so
that economic benefits are not taken for granted and only accrue to the
allies. Our ordinary citizens should benefit.

Sithetha ngoomama abasemaphandleni, aba bekubuzwa ngabo apha, nabangaphaya
eGcuwa. Ezinye iindawo azinawo kwa amabala emidlalo. Ziyafuna nazo
ukuzilungiselela ukuba zisingathe amanye amazwe. Zamkele abantu abavela
kwamanye amazwe ukuba baze kuhlala kwezo ndawo zabo ukuze bakwazi ukuzuza
nabo ngokwezoqoqosho kwesi siganeko sale tumente inkulu kangaka yehlabathi.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[We are talking about the women in the rural areas, the ones about whom
questions were raised here, and those from Butterworth. Other places do not
even have playgrounds. They also want to prepare themselves so that they
can host other countries and welcome people from other countries, so that
they can come and stay in their places so that they too can enjoy some
economic benefits from this big world tournament.]

We call on all government departments and their agencies to now start
implementing their support and funding measures, so that SMMEs and co-
operatives are key beneficiaries of the Fifa World Cup in 2010.

We in the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry wish to support the
Bill, and we are looking forward to the regulations that are going to be
drafted. We are going to participate, together with all other stakeholders
- meaning other committees of Parliament - so that we ensure that the
regulations themselves are going to conform to all the objectives and
policies of our country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, many concerns have been voiced about the
perceived consequences of the first African Soccer World Cup in 2010. In
the interest of democracy, it is important that these issues are raised and
addressed. Thereafter we must, without further delay, turn our attentions
to honouring the commitments that South Africa has made to Fifa and the
world.

The ACDP is sure that South Africa would not have made a bid to be the host
country and believed that such a bid would be successful, unless the
relevant impact assessments had taken place. We are also sure that coherent
plans are in place to meet the infrastructure requirements by the due
dates.

Plans mean nothing without delivery and delivery means nothing without
meticulous adherence to set timeframes. High competency levels in project
management will be the key to a successful 2010 World Cup and to ensure
that the after-effects of the event will be largely of a positive nature.

A great many of the activities geared towards the guarantees to Fifa will
have to be implemented at a local level. Now is good a time as any for our
municipalities to rise to the occasion and prove that it is not so much a
lack of capacity, but lack of commitment to timeframes.

If ever there was an opportunity for South Africans to work together as a
nation, it is now. Let us not only play together but also work together to
make a great success of the African World Cup. We support the Bills.

Mnr W D SPIES: Agb Voorsitter, die Amerikaanse digter en filosoof Ralph
Waldo Emerson het op ’n stadium gesê dat wat voor ons lê en wat agter ons
lê, maar baie klein is vergeleke met wat binne in ons lê. Terwyl die wêreld
se oë op Suid-Afrika gerig is en kritici baie te sê het oor Suid-Afrika se
vermoë om die 2010-Wêreldbeker aan te bied, kan die land ook hierdie wyse
spreuk sy eie maak.

Die versoeking vir baie Suid-Afrikaners is dat hulle hierdie taak wat
voorlê oorskat, om teen die grootte daarvan vas te kyk en die uitdagings
wat voorlê eerder te vermy as om dit kaalvuis te pak en uit te sorteer. Vir
baie ander Suid-Afrikaners gaan die versoeking weer wees om te bly vaskyk
in die verlede, om hulself voortdurend te herinner aan die ongelykhede en
onregte van die verlede, en in die proses die nuwe geleenthede vir groei,
vooruitgang en internasionale blootstelling mis te kyk.

Dit is juis hierdie benadering wat dikwels gepaard gaan met ’n byna
krampagtige versugting tot beheer oor elke detail en aspek van die
samelewing en wat ook ten opsigte van hierdie wetgewing gelei het tot
suggesties dat maatreëls ingestel behoort te word, teen die gebruik van
sekere vlae by sportgeleenthede. Die VF Plus wil eerder pleit vir
verdraagsaamheid.

Terwyl die VF Plus hierdie wetgewing steun, is dit ons droom dat die
Wêreldbekertoernooi van 2010 werklik ’n geleentheid kan word waarin alle
Suid-Afrikaners kan leer, dat die uitdagings wat voor ons lê en die
geskiedenis wat agter ons lê, niks is in vergelyking met die drome, die
talente, die geloof en die vermoëns wat binne in ons lê nie. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, the American poet and philosopher Ralph
Waldo Emerson once said that what lies behind us and what lies ahead of us
is very small compared to what lies within us. While the eyes of the world
are on South Africa and critics have had a lot to say about South Africa’s
ability to host the 2010 World Cup, the country can make this wise remark
its own.

Many South Africans are tempted to overestimate this task that lies ahead;
to see only the size of the event and consequently avoid the challenges
that lie ahead instead of tackling them unflinchingly and sorting them out.
On the other hand, many other South Africans will be tempted to remain
obsessed by the past, to keep on reminding themselves about the
inequalities and injustices of the past, and in the process overlook the
new opportunities for growth, prosperity and international exposure.

It is, in fact, this approach that often goes hand in hand with an almost
obsessive desire to control every detail and aspect of society and that has
also, with regard to this legislation, led to suggestions that measures
should be introduced to ban the displaying, of certain flags at sporting
events. The FF Plus rather wants to plead for tolerance.

While the FF Plus supports this legislation, it is our dream that the World
Cup tournament of 2010 will really become an occasion through which all
South Africans can learn that the challenges that lie ahead of us and the
history that lies behind are nothing compared to the dreams, the talents,
the confidence and the abilities that are within us. I thank you.]

Mr M M DIKGACWI: Hon Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, colleagues, I
greet you. It is a great pleasure and an honour to support this legislation
in the NA. It paves the way towards making a living reality for all South
Africans of their right to participate in the international arena and to be
involved during the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

Indeed, the special measures Bill now before this House gives expression to
a major South African achievement. It represents the building of an
unprecedented partnership that will allow government, the public, the
private sector, Fifa and the soccer federations in South Africa and the
continent and sponsors to work together to redress the legacy of imbalances
in access to the soccer world. It represents an important step towards the
fulfilment of the pledge enshrined in our Constitution that all citizens
shall enjoy recreation and freedom to participate in sport, including the
viewing of sporting events of national interest.

The journey from 1992, when we were readmitted to participate
internationally, has been long and complex. If it has evoked some
impatience and frustration amongst those eager to benefit from support for
soccer development, it has been thorough in seeking consensus in a complex
sector of our society. Conferences, consultations, research and public
hearings, not to mention debates in the soccer fraternity, have left the
imprint of wide-ranging views and opinions on this piece of legislation. We
believe that the work has been done to allow the NA to put the final
parliamentary seal on the special measures Bill.

Generations of oppression and domination have left our emerging democracy
with a skewed perception that we cannot host a successful Soccer World Cup,
despite the successful World Cups that we have hosted in the past for
cricket and rugby.

Bubuvuvu nobuxoki bomshologu ukucinga ukuba asizi kukwazi ukubamba
ngempumelelo iNdebe yoMhlaba yeFIFA ngowama-2010. Loo nto indenza ndifune
ukukhupha, ibe ngathi ndimginyile lo mshologu kwaye ungaphakathi kum;
ndinge ndingasuka ndimthi tyeke. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[It is fallacious and dishonest and malicious to think that we will not be
able to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup successfully. That makes me want to
throw up; as if I have swallowed the malice and it is within me; how I wish
I could spit it out![Laughter.]]

Whilst some progress has been made in changing this misconception since the
achievement of democracy, it is only a very small beginning compared with
what is needed ...

... ngenxa yezi zikhwasilima zimelene nokugxeka zigxwale. [... because of
these critics who always criticise and howl.]

Only 3 million tickets are going to be available for the World Cup. On the
other hand, in South Africa alone we have approximately 45 million people
and we all know for a fact that most of those tickets will only be
accessible to the few South Africans who can afford them. The Bill seeks to
accommodate people from the rest of Africa, who cannot afford to view all
the games, be it in Kakamas or Qoboqobo, but will still enjoy the games at
various viewing stations that will be put up; at the same time enjoying
their “amarhewu”, their pap en vleis [porridge and meat], amagwinya
[vetkoek], Castle Lager, boerewors, mogodu, njalo njalo, bantu bakuthi
[offal, my countrymen].

None of us would want a situation in which our people are restricted in any
way. However, within the confines of the stadium there will be
restrictions. These restrictions will, however, be compensated for by the
stadiums to the shops in the stadium that would be limited to brands that
are licensed by Fifa. Fifa will pay a compensation fee to the stadium to
compensate for losses that may be incurred due to the restrictions on the
nearby shops within the stadium. By and large this will be addressed by
city and stadium agreements.

This is an African century and as such Fifa has contributed a huge amount
for the African legacy, which will cover the African school of excellence
and the renovation of stadium pitches in the 52 Fifa member states on the
African continent.
Though 2010 host cities must be able to fulfil their promises to Fifa, if
these issues had not been addressed timeously in the world cup special
measures Bill, which has passed through the Cabinet and which is set to
address these concerns, they would be likely to impact negatively on those
cities’ to host a successful World Cup.

When the agreement was announced, only Fifa’s requirements were published.
The Bill, therefore, will deal with the misconception that there are seven
city managers who signed the agreements and made promises they could not
keep without special legislation. The government agreed to support the host
cities in executing their World Cup obligations. The government has signed
an agreement for special legislation to be passed to enable the cities to
execute their duties under the agreement and for the indemnification of
host cities. These issues raised by the Bills are important because they
cover whatever concerns have been raised in public meetings by all
interested parties.

On 16 June we celebrated the 30th anniversary of the Soweto uprising and in
August we celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Women’s March to the Union
Buildings to protest against the pass laws. The commemoration of these
events, which were key contributors to the downfall of the apartheid
regime, as well as the birth of our new democracy, gave us an opportunity
to reflect on the enormous sacrifices made by women, and many people in
this country who were committed to ensuring that we can enjoy what
President Mbeki has called the Age of Hope.

The commemoration also enables us to reflect on what contributions we may
have made to the realisation of the dream harboured by the youth of 1976,
the women who marched in 1956, as well as all those who sacrificed their
lives so that we could become a proud, strong and united nation.

When the late Mama Stella Sigcau called on construction industry leaders,
tertiary institutions and built environment professionals to participate in
the National Construction Week scheduled for 27 July – 3 August, this
nationwide campaign was aimed at attracting youth and women to an industry
that is going to grow in the next five years. This is a result of increased
infrastructure spending by government as part of Asgisa. The investment
will have a direct impact on the skills requirements of the construction
industry.

The construction of stadiums for the 2010 Soccer World Cup will have to
model the national construction project in order to ensure that women and
youth are active participants and beneficiaries in the construction of the
stadiums. To achieve this there needs to be an urgent and vigorous drive to
attract the youth and women into the construction sector. We cannot rest on
our laurels and assume that all is going to be well. In fact, the tender
specification should highlight that our women and the youth should
participate directly.
The Department of Trade and Industry tends to allay fears in respect of how
small business will benefit from the event by mentioning that 30% of the
money received by the LOC as a budget from Fifa has been secured. The DTI
also suggested that a database for small businesses must first be created
across the country in order to share equally from the amount. It is
therefore imperative that the DTI insists on criteria that benefit women,
the youth and the disabled in respect of its allocation policy as regards
the 2010 construction programme.

The LOC should also adopt the national construction week as its annual
event to ensure that women and youth are enabled to participate fully
during bidding for the right to build and the actual construction of the
2010 stadiums. These programmes should aim to re-engineer the profile of
the emergent construction sector. The national procurement policies should
be strictly adhered to and the appointment of the construction companies
should be in accordance with our national BEE statutes.

Siza kuwatya amanqina, ulusu kunye nenyama, kooMzoli nakooMaphindi, xa
sibukele kwiindawo eziza kulungiselelwa abantu abanje ngam, abangena mali,
kwaye abangathathi ntweni. Siza kusela umqombothi kunye ne-Black Label ke,
General, kwezi ndawo. [Kwahlekwa.]

Bubuvuvu obu buthethwayo, bokuba zonke iindawo ekubukelwa kuzo kuya
kufuneka ukuba kuselwe ze kutyiwe izinto ezithengiswa zinegama leFifa;
ayikho ke leyo.
Ndiyahleba ke ngoku: IFifa inike iSafa imali yokuba ilungise iqela lethu
ukuze libe nokuqina, kwaye likwazi nokudlulela kwimijikelo elandelayo,
singoyiswa kwasekuqaleni. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We are going to eat trotters, offal and meat at Mzoli’s and at Maphindi’s
place, while we are watching matches at places that are going to be set up
for people like me, who do not have money and who are poor. We are going to
drink sorghum beer and Black Label, General, at these places. [Laughter.]

It is just hot air to say that products people drink and eat at all the
places that are set up to watch matches, will have to have a Fifa label.

I am speaking off the record now: Fifa has given Safa money to prepare our
team, so that it can be strong and go to the next rounds, and not be
eliminated out at an early stage.]

No wonder we can afford to pay a coach R1 million a month.

Azi ukuba oko kuza kunyusa umgangatho weBafana Bafana na? Mhh! Asazi. Siza
kungxola qho, de kwaphuk’ okwaphukayo. Enkosi. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [I wonder if
that is going to improve the performance of Bafana Bafana? We are going to
make a noise until there is change. Thank you. [Applause.]]
Mr T M LIKOTSI: Chairperson, the Fédération Internationale de Football
Association, Fifa, has placed some of the responsibilities on Safa and the
government of the Republic of South Africa to host the 2010 Soccer World
Cup. Fifa has a list of requirements to be met and a firm undertaking on
guarantees to be made by the government of the host country.

The Minister of Sport and Recreation is empowered through this Bill for
government to meet its obligations. The second Bill empowers the Minister
of Trade and Industry and other affected Ministers to facilitate other
related matters, such as merchandising, foreign medical contingents, etc.

The PAC of Azania hopes that the 2010 Fifa World Cup will create the much-
needed opportunities for the struggling masses of our country and eradicate
poverty. Mfundisi, the whole country is anxiously preparing itself for the
2010 Fifa World Cup.

Amaqela emigulukudu yobundlobongela obucwangcisiweyo kwilizwe jikelele nawo
ayazilungiselela ukuze abone ukuba angeza kwenza ntoni ukwenzela ukuba
izinto zethu zingahambi kakuhle apha kweli lizwe lethu. Kuyafuneka ke ukuba
siqinise macala onke ukuze izinto zethu zikwazi ukuba zihambe kakuhle.

ISafa mayilunge, iqoqoshe zonke ezisaseleyo, umzekelo umba womqeqeshi
wesizwe, iqela eliza kumela isizwe, eliya kuthi liyiphumelele le ndebe
ngowama-2010, ukwenzela ukuba indebe ingangeni iphinde iphume kweli lizwe
lethu.

Kufuneka siqalise kwangoku ngamaphulo okukhuthaza abaxhasi ukuba baye
ngobuninzi babo emabaleni ukuze baye kukhuthaza abafana bethu ukuze bakwazi
ukuba badlale kakuhle. Kufuneka sibonise ilizwe jikelele ukuba sisisizwe
esiyithandayo imidlalo. I-PAC iyawuxhasa lo Mthetho  Usayilwayo.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The organised crime syndicates are also preparing themselves in order to
find out what they can come and do to disrupt our plans in this country.
Therefore we must plug all the loopholes, so that everything goes according
to plan.

Safa must be organised and tie up all the loose ends, for instance, the
issue of the national coach as well as the team that will represent the
nation - a team that will win the 2010 World Cup, so that the Cup trophy
does not come into this country only to leave again.

We must start now with campaigns to motivate the supporters to attend the
matches in large numbers to encourage the team so that they can play well.
We must show the whole world that we like sport. The PAC supports this
Bill.]

Re a e tshehetsa Bili ena. [We support this Bill.]
Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, hon Minister, South Africa’s winning of the bid
to host the Fifa World Cup has evoked national and international
excitement. Having a good reputation for hosting such international
sporting events as the 1995 Rugby World Cup, the 2003 Cricket World Cup,
the Women’s World Cup of Golf in 2005 and 2006, and not forgetting the A1
street race in Durban in January this year, we are confident that we will
deliver the best Fifa World Cup ever to the world.

The MF wishes to state that hosting the Fifa World Cup should be an event
uniting the wills and efforts of all role-players to create a success
greater than the success of any country that has hosted the World Cup thus
far. Just like any other country, South Africa will also have its trials
and tribulations, but after every fall South Africa is sure to rise to a
higher level than before the fall. It is imperative that we realise the
valuable contribution sport and recreation makes in terms of social and
economic growth and development.

It is estimated that this event will contribute R21,3 billion to the GDP
and, in terms of stadium venues, there is an estimated saving of
approximately R1 billion that promises that this event will be more
auspicious in terms of profit. South Africa has won the interest of many
big foreign investors such as the Middle East.

The Bills, drafted to guide our processes in hosting this event, cover a
number of issues relevant to the success of this event. This is the
greatest opportunity for South Africa to metamorphosise as a great
attraction for investment. Job creation, social development and, most of
all, poverty alleviation all form part of the 2010 vision. Opportunities
for small and medium businesses are all at our fingertips.

The MF acknowledges the value the 2010 bid has to our nation and we
visualise its success, wishing it to be a reality through the
implementation of the special measures Bills. We don’t want to be just any
country hosting the 2010 World Cup. We simply want to be the best. The MF
supports the Bill.

Mr S SIMMONS: Chair, the United Party of SA wishes to applaud the
government for its relentless efforts to create a favourable environment
for the 2010 Soccer World Cup. This event, as we all know, brings with it a
number of challenges and, subsequently, concerns on my part. The objective
is not to be negative, but rather to make a genuine attempt to seek
solutions.

On the positive side, this giant event will have, amongst other things,
economic spin-offs owing to the development of infrastructure, such as
roads, the building and upgrading of stadiums, the improving of the
hospitality sector, to name but a few. More jobs will be created: 129 000
are being mentioned, but this could be more. It will result in the
improving of skills of our workforce and it will have an enormous effect on
tourism. This, in turn, will address unemployment and poverty in our
country. Eleven host cities in the country will be affected directly and so
will the rest of the Republic of South Africa.

The concerns I referred to are the issues of, firstly, logistics and time
constraints. Are we really on schedule with the building of the necessary
stadiums? Will our infrastructure meet the demands of such an event? We
need to avoid a situation in which we mislead ourselves with what we can
really achieve in the remaining few years.

The biggest concern of the United Party of SA is the current state of crime
in South Africa. We need to convince the rest of the world that we can
ensure their safety during this period. The current crime wave we are
experiencing suggests that we have a long way to go to stabilise crime in
South Africa.

Will we, for instance, be able to ensure that the objectives of section 6
of the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill are achieved?
If we are to achieve the objectives of this Bill, then we need to answer
these questions in an honest fashion. The United Party of SA supports both
Bills. Thank you.

Mr R COETZEE: Hon Chair, hon Minister, the 2010 World Cup presents our
country and, through us, all of Africa with a unique opportunity to shine
on the world stage. By making a success of the event, we can help to
redefine the image of Africa in the eyes of the world, replacing the
stereotypes of poverty, war and wildlife with a clear view of the potential
for success our continent harbours.

Now, there are some among us who say that the World Cup is too expensive
and that the money could be better spent on delivery to the poor. Those
people, if they are well intentioned, make a reasonable point, but they
miss the bigger point, because there’s something the World Cup can deliver
to our people that no amount of money ever will: a priceless example of
everything we can be as individuals and as a nation – evidence of our
ability, proof of our will to succeed, a legacy of success and a reservoir
of self-belief that will benefit us long after the final whistle has blown.

But to succeed we must fixate on one clear objective and work with laser-
like intensity towards it to produce the best World Cup ever. We must not
simply match but surpass the achievements of every host nation that has
come before us. Our World Cup must be more efficiently run, our hospitality
warmer and more generous, and our streets safer than anything experienced
before. To make this happen, we need inspired leadership, a clear
management structure and obsessive attention to detail.

Come 2010, we must be the proud architects and agents of our own success,
not hand-wringing victims of circumstance or shifty-eyed excuse makers.
There are three issues about which I wish to provide a warning. The first
is corruption. Our country is still processing the experience of the arms
deal in which billions of rand in contracts were up for grabs – a
temptation that proved too great for too many people.

Access to the ruling party has come to mean access to wealth and as an ANC
regional secretary put it in the Mail & Guardian last Friday: “You can’t
discuss building a road without someone looking at how it can make them
rich.” Well, lots of money is going to be spent on roads and on other
infrastructure projects in the run-up to the World Cup, and we must ensure
that this is not seen as an opportunity for illegal and inappropriate self-
enrichment on anyone’s part.

Second, it is imperative that we extend ownership of the World Cup to all
the people of South Africa. It is alarming that Cosatu is threatening to
clash with Safa and the government over inclusion in the organising
committee. Mr Vavi is on record as saying that the failure of Safa to
include Cosatu will lead to an unprecedented confrontation between Safa and
Cosatu. To the best of our knowledge, a meeting is yet to take place
between Cosatu and Mr Danny Jordaan, who promised to meet the union.

Threats of blackmail reflect very poorly on the Cosatu leadership. The
World Cup should not be turned into what the left used to call a site of
struggle but, equally, this means recognising that the World Cup is a
national project. It should not belong to any political party or sector of
society. We need the whole country to pitch in and take ownership of it.

This government has a tendency to exclude people of goodwill. Perhaps it
fears that someone else will steal its credit. Perhaps it is a reflection
of the ANC’s confusion of itself with society as a whole. But, whatever the
case, the World Cup provides our country with an opportunity to work
together and we should grab that opportunity with both hands.

Finally, the South African public cannot take ownership of the World Cup if
it can’t afford tickets to the games. Our committee must insist that Fifa
understands and responds to the economic reality of millions of people in
our country. It would contradict the very purpose of bringing the World Cup
to Africa to price Africans out of the market for tickets. At the same
time, South Africans must appreciate the need to plan ahead to ensure that
they get seats at the games, and I think a personal medium-term expenditure
framework might not be a bad idea.

The DA is 100% behind the World Cup. We stand ready to play our part in
making it the best one ever. If we criticise, then it will be out of
concern that we are failing in that objective and, when we celebrate, it
will be as part of a proud nation that has learnt through communal effort
the real measure of its own potential. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson and hon members, firstly, it is an honour to
participate in this debate on behalf of the ANC and to have been part of a
team of comrades and members from other political parties who worked
tirelessly to provide the legal framework to ensure a successful 2010
Soccer World Cup.

The Soccer World Cup is second in importance only to the Olympic Games and
it appeals to billions of supporters and viewers around the globe. It is
thus interesting to note that 161 countries are affiliated to Fifa,
compared to 157 that are members of the United Nations. This is just one
example of the size of the Soccer World Cup.

If one wants to compare the event to other events we have successfully
hosted, come 2010 it will be like hosting the Rugby World Cup, the African
Cup of Nations, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the antiracism
conference and the Cricket World Cup all at the same time within 30 days.
That is the sheer magnitude of what we will be dealing with.

When we were awarded the right to host the 2010 World Cup, all of us
celebrated the announcement with a deep-rooted conviction and commitment
that our country would be able to deliver the best World Cup ever. However,
during our deliberations in the portfolio committee and the public
hearings, certain sounds emanated from quarters from which we really had
not expected them.

In the online publication South Africa Today on 23 June 2006, the DA leader
planted the seeds of doubt by suggesting that the ANC in Parliament was
delaying the passing of the world cup Bills when he said: “But we have so
far as a nation failed to deliver. One example of our sluggishness is our
Parliament’s failure to pass legislation that will enable South Africa to
conform to Fifa’s requirements for the tournament.” The hon Leon then went
on to say that the deadlines wouldn’t be met.

Now, what has happened since then is that everything that was said by the
DA leader turned out to be fiction and was completely removed from reality.
One is surprised that he did not check the facts and consult two of his
members, one of whom participated in this debate, who never raised these
issues and were quite comfortable with the process as it unfolded.

What are the facts? The special measures Bill was not introduced in
Parliament last year, as the hon Leon claimed. It was only introduced on 6
June 2006. After the portfolio committee recommended that the Bills be
split, the Bills were only reintroduced on 20 June – three days before we
went into a constituency period.

The ANC component on the committee then recommended that we have public
hearings and those took place. At the same time, Comrade Komphela and the
Office of the Leader of Government Business communicated these developments
to Fifa and the LOC, and they were quite comfortable with the process. The
portfolio committee adopted the legislation on 25 July – that was almost a
week in advance of the perceived deadline.

The comments of the DA leader were subsequently followed by those of the
Herstigte Nasionale Party, which went so far as to write a letter to the
President of Fifa saying why we were not ready to host the 2010 World Cup.
It thus came as no surprise that before President Mbeki was handed the
baton and the rights on behalf of South Africa to host the 2010 World Cup,
the media campaign in South Africa – the anti-South African campaign –
gained momentum to such an extent that the President of Fifa, Sepp Blatter,
himself had to come out and say: “These people either don’t understand what
is happening or they don’t love their country.”

It is becoming abundantly clear that the rest of the world has more faith
in our ability to host the World Cup than some individuals and
organisations in our country. This is illustrated by the fact that Fifa and
the local organising committee, in a very short space of time, achieved the
following. Commercial sponsorship amounting to US$21 billion has been
secured four years before the World Cup takes place. [Applause.] That is in
comparison to the US$14 billion that Germany made out of the 2006 World
Cup.

In terms of legal matters, today the National Assembly will pass the Bills.
Already, on 26 May, the 2010 World Cup was declared in the Gazette as a
protected event. The financial measures Bill should be finalised by
Parliament soon, and the host city agreements between Fifa and the
different cities have been concluded, as have the stadium contracts. I
think Fifa and the LOC deserve a round of applause for the work they have
been doing. [Applause.]

On top of that, the emblem launch for 2010 took place in Berlin on 7 July,
with the theme focusing on an African World Cup. This logo was
conceptualised and designed by the South African companies Switch and
Global Interface, that are 100% owned by black women from this country. The
African Legacy Programme was also launched at the same time; and the 2010
ambassadors, who include football greats like Pele, Roger Milla, Lucas
Radebe and Mark Fish, were introduced to the audience.

For those prophets of doom – the hon Mr Simmons – stadium construction is
scheduled to be completed by June 2009, a year before the actual event
takes place. On top of that, the five venues for the Confederations Cup
have been announced, and if Fifa wishes to host that tournament tomorrow,
the five venues are ready for the event to take place.
The hon Skosana raised a question with the hon Rasmeni that dealt with the
restrictions that will be imposed on certain types of merchandise within
the specific controlled areas. Now, from our experience in Germany there is
actually very little activity in terms of the broader followers of soccer
inside the controlled environments around stadiums. Most of the action and
most of the spectators are outside those areas. In those areas no
restrictions apply, except for elements of ambush marketing that must be
curbed.

The focus has now shifted to South Africa, and it is crucial for all our
government departments and the municipalities to work closely with the 2010
World Cup unit and the LOC to ensure that we meet our commitments. In a
short space of time – 30 days - the municipalities will host 64 World Cup
matches. This will require that they work very closely with and use the
best expertise available to prepare for that event.

While we are saying that, Minister, we acknowledge the sterling work that
has already been done by some of our cities. The majority of them are ahead
in their preparations, and this includes Cape Town, because very often we
see that the media throws out this thing about the Green Point stadium and
what is going to happen at Green Point. The media reported again on some of
the residents in the area who are vehemently opposed to the construction of
the new stadium in Green Point.

Fortunately, we are dealing with a few die-hards who, when compared to the
rest of the people of Cape Town, make up a minute percentage of the
population. The majority of the people of Cape Town and of the Western Cape
want the new stadium, and we should not allow disgruntled groups who are
politically mobilised to stand in the way of our national objectives.

The City of Cape Town has signed the host city agreement and must follow
through on the undertakings that have been made. Under no circumstances can
we allow a precedent top be set in that legal contracts concluded with
international bodies are reviewed after elections when there is a change in
the party governing the specific city.

In conclusion, South Africa and Africa stand to benefit a lot from the
hosting of the 2010 World Cup. While we say that, there were certain things
that were mentioned in the debate, and I want to refer briefly to one or
two of them.

The hon Holomisa referred to the US$10 million that has been received from
Fifa to build Safa House, and that is correct. That is what the money was
intended for. But, General, on top of that US$10 million, another
US$10 million was given to prepare the team to be ready for 2010, and that
is where our work lies now. We must work now in the portfolio committee;
call Safa and hold them to account to give us the plans to prepare a
successful team to compete in the World Cup.

At the end, the hon Coetzee also raised some concerns about corruption, the
ownership of the World Cup, the extent of goodwill, etc. We are making
progress, and we are absolutely certain that we will achieve the original
objectives that we have set for ourselves.

By hosting this World Cup, we will not only advance the African
Renaissance, but will also instil a sense of national responsibility and
pride in our people and will prove our ability to work together towards a
common goal despite our divisive past.

Moving towards 2010, we can prove to the rest of the world that as a
country we are an honest and reliable partner that can be trusted to
deliver on our undertakings and the commitments we have made. This will be
achieved as we are spurred on by unity of purpose and by being united in
our diversity. The ANC supports the Bills. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, hon members, let me
first of all associate our department with the sentiments expressed here by
hon Komphela wishing Mr Donald Lee a speedy recovery. We just heard about
it and we share the feeling that he should be given all the support he
deserves to come back right here and be part of us all.
This Bill, as many people have said, attempts to do what needs to be done
in order for the 2010 World Cup to take place in our country. It also seeks
to pre-empt disasters such as those that were experienced by our people in
Ellis Park and elsewhere. For that reason, it insists that we should do
everything to ensure that the stadiums where the 2010 World Cup will be
played as well as the infrastructure that will facilitate access to them,
comply with the specifics of Safa and with what Safa expects of an event of
this nature.

For this reason, the Ministers mentioned in the Bill are empowered to pass
regulations and gazette them to ensure that these things happen according
to the specifications. The regulations will also outlaw any other symbol
that is antisocial because this would be in compliance with our own
Constitution, which discourages the encouragement of such kind of
antisocial symbols or songs or behaviour.

We understand the pressure, which many South Africans seem to be putting on
our shoulders. We understand it to be a product of the anxiety, which all
of us must share because if you are going to organise an event, even if you
are going to organise a sitting of this House, you must be anxious about
its success or otherwise. You want it to succeed – then you must be
anxious.

We are as anxious as all South Africans in this respect. But we are more
informed than many of them, which is why our anxiety is not excessive over.
Our anxiety is controllable – the scientific understanding of what can be
done and what will be done controls it. So, the anxiety that is overtly
expressed in many cases is unwarranted, although it is fully
understandable.

Somebody said here we have given our word and there is no bigger guarantee
in Africa than when a person gives you his or her word. That is all. It was
before hon Van der Merwe. You people introduced the Roman Dutch law. We
relied on people giving their word and that was good enough and people
stuck by their promises.

The framework that this Bill provides has taken into account the
development goals of our government, which must be balanced with the
primary objectives of Fifa, because Fifa primarily wants a football world
cup that will generate income for themselves. They concede this is their
major fund-raising exercise and they want to make money out of it. But we
don’t want to make money out of this. We really want this event to
contribute towards our development goals for 2014.

Fortunately, there is a great deal of confluence between the legacy Fifa
wants to leave behind and what we want our communities to access in terms
of infrastructure, human resource development and all related developmental
issues.
It is very important for South Africans to position themselves now. I agree
with the speakers. Now is the time for South Africans to position
themselves to benefit from these spin-offs. For that reason the local
organising committee has published, two weeks ago already in the Sunday
Times, a whole list of areas where our people can begin to prepare
themselves as participants – vetvoek, tripe and all those things, catering,
transport. A whole list is already there and it is our responsibility as
public representatives to assist our people in those endeavours.

We can assure you, hon Holomisa, that procurement laws are already in
place. They have been promulgated by the LOC and in many respects they
replicate the laws that the government applies in these cases. There would
be fairness. There would be justice. There would also be transparency in
their application. But, of course, transparency should not be confused with
nakedness.

The local organising committee (LOC) is a section 21 company, and as such
must subscribe to the Companies Act of this country. There are things that
will remain the purview of the board members of the company.

We are comfortable with our compliance control mechanisms. We are confident
that we will meet the stipulated deadlines. We are not just comfortable
from the heart. We are not just making statements of face. We are stating
these things on the basis of assessments by professionals and technical
people who deal with these things on a daily basis. They deal with them in
South Africa and in many parts of the world. All of them are not owned, Mr
Coetzee, by the ruling party. These companies are owned by people who have
no membership whatsoever of the ruling party.

Is it expensive? It depends on which way you are looking at it. If you look
at it in terms of contributing to those millennium goals – contributing to
those 2014 strategic objectives of our government - then there’s no way
that you can say it is expensive. It is because by its very nature,
transformation and development cannot be cheap; it comes in a very
expensive way. But, indeed, it offers us an opportunity to present
ourselves to the world for what we really can be. It presents us with an
opportunity, which no money can buy.

I agree that some people do get excluded from a number of these programmes,
not by design but sometimes by their own commission. If you call a public
meeting, like we did in Port Elizabeth two weeks ago, and some people do
not attend that public meeting, you cannot say they were excluded. They
have actually excluded themselves. So, we must begin to attend public
meetings in our communities.

Better still, the LOC empowered Mr Danny Jordaan that whenever he is
invited by whatever political party, he must go and explain what is going
on in our country. So, the doors are open.

Indab’ inendodana, uyise akanatyala. [The ball is in your court.]

I want to pay special tribute to the Deputy Minister of Finance, Jabu
Moleketi, the Chairperson of the TCC who has the unenviable responsibility
of co-ordinating all these departments. Their managers bring them together
and hammer out the policies that must be followed, negotiate with Fifa and
all other stakeholders and move them in the direction in which we want
these things to go. I think he has done an outstanding job. [Applause.]

I also want to recognise the work done by the Deputy Minister of Sport and
Recreation, Mr Gert Oosthuizen, who I had entrusted with the responsibility
to monitor the developments around this Bill and to pilot and indeed to be
a navigator of this Bill to make sure that nothing gets left out that will
obstruct the passing of this Bill.

I want to congratulate the managers of all the 19 different departments
that have participated. It was not always easy. The temptations to go at a
tangent were always great, as the hon Holomisa pointed out today, but Jabu
was always there to bring them back to where they must be. I thank them for
their diligence in that respect.

The portfolio committee under the leadership of the hon Butana Khompela has
done an outstanding job within a very short period of time. [Applause.]
When you said the Bill must be divided into two Bills, I nearly fired our
law advisers because I thought they should have been the ones to know that
beforehand. But, you were patient with them and you chaperoned them in the
right direction. Not only were you meticulous in going through the Bill,
but you did not neglect to be diligent and to recognised the urgency of
making sure that these things happen.

So, you have already laid the foundation for what the members are talking
about here – our ability to do what must be done. I want to thank you one
and all. You have made South Africa very proud and the confidence of Africa
and Fifa in this country will in many ways be boosted by the way you dealt
with this Bill. I thank you one and all. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill read a second time.

Second Fifa 2010 World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill read a second
time.


                               POINTS OF ORDER





                                  (Ruling)


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order! Before the House can adjourn,
there’s a ruling that I need to deal with.

On 21 June, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party moved a motion regarding a
Parliamentary Observer Mission to the Democratic Republic of Congo. The hon
Mr M J Ellis raised a point of order concerning a perceived breach of good
faith as the code and rules that govern observer missions contained in the
motion had not been discussed by the Chief Whips Forum.

In response to the remarks by the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Mr
Ellis again rose on a point of order. The remarks that gave offence relate
to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party saying: “I want to really table it
that we will not be blackmailed into consensus when the issues that we are
raising are crystal clear.”

I undertook to study the Hansard. I’ve now had an opportunity to study
Hansard and wish to give my ruling as follows: Firstly, points of order
should relate to a point of procedure of order or order during proceedings
of the House. Mr Ellis’ first point of order is an opinion on the course
the draft code of conduct should have followed prior to its coming before
the House and is therefore not a point of order.

On the second point of order, the remark by the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party that “we will not be blackmailed into consensus” was used within a
figurative context and therefore the remark is not unparliamentary.

The House adjourned at 18:04.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           THURSDAY, 22 JUNE 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 21 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
         the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


         (a)     Firearms Control Amendment Bill [B 12 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Joint Budget Committee for consideration and
        report:

          a) Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
             Division of Revenue Bill for 2007-2008, tabled in terms of
             section 9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act,
             1997 (Act No 97 of 1997).


     2. The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:


          a) Report of the Registrar of Long-term Insurance for 2004.


   b) Report of the Registrar of Short-term Insurance for 2004.

          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
             on the Registrar of Friendly Societies for 2004.

          d) Government Notice No 317 published in Government Gazette No
             28699 dated 31 March 2006: Adjusted allocations in terms of the
             Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).

          e) Proclamation No R.16 published in Government Gazette No 28675
             dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which certain sections
             respectively must come into operation, in terms of the Revenue
             Laws Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 31 of 2005) and Revenue Laws
             Second Amendment Act, 2005 (Act No 32 of 2005).

          f) Proclamation No R.17 published in Government Gazette No 28675
             dated 29 March 2006: Fixing of date on which section 103(1)
             shall come into operation, in terms of the Revenue Laws
             Amendment Act, 2002 (Act No 74 of 2002).
          g) Government Notice No 316 published in Government Gazette No
             28698 dated 31 March 2006: Commencement of the provisions in
             terms of the Auditing Profession Act, 2005 (Act No 26 of 2005).

          h) Government Notice No R.238 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
             Registrar of Securities Services in terms of the Securities
             Services Act, 2004 (Act No 36 of 2004).

          i) Government Notice No R.239 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
             Registrar of Friendly Societies in terms of the Friendly
             Societies Act, 1956 (Act No 25 of 1956).

          j) Government Notice No R.240 published in Government Gazette No
             28627 dated 17 March 2006: Determination of fees payable to the
             Registrar of Financial Services Providers in terms of the
             Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act, 2002 (Act No
             37 of 2002).

          k) Agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany and the Government of the Republic of South Africa
             concerning Financial Cooperation in 2004, tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          l) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Financial Cooperation in
             2004.

          m) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Support to the Risk Capital
             Facility (SA/007/04), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          n) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the European
             Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning Support
             to the Risk Capital Facility (SA/007/04).

          o) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning EPRD Audit/Evaluation
             Facility (SA/006/05), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          p) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             EPRD Audit/Evaluation Facility (SA/006/05).

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Health:


          a) Project Agreement between the Government of South Africa and
             the Government of Ireland on a Project for Supporting the
             Prevention, Care and Support of HIV and AIDS and the reduction
             of its impact in the Limpopo Province, through the Provincial
             Department of Health, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Project Agreement between the
             Government of South Africa and the Government of Ireland on a
             Project for Supporting the Prevention, Care and Support of HIV
             and AIDS and the reduction of its impact in the Limpopo
             Province.

    4.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government:

          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement NO. 674-0332 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Increased Sustainable Local Government Service Delivery, tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No. 674-0332 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Increased Sustainable Local
             Government Service Delivery.


          c) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Support to Urban Renewal
             Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/001/05), tabled in terms of
             section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Support to Urban Renewal Programme in the Eastern Cape
             (SA/001/05).

    5.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Education, the Joint Monitoring
        Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Women and
        the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life
        and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:

          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement NO. 674-0328 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Increased Access to Quality Education and Training, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.
          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No. 674-0328 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Increased Access to Quality
             Education and Training.


    6.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land
        Affairs:


          a) Amendment number five to the Grant Agreement between the
             Government of the United States of America acting through the
             United States Agency for International Development and the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa for the Increased
             Commercial Viability of Existing Small and Medium Agribusiness,
             tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Amendment number five to the
             Grant Agreement between the Government of the United States of
             America acting through the United States Agency for
             International Development and the Government of the Republic of
             South Africa for the Increased Commercial Viability of Existing
             Small and Medium Agribusiness.


    7.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government:


          a) Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0330 between the
             United States of America and the Republic of South Africa for
             Democratic Consolidation Advanced, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No 674-0330 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Democratic Consolidation
             Advanced.


    8.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Social Development:


          a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Programme of Assistance to
             the Victim Empowerment Programme of the Department of Social
             Development in the South African Government (SA/003/05), tabled
             in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Programme of Assistance to the Victim Empowerment Programme of
             the Department of Social Development in the South African
             Government (SA/003/05).


    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry:

          a) Letter of Agreement for the Provision of Funds from the
             National Forest Programme Facility, through the Food and
             Agricultural Organization of the United Nations to Department
             of Water Affairs and Forestry of the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Letter of Agreement for the
             Provision of Funds from the National Forest Programme Facility,
             through the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
             Nations to Department of Water Affairs and Forestry of the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa.


    10.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry:

        (a)      Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning Economic Development
             Support Programme in the Eastern Cape (SA/003/04), tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between
             the European Community and the Republic of South Africa
             concerning Economic Development Support Programme in the
             Eastern Cape (SA/003/04).


        (c)      Strategic Objective Grant Agreement No 674-0331 between
             the United States of America and the Republic of South Africa
             for Support for Economic Growth and Analysis, tabled in terms
             of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Strategic Objective Grant
             Agreement No 674-0331 between the United States of America and
             the Republic of South Africa for Support for Economic Growth
             and Analysis.


    11.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs and the
        Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration:


          a) Financing Agreement between the European Community and the
             Republic of South Africa concerning African Union/Nepad
             Capacity Building in Governance and Public Administration
             (SA/006/04), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Financing Agreement between the
             European Community and the Republic of South Africa concerning
             African Union/Nepad Capacity Building in Governance and Public
             Administration (SA/006/04).


    12.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Defence and the Portfolio
        Committee on Safety and Security:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Swiss Confederation and
             the Government of the Republic of South Africa concerning
             Operational Police Commanders Training in the Democratic
             Republic of Congo, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Swiss Confederation and the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa concerning Operational Police Commanders
             Training in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

    13.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs and
        Tourism:

          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark regarding
             the Urban Environmental Management Programme in South Africa
             (2006-2010), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the
             Kingdom of Denmark regarding the Urban Environmental Management
             Programme in South Africa (2006-2010).


    14.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Water Affairs and Forestry and
        the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government:


          a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa through its National Department of Water Affairs and
             Forestry, and the Government of Switzerland through its Swiss
             Agency for Development and Cooperation concerning the
             Masibambane – ‘Local Government Capacity Building through
             Knowledge Sharing’ Project (01.04.2005-31.03.2008), tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
             of the Republic of South Africa through its National Department
             of Water Affairs and Forestry, and the Government of
             Switzerland through its Swiss Agency for Development and
             Cooperation concerning the Masibambane – ‘Local Government
             Capacity Building through Knowledge Sharing’ Project
             (01.04.2005-31.03.2008).


    15.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration:


          a) Preliminary Annual Report of the Department of Labour for 2005-
             2006 [RP 45-2006].


    16.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
             2006/07 to 2010/11.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the South African delegation to the 114th Inter-
        Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Nairobi, Kenya 7-14 May 2006.

                REPORT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THE
         114TH INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) ASSEMBLY IN NAIROBI,
                                7-14 MAY 2006

1. Introduction

Established  in  1889,  the  IPU  is  the  international   organisation   of
Parliaments of sovereign states.

Over one hundred and thirty national parliaments are  currently  members  of
the IPU.  Seven regional parliamentary assemblies are Associate Members.

It is the focal point for worldwide parliamentary  dialogue  and  works  for
peace and co-operation amongst peoples and for  the  firm  establishment  of
representative democracy.

The IPU supports the efforts of the  United  Nations,  whose  objectives  it
shares, and works in close co-operation  with.   It  also  co-operates  with
regional inter-parliamentary organizations as  well  as  with  international
inter-governmental and civil society organzations that are motivated by  the
same ideals.

The organs  of  the  IPU  are  the  Assembly,  the  Governing  Council,  the
Executive Committee and the Secretariat.

2. Agenda

The agenda for the 114th IPU Assembly was as follows:

 • Election of the President and Vice-Presidents of the 114th Assembly
 • Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion of an emergency item
   in the Assembly agenda
 • General debate on the political, economic and  social  situation  in  the
   world with the overall theme of Promoting democracy and helping to  build
   democratic institutions
 • The role of parliaments in strengthening the control  of  trafficking  in
   small arms and light weapons and their ammunition (Standing Committee  on
   Peace and International Security)
 • The role of parliaments in  environmental  management  and  in  combating
   global degradation of the environment (Standing Committee on  Sustainable
   Development, Finance and Trade)
 • How parliaments can and must promote effective ways of combating violence
   against women in all fields (Standing Committee on  Democracy  and  Human
   Rights)
 • Approval of the subject items for the 116th Assembly and  appointment  of
   the Rapporteurs

3. Delegation

The delegation to the 114th IPU Assembly consisted of:


Members


Hollander, P (Deputy Chairperson and Leader of the Delegation) (ANC)
Bapela, K O (ANC)
Dreyer, A (DA)
Greyling, L (ID)
Lucas, E (IFP)
Madikiza, G (UDM)
Mgabadeli, H (ANC)
Njikelana, S J (ANC)


Officials


Ahmed, K
Cwaile, Kebadirang (Assistant to the Leader of the Delegation)
Matyolo, L (ASGP representative)
Paulse, C

4. Delegation Briefing Meetings

The Delegation met at least once a day to plan for the  day’s  meetings  and
discussions.  Decisions on attendance  of  meetings  and  strategies  to  be
employed in those meetings were discussed before hand by delegates.

5. Governing Council

The Governing Council is  the  plenary  policy-making  body  of  the  Inter-
Parliamentary  Union.  A  number  of  committees  and  working  groups   are
subordinated to it and report to the Council on their work.

The  President  of  the  Inter-Parliamentary  Union,  currently   Mr.   Pier
Ferdinando Casini  of  Italy,  is  ex-officio  President  of  the  Governing
Council

The Council establishes the annual programme and budget  of  the  Union,  is
responsible for  the  admission  or  suspension  of  members  and  Associate
Members, and establishes the list of Assembly observers.  Occasionally,  the
Council considers substantive issues and  adopts  thematic  resolutions  and
policy statements, the most recent of which are listed below. The  Governing
Council is composed of three representatives from each member parliament.

The three representatives from South Africa at the 114th IPU were: (1) Ms  P
Hollander, (2) Mr O Bapela and (3) Mr L Greyling.

The Vice President, Ms Mensah-Williams, opened the Council.

The Chinese delegation nominated the Speaker of  the  National  Assembly  of
Kenya  as  the  President  of  the  114th  Assembly.   He  was   unanimously
appointed.


IPU Membership and Observer Status


Four organizations applied for observer status, namely:

 ▪ Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy (IAO)
 ▪ Inter-parliamentary Commission of the  economic  and  Monetary  Community
   of Central Africa
 ▪ AMANI Forum – The Great Lakes Parliamentary Forum on Peace
 ▪ Association of Senates Shoora and Equivalent Council in  Africa  and  the
   Arab World

The debts owed by the Dominican Republic, Georgia and Madagascar  have  been
forgiven.

The IPU Governing Council readmitted the National Congress of Paraguay and
the transitional parliament of Somalia and admitted Qatar as new IPU
Member. It also amended the modalities of the rights and responsibilities
of observers at IPU meetings so as to be able to grant observer status to
international political party federations to attend future IPU Assemblies.




Report of the Secretary General


The SG provided an overview of his report.   He  highlighted  the  following
issues:

 ▪ Conference of Speakers of Parliament was a highlight of 2005
 ▪ 22 meetings organised in 2005 with a total  of  4000  MPs  attending  the
   meetings
 ▪ The IPU website has 180,000 documents and received 600,000 hits in 2005
 ▪ A bi-monthly e-bulletin is being  developed  and  it  is  suggested  that
   this bulletin be forwarded to all Members


Election of the Secretary General


The Executive Committee members unanimously proposed the re-election of  the
Secretary General by acclimation.  In addition, a working group will be  set
up to look at the new conditions of service for the SG and  will  develop  a
proposal for nominating and appointing a new Secretary General.


Human Rights Committee


The Chairperson of the Human Rights Committee, British Member of  Parliament
Ann Clwyd indicated that there was a record number  of  human  rights  cases
being considered by the Inter-Parliamentary Union's Committee on  the  Human
Rights of Parliamentarians.

In her report to the Governing Council, Mrs. Clywd said that during its
112th session, the Committee had examined 64 cases in 35 countries and held
12 meetings with delegations. The Council approved 12 resolutions
concerning the cases of 118 parliamentarians in 21 countries all over the
world, among them public cases in Bangladesh, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia,
Colombia, Ecuador, Eritrea, Honduras, Indonesia, Israel/Palestine, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Sri Lanka,
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and Zimbabwe.

6. Assembly

The IPU Assembly is the principal statutory body that expresses the views
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union on political issues. It brings together
parliamentarians to study international problems and make recommendations
for action.

Mr Kaparo, Speaker of the National  Assembly  of  Kenya,  was  appointed  as
President of the Assembly.


Opening Comments from the Vice President


Ms Mensah-Williams, Vice President of the Executive Committee, standing in
for President Cassini, commented on the international and local democracy
deficit. She noted that the IPU had developed a guide on democracy.  The
guide spoke to the following issues amongst others:

 ▪ Increasing democratic values in a responsible way
 ▪ Strengthening parliaments
 ▪ Identifying objectives of a democratic parliament
 ▪  Notes  that   Parliaments   should   be   representative,   transparent,
   accountable, accessible and effective
 ▪ Identifies the common challenges facing parliaments
 ▪ Identifies good practices

She noted further that it was important  to  develop  ICT  capacity  amongst
Parliaments and that a partnership has been set up with  UNDESA  to  develop
ICT capacity.


Co-operation with the United Nations


The head of the UN Fund for International  Partnerships  and  representative
of the Secretary General, provided an overview of the UN’s  Democracy  fund.
The fund currently:

 ▪ Has a total of $50 million
 ▪ Is  intended  to  be  a  tool  to  enhance  participation  in  democratic
   processes
 ▪ Is aimed at marginalized communities
 ▪ Received applications from Afghanistan and Sri Lanka to access the fund

It was noted further by the UN representative that:

 ▪ There are several democratic models and that  the  UN  does  not  favour
   any particular model
 ▪ A Peace Building Commission has also been set  up  to  assist  countries
   that have emerged from violence
 ▪ He noted further that the  relationship  between  the  IPU  and  UN  has
   increased significantly
 ▪ It was also important that international issues need  to  be  placed  on
   national agendas


Comments by President of the Parliament of Somalia


The President provided an overview of the last  15  years  in  Somalia.   He
noted that:

 ▪ A civil war existed for more than a decade
 ▪ This has annihilated government agencies and departments
 ▪ The Transitional Federal  Parliament  Members  are  unpaid  but  rely  on
   allowances provided by donor funding
 ▪ Donor support is critical for the survival of Somalia
 ▪ The Parliament faces  enormous  challenges  and  wishes  to  visit  other
   Parliaments to learn from their experiences


Address by the Kenyan Minister of Foreign Affairs, Hon Raphael Tuju


 ▪  The  dominance  of  free  market  economies  had  resulted  in   changed
   lifestyles and an unprecedented improvement of  living  standards  around
   the globe.
 ▪ Despite the positive effects of this economic  model,  the  influence  of
   big business in governance, the political process  and  campaign  finance
   was increasing.
 ▪ Parliaments had to be concerned about whether that influence  would  help
   or subvert democracy.
 ▪ It was Parliament’s role to act as the voice  of  the  voiceless  and  to
   protect  vulnerable  persons  against  the   emerging   dictatorship   of
   international capitalism.
 ▪ He noted that laws were not always made in the interests  of  the  people
   and  it  was  therefore  critical  that  parliamentarians  ensured   that
   legislation was pro-people.

Address by Prof Wangari Maathai MP and Nobel Peace Laureate


 ▪ There is  an  inherent  connection  between  the  environment  and  peace
   building and it was  important  to  recognise  the  link  between  peace,
   sustainability and good governance.
 ▪ The Green Belt Movement used the tree as an entry point  to  communities,
   as  a  sign  of  hope  that  could  give  a  feeling  of  self-worth  and
   accomplishment.
 ▪ The Movement questioned the  link  between  peace  and  security  in  the
   context  of  environmental  management,  since  there  needed  to  be  an
   equitable sharing of resources in order to ensure peace.
 ▪ Parliamentarians had to encourage dialogue,  the  pursuit  of  truth  and
   common good, listening, forgiveness and reconciliation,  and  to  provide
   space and patience for those things to happen.

Address by David Nabarro, Senior United Nations Co-ordinator for  Avian  and
Human Influenza

 ▪ Avian flu is spreading  rapidly  across  the  world:  in  the  last  four
   months, it had spread from 15 to 47 countries.
 ▪ Difficult decisions had to be  taken  to  achieve  a  balanced  response.
   The disease must be controlled while livelihoods were protected.
 ▪ Parliamentarians had to ensure that their countries were  ready  to  deal
   with the potential impact of Avian flu.

As part of the general debate on democracy, Mr Obed Bapela MP,  provided  an
input on behalf of South Africa.  He stated that:

 ▪ Firstly, South Africa is based on a  constitutional  democracy  with  the
   Bill of Rights playing a central role in shaping the  values  adopted  by
   the country.
 ▪ Elections cannot be regarded as the  main  or  only  base  of  a  working
   democracy.  As a  result,  it  was  imperative  that  countries  consider
   adopting a constitution that will act as yet  another  tier  of  ensuring
   democracy.
 ▪ However, a country’s citizens have to agree to this constitution.
 ▪ Secondly, institutions that help to foster and build democracy,  such  as
   independent electoral commissions, have to be developed,  maintained  and
   protected.
 ▪ Finally, countries need to become  involved  in  peace  building  efforts
   beyond their borders in  order  to  ensure  that  democratic  values  are
   adopted as widely as possible.


Emergency Item


A  representative  of  six  Arab  countries  suggested  that  the  issue  of
religious freedom be discussed as an emergency item, whereas India  believed
that the avian flu crisis was far more critical.

Ultimately, the Drafting Committee on the Emergency Item  decided  that  the
suggestion forwarded by Kenya on aid to poor populations  in  Africa,  would
be the subject of the emergency item.

Mr Njikelana, from South Africa, was nominated by the Africa Group, to  form
part of the Drafting Committee.

In a resolution entitled The need for urgent food relief in order to  combat
drought-induced  famine  and  poverty  in  Africa,  for  the  world’s   most
industrialized nations to speed up aid to the continent and  for  particular
efforts to be made to reach desperate and poor  populations,  IPU  delegates
urged "the governments  concerned  to  take  every  appropriate  measure  to
facilitate access to the affected areas for  the  speedy  delivery  of  food
supplies and to provide security". The delegates also called on all  parties
to ensure that food relief programmes are not used for  political  ends  and
that food is distributed to those in need without political interference

The 114th Assembly recommended that parliaments in  the  affected  countries
monitor the delivery of food relief programmes and invited  them  to  report
on their findings to the IPU.  They  called  upon  the  governments  of  the
countries concerned  to  make  every  effort  to  implement  the  Millennium
Development Goals,  "in  particular  those  relating  to  the  reduction  of
poverty, and to this end, to  pursue  sustainable  development  strategies".
Those strategies "must aim to promote good governance and respect for  human
rights, eradication of corruption, sustainable food production,  development
of infrastructure to provide access to communities, and,  most  importantly,
security for the population"


   Standing Committees



First Standing Committee


The parliamentarians adopted a resolution entitled The role  of  parliaments
in strengthening the control of trafficking in small arms and light  weapons
and their ammunition,  in  which  they  urged  parliaments  to  combat  SALW
proliferation and  misuse  as  a  key  element  in  national  strategies  on
conflict prevention, peace-building, sustainable development, protection  of
human rights, and public health and safety

They urged parliaments not only to promote and ensure the  adoption  at  the
national level of legislation and regulations required to control  SALW  and
to combat its proliferation and misuse, but also to promote the  development
of an international arms  trade  treaty  (ATT)  to  strictly  regulate  arms
transfers on the basis of State  obligations  under  international  law  and
internationally accepted norms and human rights standards.

Parliaments  should  promote  greater  international  regional  efforts   to
develop common standards to control the activities  of  those  brokering  or
otherwise facilitating arms transfers between third countries and to  ensure
the existence of strong legal  sanctions  for  those  who  provide  SALW  to
children, or who recruit and use children in conflicts or armed  operations.
Legislators also  urged  parliaments  "to  ensure  the  existence  of  legal
sanctions at the national  level  for  those  who  commit  crimes/atrocities
against vulnerable sections of  society  such  as  the  elderly,  women  and
children". Special attention should  also  be  given  to  capacity-building,
with a view to overcoming some of the  barriers  in  the  implementation  of
SALW commitments.

The delegation of India expressed strong reservations on the text of the
resolution as a whole, since it had requested that the resolution deal
exclusively with illicit small arms and light weapons.


Second Standing Committee


On The Role of Parliaments in  Environmental  Management  and  in  Combating
Global  Degradation  of  the  Environment,  legislators   recommended   that
parliaments "include in their budgets clear indicators of the financial  and
non-financial costs related to environmental degradation", and "promote  the
development of new and broader tools and methods of measuring GDP and  other
standardized economic concepts".

They paid tribute to the special role of women in  environmental  protection
and called for the mainstreaming of women in  environmental  decision-making
processes, from which they have traditionally been excluded, and that  women
be given more equitable access to land  ownership.  Looking  to  society  at
large, and in the spirit of the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Education  for
Sustainable Development (UNDESD), the resolution underscores  the  need  for
"governments  and  parliaments  to  advocate  environmental  awareness   and
educate  the  public  about   coordinated   action   against   environmental
degradation".

On energy, conservation and other aspects of natural  resources  management,
the resolution adopted expressed reservations on the use  of  nuclear  power
as part of the energy mix and called  for  more  research  on  the  problems
posed by the decommissioning of power plants, storage of nuclear  waste  and
accidental leakage of  radioactive  materials.  In  contrast,  unconditional
support is given to  the  implementation  of  3R  (Reuse,  Recycle,  Reduce)
approaches in conjunction with "the development of  environmentally-friendly
products […] and of a sound material-cycle  society."  Finally,  legislators
called upon parliaments to work towards limiting to 2°C  the  rise  in  mean
global temperatures compared with pre-industrial levels

South Africa formed part of the drafting committee.

Following the adoption of the resolution, the delegation of India expressed
reservations on operative paragraphs 4 and 16, which it felt should appear
in the preambular section, and pointed out that the European Union proposal
referred to in operative paragraph 4 could not be seen as enjoying
universal support. The delegation of Australia said that two of its four
members wished to register a reservation on operative paragraphs 10 and 11
of the resolution. The delegation of Venezuela expressed reservations on
operative paragraph 10 because it failed to mention by name the single
biggest atmospheric polluter of the environment. It also regretted that
paragraph 13 of the initial draft, which referred specifically to the work
of the Nobel Prize laureate, Ms. W. Maathai of Kenya, had been deleted from
the final draft, and proposed therefore that honorary IPU membership be
bestowed on Ms. Maathai and that a special resolution be adopted to this
end. The delegation of Niger seconded the proposal.


Third Standing Committee


Delegates adopted  a  resolution  entitled  How  parliaments  can  and  must
promote effective ways of combating violence against women  in  all  fields.
They called upon governments and parliaments to give priority to  and  raise
awareness about violence against women as both a cause and a consequence  of
the rising incidence of HIV/AIDS and  to  include  these  considerations  in
their national strategies; and  to  implement  the  United  Nations  General
Assembly resolution on Crime prevention and  criminal  justice  measures  to
eliminate violence against women;  in  particular  to  punish  all  acts  of
violence against women perpetrated by  State  or  non-State  actors  in  the
public and the private spheres; to establish courts specialized  in  hearing
cases of such violence; and to establish a governmental body  promoting  the
prosecution of all acts of violence.

South Africa ensured that disabled women were specifically mentioned in  the
resolution  which  calls  upon  parliaments,  when  debating   methods   for
gathering evidence and devising measures to punish sex  offenders,  to  give
special attention to the fact that children and mentally disabled and  other
disabled women - who are especially vulnerable to sexual violence - find  it
difficult to testify in court.

Governments and parliaments should promote public awareness of  the  problem
of violence against women, and "enact and enforce  legislation  against  the
perpetrators of practices and acts of violence against women  and  children,
including  tough  and  clear  measures  to  combat   recidivism".   Moreover
parliaments are  urged  to  "review  legislation  to  detect  practices  and
traditions that impede the attainment of equality between the sexes  and  to
eliminate inequality in all spheres, in particular in education, health  and
access to property and land". Changes in social and  cultural  attitudes  to
gender roles and the elimination of  patterns  of  behaviour  that  engender
violence should also be encouraged, as should cooperation with the media.

Parliaments are also urged to denounce and combat the extreme forms of
gender violence against women that are derived from the violation of their
human rights and that are shaped by a set of misogynous conducts which can
involve impunity and which have culminated in homicide and other forms of
violent death of women.

Finally, parliaments and governments are  requested  to  make  rape,  sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced  pregnancy,  enforced  sterilization,
or any other form of sexual violence  of  comparable  gravity  crimes  under
their domestic legislation and to repress them as such.  With  reference  to
human   trafficking,   parliamentarians   stressed   the   need   to   build
international and  regional  cooperation  among  the  countries  of  origin,
transit and destination, through instruments such  as  bilateral  agreements
and international treaties.

Following the adoption of the resolution, the delegation of Australia
indicated that two of its members had expressed reservations on the
reference in operative paragraph 1 to the CEDAW Optional Protocol. The
delegation of Iran (Islamic Republic of) expressed reservations on
preambular paragraph 8 and operative paragraph 12.

7. Women Parliamentarians

More than 170 women legislators from 117 countries attended the  Meeting  of
Women  Parliamentarians.   The   President   of   the   Meeting   of   Women
Parliamentarians, Kenyan Assistant  Minister  of  Education  and  Member  of
Parliament, Beth Mugo, denounced the prevalence of rape and sexual  violence
during armed conflict. She pointed out that the untold  suffering  of  women
in Western Sudan, Darfur, in the hands of  militants  is  a  worrying  trend
that must be stopped. Of greatest concern are the  reported  cases  of  rape
and murder.

Referring to the situation in Kenya, Assistant Minister Mugo explained  that
the Kenyan Parliament was debating  a  bill  for  enactment  of  the  Sexual
Offences Bill. It prescribes  stiffer  and  enhanced  penalties  for  sexual
offences as way of combating sexual violence against women. She  added  that
the state of a society is determined by the consciousness of its  women.  As
leaders, mothers and policy makers of the world, woman have the  opportunity
to make a difference by lifting these words off the  pages,  into  concrete,
lasting and progressive solutions to the many problems affecting society.

Welcoming the participants, the Speaker of the host Parliament, Francis  Ole
Kaparo, said that women all over the world form the backbone of every  home,
every society and every nation. He  urged  women  not  to  relent  in  their
efforts to have their voices heard and their efforts recognized.

Speaker Kaparo highlighted the fact  that  women  legislators  will  discuss
positive action mechanisms to promote women in politics. Women in  positions
of power need to be assertive. They need to  develop  mechanisms  that  will
enable them  to  function  well  so  they  can  achieve  results.  Women  in
authority need to be good role models for young girls.  He  argued  that  in
today's   rapidly   changing   globalized   world,   the   role   of   women
parliamentarians is truly essential.

The  Vice-President  of  the  IPU  Executive  Committee,   Namibian   deputy
Margareth Mensah-Williams, addressed the Women Parliamentarians  Meeting  on
behalf of the IPU President, Mr. Pier Ferdinando Casini.  She  welcomed  the
men parliamentarians attending the meeting by reminding that men of  quality
don't feel threatened by women's equality. She went on  to  say  that  women
hold half the world but not half of the power and the reason why women  have
the special place to discuss these issues at the  IPU  is  because  the  IPU
Secretariat together with the Executive  Committee  and  the  President  saw
that it is very important to give women  a  specific  time  where  they  can
continue discussing pertinent issues around the world and  how  to  build  a
network with each other and how to be role models for each other.

Mrs. Mensah Williams paid tribute  to  the  President  of  the  IPU  Women's
Coordination Committee,  Canadian  Senator  Joan  Fraser  -  who  ended  her
mandate at the 114th IPU - for her dedication to the  cause  of  partnership
between men and women in politics

Speaking on behalf of the IPU Gender Partnership Group,  British  Member  of
Parliament John Austin expressed support for efforts carried  out  in  Kenya
to put an end to violence against women through the  development  of  strong
legislation on the question.

Ms Dreyer and Mgabadeli attended the Women  Parliamentarians  meeting.   The
primary decisions taken at the meeting related to the filling of  vacancies.
 The following vacancies were filled:

President (Uruguay)
First Vice President (Philippines)
Second Vice President (Bahrain)

8. Panel Discussion on HIV/Aids

The IPU gathering included a panel discussion on children and AIDS
featuring Stephen Lewis, the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for AIDS in
Africa. Lewis said that the lack of treatment for HIV-positive children
amounts to a death sentence. Without treatment, half of these children will
die before their second birthday – 80 per cent before they reach the age of
five.

Lewis indicated that these children are missing  out  on  treatment  because
they are still missing from national policies. They  are  forgotten  by  the
public, who see AIDS as an adult  disease,  and  forgotten  by  leaders  who
focus on adults when it comes to laws, policies and budgets.

The panel  focused  on  concrete  ways  that  parliamentarians  can  support
children affected by HIV/AIDS:

 ▪ Break the  silence  and  end  the  stigma  and  discrimination  of  those
   affected by HIV and AIDS.
 ▪ Ensure that there are comprehensive policies and/or legislation  for  HIV
   and AIDS that include children, and that there is adequate funding.
 ▪ Protect, support and strengthen families and  communities  most  affected
   by HIV and AIDS.
 ▪ An essential part of this is to work for abolishing  school  fees,  which
   prevent many children from getting a basic education

Veneman urged parliamentarians to "Unite for Children, Unite Against  AIDS,"
invoking the global partnership initiative as  a  platform  for  urgent  and
sustained  programs,  advocacy  and  fundraising  to  limit  the  impact  of
HIV/AIDS on children and help halt the spread of the disease.

He stated that the world must be alerted to the  reality  that  HIV/AIDS  is
robbing  tens  of  millions  of  children  of  childhood  itself  and   that
Parliamentarians must continue to act together, decisively and urgently,  to
put children at the centre of the HIV/AIDS agenda and  ensure  an  AIDS-free
generation.

9. Meeting with SADC

The meeting was opened by the Speaker of Zambia and Chairperson of the SADC-
PF, Hon Amusaa K Mwanamwambwa.  Three  countries  were  represented  at  the
meeting namely, Zambia, Namibia and South Africa.

The Speaker noted the loss of the former Namibian Speaker  of  the  National
Assembly and held a moment of silence.

A representative of the SADC-PF Secretariat provided  a  brief  overview  of
SADC-PF’s new strategic plan.  It was  noted  that  from  2000-2005  SADC-PF
focused strongly on democratic governance and  more  specifically,  election
observer missions. The  2006-2010  plan  focuses  on  gender  mainstreaming,
improved  democratic  governance  in   the   SADC   region   and   effective
implementation of regional integration programmes amongst others.

A Parliamentary Leadership Centre has also been established to  enhance  the
capacity of Members and staff by developing their skills  and  knowledge  of
parliamentary processes.

The Speaker also  suggested  that  SADC-PF  focus  on  establishing  a  SADC
Parliament and that Botswana, Namibia, Zambia and South Africa have  already
agreed in principle to move from a Forum to a regional Parliament.

Hon M Mensah-Williams, Vice President of the IPU Executive and Namibian  MP,
provided an overview of the  issues  that  will  be  discussed  at  the  IPU
Assembly.  She noted the following matters:

 ▪ Out of 143 Member States, only 31 have  submitted  reports  to  the  IPU.
   She urged that Members ensure that their  respective  Parliaments  submit
   reports to the IPU.
 ▪ There are three countries, including Liberia, who  have  not  paid  their
   subscriptions  for  three  years  and  therefore  are  not   allowed   to
   participate in the IPU.  However, a task team has been  set  up  to  meet
   with Liberia to discuss this matter.
 ▪ It was noted that thirteen countries from Africa still do not  form  part
   of the IPU, including Lesotho.  It was suggested that the  SADC-PF  Chair
   approach Lesotho to consider membership to the IPU.
 ▪ On the question of the UN’s reform  process,  it  was  suggested  at  the
   Executive Committee, that the IPU move  from  observer  status  to  being
   included in the work of the UN.
 ▪ The 12 plus  group  expressed  concerns  about  the  process  around  the
   appointment of the Secretary General. They believed that an advert should
   have been placed whereas the rest of the Executive agreed that the letter
   by the President to all Parliaments inviting nominations for the post was
   sufficient. However, since no one was nominated as an alternative to  the
   current Secretary General, it appears as if the current Secretary General
   will be re-elected.  In  Geneva,  it  will  be  proposed  that  a  Deputy
   Secretary General be appointed to take over from  the  current  Secretary
   General.
 ▪ It was suggested that SADC Parliaments  develop  a  database  of  Members
   who could serve on various IPU/UN panels.  Two immediate panels that will
   be  held  in  June  and  September  are  on  HIV/Aids  and   broadcasting
   respectively.
 ▪ Bangkok will host the IPU  in  2007,  and  South  Africa  stands  a  good
   chance of hosting the  IPU  in  2008.   One  potential  problem  is  that
   Venezuela has also requested to  host  the  IPU  in  2008.   However,  it
   appears unlikely that Venezuela will host the IPU in 2008.
 ▪ The emergency items  were  not  discussed,  but  it  is  suggested  there
   should not be a serious problem in agreeing to a single topic, which will
   in all likelihood be the topic on religious freedom.
 ▪ Vacancies: women’s group President and two  Vice  Presidents,  plus  four
   positions per region (two titular and two substitute members).
 ▪ A  Task  Team  on  the  IPU  Reform  process  has  been  suggested.   One
   representative per region has been requested.
It was further suggested that SADC delegates should  meet  regularly  before
the IPU meetings in order to better co-ordinate a collective strategy  as  a
region.  As the current  chair  of  SADC-PF,  Zambia  was  tasked  with  co-
ordinating SADC meetings prior to the IPU Assembly.

10. Bilateral Meetings

The South  African  delegation  had  a  few  bilateral  meetings  that  were
primarily requested by the Head of the Delegation as well  as  by  Heads  of
other delegations to the IPU.  The bilateral meetings held were as follows:


Bilateral with Belarus


The Leader of the Belarus delegation,  Gennady  Novitsky,  Chairman  of  the
Council of the Republic, welcomed the leader of the  SA  delegation  and  Mr
Bapela.  He indicated that:

 ▪ While the two countries  are  situated  far  apart,  there  is  much  in
   common
 ▪ The primary sphere of co-operation is economic and trade relations
 ▪ It was  also  important  for  the  two  countries  to  co-operate  at  a
   multilateral level in  the  various  institutions  that  both  countries
   participate in
 ▪ It was suggested that the two countries have  close  contacts  in  order
   to foster  co-operation  so  that  as  representatives  of  the  people,
   Parliamentarians could give effect to their respective mandates
 ▪ At a cultural level, it was important that  the  countries  share  their
   various experiences
 ▪ It may be useful  to  establish  a  friendship  group  between  the  two
   countries  to  manage  relations.  This  group  could  carry  out  joint
   projects.

The Leader of the SA delegation responded that:
 ▪ The Belarus Ambassador had already visited her at Parliament
 ▪ They discussed issues of trade relations
 ▪ She stated that South Africa has a new programme referred  to  as  ASGISA
   and requires more engineers and chemists
 ▪ An invitation has been received by the NCOP to visit Belarus
 ▪ The matter has been referred  to  the  Presiding  Officers  and  will  be
   decided upon shortly

Both Leaders exchanged  information  on  how  their  respective  Parliaments
operate.

Mr Bapela indicated that with respect to the issue of  a  friendship  group,
that Parliament was still in the  process  of  developing  an  international
relations policy, and that once this policy had  been  finalised,  we  would
revert to the Belarus delegation.

The Leader of the SA Delegation indicated that she would also raise this
matter in the political committee meeting and encouraged Mr Novitsky to
contact the Deputy President of RSA regarding trade relations.

Mr Novitsky indicated that the Russian Federation and the surrounding
countries, including Belarus are in the process of developing a common
currency and eliminating border controls in the region.

He indicated further that this first meeting is a symbol of the beginning
of relations between the two respective countries.


Bilateral with Iran


Seyed Mhsen Yahyavi, MP, Islamic Consultative Assembly and Deputy Oil
Minister introduced his delegation.

He indicated that he had visited SA in the past and  was  thankful  for  the
position taken by SA on the issue of nuclear  energy.   He  stated  that  at
some stage Iran was going to run out of oil,  and  it  therefore  needed  to
develop technologies that could produce sustainable nuclear energy.

SA’s position has been logical, fair and friendly and he stated that he  was
thankful for our support.

The Leader of the SA Delegation indicated that  she  was  grateful  for  the
opportunity to meet and that there was no reason to look  at  the  issue  of
nuclear weapons  or  nuclear  energy  since  the  President  has  pronounced
himself on this matter.

Mr Bapela indicated that a delegation of  SA  Parliamentarians  had  visited
Tehran to attend a conference on Palestine. He stated  that  they  tried  to
meet with the Energy Committee but was unable to do  so.   However,  the  SA
delegation met with the Iranian Atomic Energy Agency.

He stated further that the Speaker was in the process of arranging  a  visit
to Iran and that in August, a women’s meeting would  hopefully  be  arranged
between the two countries.

Mr Greying asked about Iran’s strategy with respect to the issue of  nuclear
energy.  The Leader of the Iranian delegation responded  that  the  strategy
is to focus on the issue of nuclear energy as an  environmental  issue  i.e.
the argument is that since oil is a finite source of energy, Iran  is  under
an obligation to look at alternative sources of energy.

There are therefore two options: to rely on energy sources from outside  the
country or to  develop  energy  sources  within  the  country.   It  is  the
Leader’s position that it is better to  develop  energy  sources,  including
nuclear energy, within the country. He provided the example of  Ukraine  and
Russia in which Russia trebled the price of oil  and  that  Ukraine  had  no
choice but to accept this increase in oil price.

In addition  he  indicated  that  the  letter  sent  to  the  United  States
questions the US on various foreign policy decisions.

He stated further that a large majority of Iranians are in favour of  Iran’s
foreign policy position.

Mr Lucas raised three issues: (1) the importance of energy  (2)  the  misuse
of energy and (3) what do we do about the waste produced by nuclear  energy.
He suggested that it was essential that waste be  dealt  with  in  the  most
environmentally friendly manner possible.

The Leader of the Iranian delegation responded  that  if  Iran  could  avoid
nuclear energy, they  would.   Unfortunately,  with  respect  to  waste,  it
appears as if burying the waste is the only option at this stage.   However,
ideally, this waste could possibly be recycled.

He concluded that diplomacy channels are always open but that Iran will  not
withdraw from developing its nuclear capabilities for energy purposes.


Bilateral with Kenya


Beth Mugo (Deputy Minister for Education) met with the Leader of  the  South
African Delegation, and Mr Bapela, Lucas,  Greyling  and  Madikiza  to  talk
about Kenya’s experience of hosting the 114th IPU.

Ms Mugo indicated that:
 ▪ An Inter-Ministerial Committee  (primary  ministries:  Foreign  Affairs,
   Transport, Security, Local Government, Health, Tourism, Immigration) was
   formed to plan the 114th IPU.
 ▪ Five MPs, who had been involved in the  IPU  before,  and  senior  staff
   met to form smaller committees who focused on  various  issues  such  as
   transport, accommodation etc.
 ▪ Four full-time staff worked on the organisation of the Committee.
 ▪  The  senior  staff  chaired  the  smaller  committees  that   included,
   tourism, transport, protocol etc.
 ▪ Initially,  the  committee  met  every  two  to  three  weeks  and  then
   eventually everyday.
 ▪ The entire Committee travelled to  the  IPU  hosted  by  Philippines  to
   develop a sense of what the issues were.
 ▪  The  IPU  Geneva  Secretariat  requests  a  certain  number  of  rooms,
   equipment etc that must be fulfilled.
 ▪ The IPU Secretariat will provide a  host  agreement  setting  out  these
   requirements.


11. African Parliamentary Union

Ms Mensah-Williams provided an overview of the IPU  Executive  Meeting.  She
indicated that the Africa Group has to elect a  Member  to  the  IPU  Reform
Committee.

It was noted further that the Africa Group should not  arrange  meetings  on
the same day that the Women’s Group meets. This issue  caused  some  concern
subsequent to the APU meeting since names of women that did not  necessarily
reflect the wishes  of  African  women  delegates,  were  forwarded  to  the
Meeting of Women Parliamentarians  as  candidates  for  vacant  posts.   The
matter  was  subsequently  resolved  after  African  women   delegates   met
separately to discuss this deeply concerning trend of the APU  to  hold  its
meetings at the same time than women delegates met.


Emergency Item


The Egyptian delegation stated that the Arab group had met and decided on  a
single topic  amongst  their  delegates.   This  topic  will  centre  around
religious freedom.


Vacant Posts


Ethiopia, Niger,  Uganda  (proposed  by  Mensah-Williams),  Mali  and  Gabon
nominated   delegates   to   the   Co-ordinating    Committee    of    Women
Parliamentarians.

Cameroon nominated a delegate to the Committee on Human Rights.


Secretary General


It was agreed that Mr Johnsson’s term as Secretary General  is  renewed  for
another four years.


IPU Working Group


Ghana and Cameroon nominated delegates to the IPU Working Group.




Drafting Committees


South  Africa  and  Sudan  (sustainable  development),  Zambia  and   Uganda
(international  peace  and  security),  and  Benin  (unspecified)  nominated
delegates to form part of various drafting committees.

It was decided that all nominated delegates should meet and  decide  amongst
themselves who should act as the Africa region’s representatives. Names  are
to be forwarded to the Secretary General of the APU.


Any other Business


The President of Association of Shoora, Councils and Legislative  Assemblies
requested support from the APU to obtain observer status at the IPU.

12. Meeting with Secretary General of the IPU

Mr Johnsson welcomed the Deputy Chairperson  and  Mr  Bapela  and  explained
that the President of the IPU, Mr Cassini has had  to  return  to  Italy  to
deal with the political turmoil in his country.

Mr Bapela explained the negotiations with Ethiopia regarding the hosting  of
the 2008 IPU Assembly and indicated that  Ethiopia  had  agreed  that  South
Africa could host the IPU in 2008.

Mr Johnsson stated that they have  always  adopted  the  first  come,  first
serve principle. He indicated that Thailand would  host  the  conference  in
2007, Venezuela in 2010 and Vietnam in 2011.

In the Executive Committee, there was some confusion about South Africa
hosting the 2008 Assembly. It was decided that Mr Bustos, head of
conferences at the IPU, would travel to South Africa to assess the
facilities available to determine whether South Africa is suitable to host
the conference. A final decision will be made in Geneva in October 2006.

He suggested that we set up a structure  within  Parliament  to  manage  the
2008 Assembly. This group should study the protocols  and  plans,  make  the
necessary arrangements, and then invite Mr Bustos to view  the  plans.  This
has to be completed before the Geneva meeting in October 2006.

Mr Johnsson argued that the fact that two conferences are taking place in
Africa after each other, should not be an issue, since the first 70
conferences were never held in Africa at all.

He suggested that  we  organise  two  meetings  with  the  Kenyan  and  Thai
organising committees and that we read  through  the  protocol  document  as
soon as possible.

13. Future IPU Meetings

115th Assembly   October 2006           Geneva, Switzerland
116th Assembly   April 2007       Bangkok, Thailand
117th Assembly   April/May 2008   South Africa
118th Assembly   October 2008           Geneva, Switzerland
119th Assembly   April/May 2009   Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

14. Subject Items for the 116th Assembly (Thailand)

The following subject items and co-rapporteurs were approved for the 116th
Assembly (Thailand):


First Standing Committee


Ensuring respect for and peaceful co-existence between all religions,
communities and beliefs in a globalised world.

Co-rappoteurs:         Mr P Bieri (Switzerland)
                 Mrs S Masri (Jordan)


Second Standing Committee


Job creation and employment security in the era of globalization
Co-rapporteurs:  To be appointed


Third Standing Committee


Promoting diversity and equal rights for all through universal democratic
and electoral standards

Co-rapporteurs:  Mrs N Narochnitskaya (Russian Federation)
                 Mr J D Seelam (India)

15. Implications of the Resolutions and Decisions Adopted at the  114th  IPU
   for the South African Parliament

 ▪  The  resolution  adopted  on  the  emergency   item   recommended   that
   parliaments in the affected countries monitor the delivery of food relief
   programmes and invited them to report on their findings to the IPU.  This
   commitment, agreed to by South Africa, requires follow-up by  Members  of
   the delegation to the 114th IPU and ultimately by Parliament itself.  The
   implication for Parliament is that it needs to  investigate  food  relief
   programmes in South  Africa  either  through  the  Portfolio  and  Select
   Committees dealing with agriculture and food security or by setting up  a
   task team to investigate this matter further.  The  matter  may  also  be
   highlighted when this report is adopted by Parliament.

 ▪ Similarly, the resolutions  adopted  by  the  three  Standing  Committees
   have to be discussed and followed-up. In particular:

         o Parliaments are  urged  not  only  to  promote  and  ensure  the
           adoption at the national level of  legislation  and  regulations
           required to control SALW and to  combat  its  proliferation  and
           misuse, but also to promote the development of an  international
           arms trade treaty (ATT) to strictly regulate arms  transfers  on
           the basis of  State  obligations  under  international  law  and
           internationally accepted norms and human rights standards.
         o  Legislators  recommended  that  parliaments  include  in  their
           budgets clear indicators  of  the  financial  and  non-financial
           costs related to  environmental  degradation,  and  promote  the
           development of new and broader tools and  methods  of  measuring
           GDP and other standardized economic concepts.
         o Parliament are  called  upon  to  give  priority  to  and  raise
           awareness about violence against women as both  a  cause  and  a
           consequence of the rising incidence of HIV/AIDS and  to  include
           these  considerations  in  their  national  strategies;  and  to
           implement the United  Nations  General  Assembly  resolution  on
           Crime prevention and  criminal  justice  measures  to  eliminate
           violence against women; in particular  to  punish  all  acts  of
           violence against women perpetrated by State or non-State  actors
           in the public and  the  private  spheres;  to  establish  courts
           specialized in hearing cases of such violence; and to  establish
           a governmental body promoting the prosecution  of  all  acts  of
           violence.

 ▪ SA Parliament  delegates,  at  the  insistence  of  Hon  Sisa  Njikelana,
   discussed the issue of the World Social Forum. He suggested that a formal
   request be submitted to the Secretariat of the Forum for an  introductory
   meeting before October 2006. A report of the proposed meeting  should  be
   submitted at the 115th Assembly.

 ▪ The Zambian Parliament needs to be reminded of its commitment  to  better
   co-ordinate meetings of SADC delegates prior to IPU meetings.

 ▪ In Geneva, it will  be  proposed  that  a  Deputy  Secretary  General  be
   appointed to  take  over  from  the  current  Secretary  General.  It  is
   therefore imperative that SADC and African countries meet to discuss this
   matter.

 ▪ It was suggested that SADC Parliaments  develop  a  database  of  Members
   who could serve on various IPU/UN panels

 ▪ A workshop needs to be arranged to prepare delegates  attending  the  IPU
   on matters that will be discussed and to capacitate  them  adequately  to
   engage in debate at the Assembly.

 ▪ The capacity of the International Relations Section to follow-up  on  the
   resolutions and recommendations made at the IPU needs to fast-tracked  to
   ensure  that  Parliament  meets  its  obligations  vis  a  vis  the   IPU
   resolutions.

 ▪ Furthermore, the International  Relations  Policy  has  to  finalised  as
   soon as possible in order to ensure that the necessary structures are  in
   place to manage Parliament’s approach to  international  matters  and  to
   track whether Parliament’s policies are aligned with that of the IPU’s.

 ▪ In terms of hosting the IPU in  2008,  the  Secretary  General  suggested
   that we set up a structure within Parliament to manage the 2008 Assembly.
   This group should study the  protocols  and  plans,  make  the  necessary
   arrangements, and then invite Mr Bustos to view the plans. This has to be
   completed before the Geneva meeting in October 2006.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker
     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated 13
     June 2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members of
     the Assembly of the employment of the South African National Defence
     Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo:

      EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE IN THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR SERVICE IN FULFILLMENT OF THE
    INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE
    DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO

      This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have authorised
    the employment of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF)
    personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in fulfillment of
    the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa towards
    the DRC in support of the electoral process. Elections in the DRC are
    scheduled to take place on 30 July 2006.


    This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
    section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,
    1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No 42 of
    2002).


      A total of thirty nine (39) members are employed until 15 July 2006.
    The total cost to be borne by the Department of Foreign Affairs from
    the African Renaissance Fund for the deployment of the personnel is R
    49, 547, 145.

      I will communicate this report to members of the National Council of
    Provinces and to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
    attention of the National Assembly.


      Yours sincerely,


      signed
      THABO MBEKI

PLEASE INSERT REPORT - INSERT T060622E-insert 2 – PAGES 1580-1586

2.    Annual Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development

                           JANUARY – DECEMBER 2005

1. Introduction

Our committee forms part of a pool of portfolio committees that the
National Assembly appoints from among its members to shadow the work of the
various national government departments. It is a portfolio committee for
the national department of social development, previously known as
‘welfare’. Like all portfolio committees, it has 15 full members, and 3
alternate members. It is mandated to consider bills, deal with departmental
budget votes, oversee the work of the department they are responsible for,
and enquire and make recommendations about any aspect of the department,
including its structure, functioning and policy. Furthermore, its work is
not restricted to government – it may investigate any matter of public
interest that falls within their area of responsibility.

2. Administration and management of the committee

Committee Chairperson: Mrs TJ Tshivhase
Secretary to the Chairperson: Ms D Makhetha
Committee’s Management Team:
   Mrs TJ Tshivhase - Chair
   Mr TM Masutha – ANC Party whip
   Mr B Solo – Committee Member
   Mr LPM Nzimande - Committee Member
   Mr MC Fukula – Support staff
   Mr F Abrahams – Support Staff

Committee’s support staff

   Committee Secretary: Mr MC Fukula
   Committee Assistant: Mrs A Kakaza
   Committee Researcher: Mr F Abrahams
   Committee Controller: Mrs T Lyons
3. Vision and mission of the committee

      I.    The mission

To serve as the representatives of the people in reviewing, developing and
monitoring the implementation of appropriate legislation that responds to
the social development needs of the people and that assists in reducing
poverty and social exclusion, and ensuring public participation. The
Committee will also, through its oversight function, ensure that the
policies and social development services implemented by Government are
focused on comprehensive protection against vulnerability and on
strengthening the social fabric.


  II. The vision


A caring society free from poverty, in which all people are able to develop
their full human potential, supported by an integrated family and community
centred system of social development services.

4. Chairperson’s overview:

The bulk of our committee’s time  in  the  year  2005  was,  by  and  large,
consumed by its work on legislation, namely the Children’s  Bill  [B70-2003]
Reintroduced as well as the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003]

The year saw our committee wrapping its work on  the  much  anticipated  and
topical Children’s Bill [B70-2003] Reintroduced. Our  committee  is  greatly
indebted to everybody that has contributed in making its work on the  latter
such a  resounding  success.  Subsequent  to  finalising  its  work  on  the
Children’s Bill [B70-2003] Reintroduced, our committee was referred  to  the
Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003] for its consideration. The  committee’s  work
strategy on the Older Persons Bill  [B68B-2003]  entailed  first  soliciting
public comments on the Bill, making  good  use  of  the  vehicle  of  public
hearings and afterwards engaging with the Department of  Social  Development
in  deliberating  the  solicited  public  comments.  The  public  input  and
interest manifested on the Older Persons Bill was  very  inexplicably  heart
warming.  Our  committee  sincerely  salutes  all  those   individuals   and
organisations that responded so positively to its call for public  comments.


In the course of working on  the  legislation  before  it,  our  committee’s
oversight responsibilities were however not neglected.  Notwithstanding  the
constraints emanating from its focus on  legislation,  our  committee  still
managed to keep a sharp eye on the developments  in  respect  of  the  South
African Social Security Agency (SASSA)  in  particular  and  other  entities
falling within the domain of  social  development.  An  oversight  visit  to
North West  province  was,  for  instance,  undertaken  with  the  following
objectives:
    ❑ To  look  at  the  delivery  systems  within  the  context  of  social
      security.
    ❑ To interact with stakeholders and service providers active within  the
      purview of social security delivery.
    ❑ To interact with social development officials with the  ultimate  view
      of ascertaining their level of awareness regarding the broader  social
      security changes as well as the pending transfer of some of the  staff
      from the Department of Social Development to the South African  Social
      Security Agency.
    ❑ To  visit  different  paypoints  in  order  to  look  at  changes  and
      challenging areas that needed urgent intervention.

The North West province oversight visit was intricately linked to our
Committee’s mission of reviewing, developing and monitoring the
implementation of appropriate legislation that responds to the social
development needs of the people and that assists in reducing poverty and
social exclusion, and ensuring public participation. Ensuring that the
policies and social development services implemented by Government are
focused on comprehensive protection against vulnerability and on
strengthening the social fabric. The outcomes of the visit will to be used
by the committee in its future engagements with the Department of Social
Development and the South African Social Security Agency.

The other oversight activities included hosting hearings on  the  Department
of Social Development’s budget vote 18 for the 2005/06 financial year,  with
the main focus being on the strategic plans of the Department  and  entities
reporting to it. The  Portfolio  Committee  engaged  with  Budget  Vote  18:
Social Development through a series  of  meetings  with  the  Department  of
Social Development, as well as those  entities  reporting  to  the  national
Minister of Social Development. The Committee met the Department  of  Social
Development on 1 and 2 March 2005. The Committee was further briefed by  the
National Development Agency (NDA) and the Disaster Relief Fund on  8  March;
and the Central Drug Authority (CDA)  and  the  South  African  Council  for
Social Services Professions on 9 March 2005. Due  to  time  constraints  and
various commitments on  the  side  of  senior  departmental  officials,  the
briefings and discussions on 1 and 2 March could only focus on the areas  of
social assistance, the transformation and financing of social services,  HIV
and AIDS care and population and development. That  effectively  meant  that
our committee could therefore  have  to  deal  with  other  aspects  of  the
department’s programmatic work after the completion of the budget cycle.

In the discussions on the various budget items,  members  of  the  committee
noted their interest in  the  establishment  of  the  South  African  Social
Security Agency (SASSA) and the impact that this will have on improving  the
delivery of social grants. The committee therefore expressed  its  intention
to closely monitor the establishment of  the  SASSA  through  briefings  and
progress reports. The question of the role of social grants and other  forms
of social aid to persons living with  HIV  and  AIDS  was  also  raised.  In
addition, members expressed concern about  the  manner  in  which  the  food
emergency scheme was managed, and about  the  fact  that  the  developmental
aspect of the Integrated Nutrition Strategy has not been implemented.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the entire membership of my committee
for the self-less manner in which its has contributed to the realization of
our committee’s vision and objectives. I would also like to congratulate my
committee’s support for its availability in ensuring that the committee
moved ahead with minimal glitches. A word gratitude also goes to the
officials from the Department of Social Development for the amount of work
they have put in making our committee a success.

5. List of public entities over which the committee exercise oversight
5.1 South African Council for Social Service Professions (SACSSP) – is the
statutory regulatory body for the social service professions in South
Africa. It was established and functions in terms of the Social Service
Professions Act, 1978 (Act 110 of 1978) as amended. It evolved from the
erstwhile SA council for Social and Associated Work established in 1980,
the SA Council for Social Work and SA Interim Council for Social Work.

5.2 National Development Agency (NDA) - The NDA, as a statutory body that
is governed by NDA Act, No 108/1998 as amended, contributes towards the
eradication of poverty and its causes through the provision and
facilitation of:

    ❑ Development funding;
    ❑ Capacity building;
    ❑ Research and debate on development policy; and
    ❑ Dialogue.

5.3 Disaster Relief Fund – the object of the Disaster Relief Fund in terms
of the Fund-Raising Act, No 107 of 1978, is to render, with due regard to
the financial position of the Fund and the requirements of each case, to
persons, organizations and bodies who or which suffer damage or loss caused
by a disaster such assistance as the Disaster Relief Fund Board may deem
fair and reasonable.

5.4 Central Drug Authority was established in accordance to  Prevention  and
Treatment of Drug Dependency Act 20 of 1992, as  amended.  It  performs  the
following tasks:
    ❑  Protects  communities  from  the  health  risks  and  other   damages
      associated with drug misuse
    ❑  Ensures  that  drug  misusers  and  their  families  have  access  to
      counseling and services
    ❑ Develops  and  implement  training  programmes  on  the  detection  of
      substance abuse, its prevention and treatment for all role-players
    ❑ Establishes and maintain a substance abuse information system
    ❑ Enters into agreements  with  other  countries  and  organizations  in
      order to secure mutual legal assistance, intelligence sharing and  co-
      operation in anti-drug efforts and training

5.5 Advisory Board on Social Development – is an advisory board that was
established through the Advisory Board on Social Development Act of 2001.

The objectives of the Board are-

(a) To advise the Minister on-
    ❑ Measures to promote the transformation;
    ❑ Measures to promote social development initiatives;
    ❑ Measures to include local government in the provision of integrated;
    ❑ Proposals for new legislative frameworks for the social development;
    ❑ The introduction of local and international best practices in social

(b) To act as a consultative  forum  for  the  Minister  to  discuss  social
development matters, including-
    ❑ Improving the quality of provincial and national social development;
    ❑ The introduction of new policy and  successful  policy  implementation
      in the government and non-governmental environment;
    ❑  Facilitating  consultation  between   stakeholders   and   government
      regarding the implementation of social development;
    ❑  Ensuring  effective  review  of   formulation,   implementation   and
      evaluation of social development policies, programmes and legislation,
      as informed by the needs and priorities of society;
    ❑ Inputs from the social development sector to international forums  and
      protocols; social development  services;  service  delivery  at  local
      government level; sector and amendments to existing  legislation;  and
      development services.

5.6 South African  Social  Security  Agency  –  the  agency  is  established
through the South African Social Security Act, No.9 of 2004  as  a  juristic
person. It is established as a sole agent that must:
    ❑ Ensure the efficient  and  effective  management,  administration  and
      payment of social assistance; and
    ❑ To serve as an agent for the  administration  and  payment  of  social
      security.

6. Number of meetings held and those cancelled

7. Legislation referred to the committee (Finalised and not finalised)
7.1 Children’s Bill [B70-2003]
The Children’s Bill was not referred to our committee in 2005. It was an
outstanding work that carried over from last year.

Referral date – 15 June 2004


7.2 Briefings by the department/s


7.2.1 Briefing date: 18 January 2005

Meeting agenda: Consideration of the Committee’s draft programme (2005)  and
draft annual report for 2004.

7.2.2 Briefing date: 19 January 2005

Meeting  agenda:  Briefing  by  the  member-Departments  of   the   Steering
Committee on the Children’s Bill.

The following persons were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs Lana  Petersen  –  Parliamentary  Officer  –  Ministry  of  Social
      Development.
    ❑ Ms Agnes Muller –  Deputy  Director  Children,  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑  Dr  M  Mabetoa  –  Chief  Director  Children,  Youth  and   Families,
      Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs.  Ronel  van  Zyl  –  Legal  Drafter,  South  African  Law  Reform
      Commission
    ❑ Dr J Coetzee – Director Formal Education, Department  of  Correctional
      Services
    ❑  Mr.  F  Engelbrecht   -  Deputy  Commissioner   Personal   Wellbeing,
      Department of Correctional Services
    ❑ Ms Anne-Marie  van  Zyl  -  Executive  Manager  Employment  Standards,
      Department of Labour
    ❑  Mr.  SI  Nawa  –  Deputy  Director:  Legal  Services,  Department  of
      Education
    ❑ Mr. S Pienaar  –  Assistant  Commissioner,  Social  Crime  Prevention,
      South African Police Service
    ❑ Ms M Mathye – Chief Director, Equity and  Development,  Department  of
      Provincial and Local Government
    ❑ Mr. Z  Matebese  –  Senior  Planner,  National  House  of  Traditional
      Leaders
    ❑ Mr. S Mogotsi – Director: Legal Services, Department of Home Affairs
    ❑ Mr. E Kritzinger –  Director:  Status  Services,  Department  of  Home
      Affairs.
    ❑ Mr. A Goosen – Acting  Director:  Port  Control,  Department  of  Home
      Affairs
    ❑ Ms M Rantia – Director, Office of the Rights of the Child: Presidency
    ❑  Ms  P  Moodley  –  Acting  Director,  Department   of   Justice   and
      Constitutional Development
    ❑  Adv.  P  du  Rand  –  Chief  Director,  Department  of  Justice   and
      Constitutional Development
    ❑  Mrs.  K  Shabalala  –  Chief  Director,  Department  of  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development
    ❑ Ms C Kok – Senior Legal Administration Officer, Department of  Justice
      and Constitutional Development
    ❑ Mr. Otto Kelner, State Law Adviser
    ❑ Mr Fernel Abrahams, Parliamentary Researcher

7.2.3 Briefing date: 20 January 2005

Meeting agenda: Continuation of the briefing by  the  member-Departments  of
the Steering Committee on the Children’s  Bill  –  the  Department  of  Home
Affairs responding  to  the  questions  raised  and  presentation  by  Ronel
focussing on the matrix.


Officials present:
    ❑ Anne-Marie Van Zyl – Department of Labour
    ❑ Mr Silas IM Nawa – Department of Education
    ❑ Mrs Corlia Kok – Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
    ❑ Ms Pat Moodley - Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
    ❑ Elroy Machelm – Legal Aid Board
    ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen – Parliamentary Officer – Dept of Social
      Development.
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Chief Director: Children, Dept of Social Development
    ❑ Freddie Engelbrecht – Department of Correctional Services
    ❑ Ntombizodwa K Chiloane - SAPS
    ❑ Mr Tertius GeLdenhys – Assistant Commissioner – SAPS
    ❑ Mrs Antoinette Brink – Senior Legal Administration Officer – SAPS
    ❑ Zongezile Matebese – National House Of Traditional Leaders
    ❑ Mihloti Mathys – Department of Provincial and Local Government
    ❑ 14. KS Mogotsi – Department of Home Affairs

7.2.4 Briefing date: 21 January 2005

Meeting  agenda:  Briefings  by  the  Departments  of  Labour,  Correctional
Services and Education on the Children’s Bill and presentation by Mrs  Ronel
Van Zyl, legal drafter, on the prepared matrix.

Officials present:
    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers Office
    ❑ Mr E Kritzinje – Home Affairs
    ❑ Mr J Coetzee – Correctional Services
    ❑ Ms Susan Pienaar – South African Police Services
    ❑ Ms Antoinette Brink - South African Police Services
    ❑ Anne-Marie Van Zyl – Department of Labour
    ❑ Mr Silas IM Nawa – Department of Education
    ❑ Elroy Machelm – Legal Aid Board
    ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen – Parliamentary Officer – Dept of Social
      Development.
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Chief Director, Dept of Social Development
    ❑ Freddie Engelbrecht – Department of Correctional Services
    ❑ Ntombizodwa K Chiloane – South African Police Services
    ❑ Mr Tertius GeLdenhys – Assistant Commissioner – South African Police
      Services
    ❑ Mrs Antoinette Brink – Senior Legal Administration Officer – SAPS
    ❑ Zongezile
    ❑ Mr Z Matebese – National House Of Traditional Leaders
    ❑ KS Mogotsi – Department of Home Affairs

7.2.5 Briefing date: 02 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the national Department of Justice on the  Child
Justice Bill and Children’s Bill Reintroduced with the aim of  exposing  the
Committee membership to possible gaps and overlaps between the two Bills.
Status – Postponed
7.2.6 Briefing date: 04 February 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
reintroduced with particular focus on how the Bill was structured.

Status – Postponed

7.2.7 Briefing date: 08 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefings by the Department of Health  and  Social  Security
Branch of the Department of Social Development on issues emerging  from  the
previous briefings by the member Departments of the  Steering  Committee  on
the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]


The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Ronel van Zyl- SA Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman – SA Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Mr P du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms Sebotle Ngake – Department of Health
    ❑ Dr Mohlabi - Department of Health
    ❑ Ms Estelle de Klerk =- Department of Health
    ❑ Ms Ann Behr - Department of Health
    ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Unathi Mguye - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Selwyn Jehoma - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen - Department of Social Development

7.2.8 Briefing date: 09 February 2005

Meeting agenda:
    ❑ Presentation by the  Social  Security  Branch  of  the  Department  of
      Social Development on grants to children.
    ❑ Presentation by the Department of Social Development  on  Sections  75
      and 76 issues.


The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – Principal State Law Advisor
    ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Ronel van Zyl- SA Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman – SA Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Mr P du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Brian Heber - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Unathi Mguye - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Selwyn Jehoma - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Tertius Geldenhuys – Assistant Commissioner; SAPS

7.2.9 Briefing date: 15 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Presentation by Department of Social Development on  clauses
and issues that must be moved from Section 76 of the Children’s  Bill  [B70-
2003]  (composite  bill)  to  the  Section  75  Children’s  Bill  [B70-2003-
Reintroduced


The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers Office

    ❑ Mr E Kritzinje – Home Affairs

    ❑ Mr J Coetzee – Correctional Services

    ❑ Ms Susan Pienaar – South African Police Services

    ❑ Ms Antoinette Brink - South African Police Services

    ❑ Anne-Marie Van Zyl – Department of Labour

    ❑ Mr Silas IM Nawa – Department of Education

    ❑ Elroy Machelm – Legal Aid Board

    ❑  Mrs  Lana  Petersen  –  Parliamentary  Officer  –  Dept   of   Social
      Development.

    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Chief Director, Dept of Social Development

    ❑ Freddie Engelbrecht – Department of Correctional Services

    ❑ Ntombizodwa K Chiloane – South African Police Services
    ❑ Mr Tertius GeLdenhys – Assistant Commissioner – South  African  Police
      Services
    ❑ Mrs Antoinette Brink – Senior Legal Administration Officer – SAPS
    ❑ Mr Z Matebese – National House Of Traditional Leaders
    ❑ KS Mogotsi – Department of Home Affairs

7.2.10 Briefing date: 16 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Consideration of the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]
reintroduced – going through the Bill clause-by-clause starting from
Chapter 2.

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development
    ❑  Mrs  Lana  Petersen  –  Parliamentary  Officer  –  Dept   of   Social
      Development.
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Chief Director, Dept of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers’ Office

7.2.11 Briefing date: 18 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Consideration of the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]
reintroduced – going through the Bill clause-by-clause starting from clause
12.


The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez – Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller – Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mrs Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers’ Office

7.2.12 Briefing date: 22 February 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
reintroduced – going through the Bill clause-by-clause starting from  clause
30.


The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez – Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller – Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mrs Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers’ Office

    ❑ Mr Daniel Plaatjies – National Treasury

    ❑ Mrs Ronel Van Zyl – South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission

7.2.13 Briefing date: 25 February 2005

Meeting agenda: Deliberation on the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]  Reintroduced
– going through  the  Bill  clause-by-clause  starting  from  clause  239  –
facilitated by Ms Lowesa Stuurman and Mrs Ngcobo-Mbere.

    ❑ Mrs Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner – State Law Advisers’ Office
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission

7.2.14 Briefing date: 01 March 2005

Meeting  agenda:  Department  of  Social  Development’s  Budget  overview  –
facilitated by the Department’s Director-General, Mr Vusi Madonsela and  the
Department’s Chief Financial Officer, Mr C Pakade.

The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mr A Adendorff – Senior Manager, Office of the Auditor-General

    ❑ Mr F Makiwane – Department of Social Development

    ❑ Mr V Madonsela – Director-General, Department of Social Development
    ❑  Mr  C  Pakade  –  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Department  of   Social
      Development

7.2.15 Briefing date: 02 March 2005

Meeting agenda: Budget overview for the 2005/06 financial – Briefing by  the
Department of Social Development – continuation.


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Mr Leon Swartz - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mrs Nomathemba Kela - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Ms Malegu Ogewekga - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Me Selwyn Jehoma - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Ms Vuyelwa Nhlapho - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Coceko Pakade –  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Department  of  Social
      Development

7.2.16 Briefing date: 08 March 2005

Meeting agenda: Budget overview for the 2005/06 financial – Briefing by  the
Disaster Relief Fund.


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Dr Lulama Makhubela – Director: Research and Development –
        National Development Agency.

      ❑  Mr  Moitswadi  Mofokeng  –  Chief  Financial  Officer  -  National
        Development Agency.

      ❑  Mr  Khulu  Mbongo  –  Stakeholder  Manager:  National  Development
        Agency.

      ❑ Ms Bridget Masango  –  Director:  Marketing  and  Communications  -
        National Development Agency.

      ❑ Mr Dave Willcox – Company Secretary - National Development Agency.

      ❑ Mr Reuben Mogano – Director: Projects Management

      ❑ Pastor Mzanempi Nhlapho – Chairperson: Disaster Relief Fund Board

      ❑ Mr RJ Molife – Director, Department of Social Development

      ❑  Mr  Jimmy  Kekana  –  Assistant  Director,  Department  of  Social
        Development

7.2.17 Briefing date: 09 March 2005

Meeting agenda: Budget overview for the 2005/06 financial – Briefing by  the
South African Council  for  Social  Service  Professions  (SACSSP)  and  the
Central Drug Authority.


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Dr J Lombard – CEO: SACSSP

      ❑ Mrs Boitumelo Setlalentoa – President: SACSSP

      ❑ Ms Evodia Mabuza-Mokoko – Deputy-Director: SACSSP

      ❑ Ms Connie Nxumalo – Department of Social Development
      ❑ Prof S Rataemane – Chairperson: Central Drug Authority

7.2.18 Briefing date: 15 March 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development on the Courts Chapter in the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Mrs Corlia Kok – Deputy Director, Child and Family Law:  Department
        of Justice and Constitutional Development

      ❑ Mrs Pat Moodley  –  Acting  Director,  Family  Law:  Department  of
        Justice and Constitutional Development

      ❑ Mr PA du Rand –  Chief  Director,  Court  Services:  Department  of
        Justice and Constitutional Development

      ❑ Mrs Ayesha Johaar – Senior State Law Advisor

      ❑ Mr Otto Kellner - Principal State Law Advisor

      ❑ Mr S Ebrahim – Senior Family Advocate, W, Cape

      ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen – Department of Social Development

      ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mrs Agnes Muller - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez - Department of Social Development.

7.2.19 Briefing date: 16 March 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Master’s Office on  issues  related  to  the
Children’s Bill [B70-2003 – facilitated  by  the  Acting  Chief  Master,  Mr
Baloyi.



The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mr JS Baloyi - by the Acting Chief Master: Department of  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development

    ❑ Ms Petunia Seabi – Chief Family Advocate: Department  of  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development

    ❑ Mrs Pat Moodley – Acting Director, Family Law: Department  of  Justice
      and Constitutional Development

    ❑ Mrs Ayesha Johaar – Senior State Law Advisor

    ❑ Mr S Ebrahim – Senior Family Advocate, W, Cape
    ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development

7.2.20 Briefing date: 06 April 2005

Meeting agenda: Deliberation on the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]  Reintroduced
– going through the Bill clause-by-clause starting from clause 254  to  272,
in Chapter 17 – facilitated by Mrs Ronel van Zyl.


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Mrs Ayesha Johaar – Senior State Law Advisor

      ❑ Mr Otto Kellner - Principal State Law Advisor

      ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen – Department of Social Development

      ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez - Department of Social Development.

      ❑ Kinsey Rasebitse - Department of Social Development.

      ❑ Ms Rose Mnisi - Department of Social Development.

      ❑ Ms Frances Viviers - Department of Social Development.
      ❑ Mr Brian Heber - Department of Social Development.

7.2.21 Briefing date: 08 April 2005

Meeting agenda: Deliberation on the Children’s Bill [B70-2003]  Reintroduced
– going through the Bill clause-by-clause starting from clause 273  to  296,
in Chapter 18 – facilitated by Mrs Ronel van Zyl.


The following officials were in attendance:

    ❑ Mrs Ayesha Johaar – Senior State Law Advisor

    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner - Principal State Law Advisor

    ❑ Dr Maria Mabetoa - Department of Social Development

    ❑ Kinsey Rasebitse - Department of Social Development.

    ❑ Ms Rose Mnisi - Department of Social Development.
    ❑ Ms Frances Viviers - Department of Social Development.

7.2.22 Briefing date: 12 April 2005

Meeting agenda: Policy Workshop on unclear  policy  issues  related  to  the
Children’s Bill [B70-2003] Reintroduced – Day One

7.2.23 Briefing date: 13 April 2005

Meeting agenda: Policy Workshop on unclear policy issues related to the
Children’s Bill [B70-2003] Reintroduced – Day Two

7.2.24 Briefing date: 17 May 2005
Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced – Deliberating on the forwarded draft  amendments  –  focussing
on Chapter 1 starting from clause 2 onwards.


The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr P Du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs M Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms P Moodley - Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl – South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Mrs A Muller - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms P Naicker - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs U Mguye - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms A Johaar – State Law Advisor’s Office

7.2.25 Briefing date: 18 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced – Deliberating on the forwarded draft  amendments  –  focussing
on the revised Chapter 3 of the Bill.


The following officials were in attendance:

      ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mr P Du Preez – Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mrs M Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development

      ❑  Ms  P  Moodley  -  Department  of   Justice   and   Constitutional
        Development

      ❑ Mrs R van Zyl – South African Law Reform Commission

      ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission

      ❑ Mrs A Muller - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Ms P Naicker - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Mrs U Mguye - Department of Social Development

      ❑ Ms A Johaar – State Law Advisor’s Office
      ❑ Ms Matlhogonolo Sebopela - Department of Social Development


7.2.26 Briefing date: 20 May 2005
Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced –  Deliberating  on  trafficking  in  children  in  chapter  18
including the definitions.

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr P Du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl – South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms A Johaar – State Law Advisor’s Office
    ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms Matlhogonolo Sebopela - Department of Social Development

7.2.27 Briefing date: 23 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced  –  Deliberating  on  the  proposed  amendments  to  chapter  5
facilitated by the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs KB Shabalala - Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development
    ❑ Mr Rob Skhosana - Department of Justice and Constitutional
      Development.
    ❑ Mrs Corlia Kok - Department of Justice and Constitutional Development


    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr P Du Preez – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs M Ngcobo-Mbere - Department of Social Development.
    ❑ Ms P Moodley - Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl – South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms Lowesa Stuurman - South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Mrs A Muller - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs U Mguye - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Ms A Johaar – State Law Advisor’s Office
    ❑ Mr Otto Kellner - State Law Advisor’s Office

7.2.28 Briefing date: 24 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced - Deliberation on the proposed draft amendments, starting  from
Clause 124.

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs L Petersen, PA – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs U Mguye, Deputy Director, Social Security - Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs  MV  Ngcobo-Mbere,  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A  Muller,  Deputy  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr  M  Mabetoa,  Chief  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development

7.2.29 Briefing date: 26 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
reintroduced – deliberations on the proposed  amendments  forwarded  by  the
Department of Social Development, starting from clause 249.

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs L Petersen, PA – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs A  Muller,  Deputy  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr  M  Mabetoa,  Chief  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs U Mguye, Deputy Director, Social Security - Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Pierre du Preez, Legal Officer - Department of Social Development

7.2.30 Briefing date: 27 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced – the Department of Justice  and  Constitutional  Development’s
response to reviewed aspects of chapter of the  Children’s  Bill  [B70-2003]
Reintroduced and  Deliberation  by  the  committee  on  the  proposed  draft
amendments, starting from Clause 254.
The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs A  Muller,  Deputy  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr  M  Mabetoa,  Chief  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development

7.2.31 Briefing date: 31 May 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced to be preluded by a report back by the  Department  of  Justice
on issues pertaining to chapter 5 of the Bill.

The following persons were in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Ms L Stuurman, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr  M  Mabetoa,  Chief  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre Du Preez, legal Advisor – Department of Social Development

The following State Law Advisor/s was/ere present:
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office

7.2.32 Briefing date: 01 June 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
reintroduced – deliberations on the amended Children’s  Bill  –  with  input
from Minister Z Skweyiya and Deputy Minister J De Lange on Chapter 5 of  the
Children’s Bill.

7.2.33 Briefing date: 10 June 2005

Meeting  agenda:   Consideration   of   the   Children’s   Bill   [B70-2003]
Reintroduced – deliberating on the amended Bill.
The following persons from the Department of Social Development were in
attendance:

    ❑ Mrs MV Ngcobo-Mbere, Director, Children - Department of Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A Muller, Deputy Director, Children - Department of Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr M Mabetoa, Chief Director, Children - Department of Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre Du Preez, legal Advisor – Department of Social Development

The following State Law Advisor/s was/ere present:
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office

7.2.34 Briefing date: 14 June 2005

Meeting agenda: Completion of the  final  consideration  of  the  Children’s
Bill [B70-2003] reintroduced   process – starting from  Chapter  16  of  the
draft amended Bill.

The following persons from the Department  of  Social  Development  were  in
attendance:


    ❑ Mrs R van Zyl, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission

    ❑ Ms L Stuurman, Researcher- South African Law Reform Commission
    ❑ Dr  M  Mabetoa,  Chief  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre Du Preez, legal Advisor – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Deputy Minister J de Lange - Department of Justice and  Constitutional
      Development.
    ❑ Mrs Ayesha Johaar – Senior State  Law  Advisor,  State  Law  Advisor’s
      Office.

The following State Law Advisor/s was/ere present:
    ❑ Mrs A Johaar, Senior State Law Advisor –  Chief  State  Law  Advisers’
      Office

7.2.35 Briefing date: 24 August 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department  of  Social  Development  on  the
Central Drug Authority.


The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Miss Connie Nxumalo – Director: Substance abuse and CDA, Department
      of Social Development
    ❑ Ms Evodia Mkoko – Deputy-Director: CDA
    ❑ Mr Jonathan Marwala – Assistant-Director: CDA, Department of Social
      Development

7.2.36 Briefing date: 26 August 2005



Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department  of  Social  Development  on  the
Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003]

Officials in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs Thuli Mahlangu – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez - Department of Social Development

7.2.37 Briefing date: 07 September 2005

Meeting agenda: Joint briefing  facilitated  by  the  Department  of  Social
Development and the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) on:

SASSA

    ❑ Reporting mechanism of SASSA to Parliament

    ❑ SASSA’s business plan as well  as  on  progress  made  and  challenges
      currently experienced with regard to its rollout plan and its  general
      transitional  arrangements,  update  on  the  HR  issues,  namely  the
      transfer of staff and assets.




Department of Social Development


      On progress made with regard to the finalisation  of  regulations  and
      amendments to the Social Assistance Act; new definition of  disability
      grant etc.


    ❑ The structured reporting line, if any exists,  between  our  committee
      and your department with regard to the South African  Social  Security
      Agency (SASSA) and the frequency of that reporting.

    ❑ Shed more  light  on  what  it  is  doing  to  facilitate  the  smooth
      establishment of SASSA.



The officials in attendance:
    ❑ Mr Hlubi Radebe – South African Social Security Agency
    ❑ Mr Fezile Makiwane - South African Social Security Agency
    ❑ Mr Vusi Madonsela – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Panyaza Lesufi - South African Social Security Agency
    ❑ Ms Maloka – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Lulu Pemba - Department of Social Development

7.2.38 Briefing date: 09 September 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department of Social Development on the
issues raised during Public Hearings on the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003]
held on 30-31 August 2005.

The officials in attendance:
    ❑ Mrs Thuli Mahlangu, Director: Older Persons  –  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez, Legal Advisor - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs  MV  Ngcobo-Mbere,  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mrs A  Muller,  Deputy  Director,  Children  -  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Gideon  Hoon,  Principal  State  Law  Advisor  –  Chief  State  Law
      Advisers’ Office

7.2.39. Briefing date: 12 October 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department  of  Social  Development  on  the
redraft version of the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003] as resolved in the  09
September 2005 committee meeting.

The officials in attendance:
    ❑ Ms Nomathemba Kela, Chief Director, Social Welfare and  Transformation


    ❑ Mrs Thuli Mahlangu, Director: Older Persons  –  Department  of  Social
      Development
    ❑ Mr Pierre du Preez, Legal Advisor - Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mr Gideon Hoon, Principal State Law Adviser  -  Office  of  the  Chief
      State Law Advisor
    ❑  Mrs  Lana  Petersen,  Parliamentary  Officer   –   Ministry:   Social
      Development

7.2.40 Briefing date: 19 October 2005

Meeting agenda: Hearings on the Dept’s Annual Reports (2005)

    ❑ Briefing by the Department of Social Development on its Annual  Report
      for 2005
    ❑ Briefing by the South African Social Service Professional  Council  on
      its Annual Report for 2005
    ❑ Briefing by the Central Drug Authority on its Annual Report for 2005
    ❑ Briefing by the South African Social Security  Agency  on  its  Annual
      Report for 2005

7.2.41 Briefing date: 04 November 2005

Meeting agenda: Briefing by the Department of Social Development on the
redraft version of the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003].

The following officials were in attendance:
    ❑ Ms Nomathemba Kela, Chief Director, Social Welfare and Transformation


    ❑ Mrs Lulu Pemba, Director: Legal Services – Department of Social
      Development
    ❑ Ms Vuyelwa Nhlapho, Deputy Director-General - Department of Social
      Development
    ❑ Ms Isa Sikawana – Department of Social Development
    ❑ Mrs Lana Petersen, Parliamentary Officer – Ministry: Social
      Development

7.2.42 Briefing date: 09 November 2005

Meeting agenda: Consideration of the Public Hearings Report on the Older
Persons Bill [B68B-2003]

7.2.43 Briefing date: 16 November 2005

Meeting agenda: Presentation by the Department of Social Development on  the
draft proposed amendments to the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003]

8. PUBLIC HEARINGS

8.1 Public Hearings on the Older Persons Bill [B68B-2003]

8.1.2 Dates: 30-31 August 2005

8.1.3 Institutions that sent submissions:
    ❑ Cape Jewish Seniors Association (CJSA)
    ❑ Ikamva Labantu
    ❑ Highlands House (The Cape Jewish Aged Home)
    ❑ Grandmothers Against Poverty and Aids
    ❑ Kerklike Maatskaplike Dienste Raad (KMDR)
    ❑ Church Council For Social Services
    ❑ Action on Elder Abuse South Africa (AEASA)
    ❑ SA Human Rights Commission
    ❑ NG Ministry of Caring
    ❑ NAWONGO
    ❑ A branch of NG Welfare, North West
    ❑ Pretoria Council for the Care of the Aged
    ❑ Alzheimer’s South Africa
    ❑ Women’s Legal Centre
    ❑ Department of Health - CT
    ❑ The Black Sash
    ❑ Joint Forum for Policy on Ageing
    ❑ RAPCAN
    ❑ Southern African Catholic Bishops Conference
    ❑ Alliance for Children’s Entitlement to Social Security
    ❑ Law Society of South Africa
    ❑ South African Council of Churches
    ❑ Media Monitoring Project
    ❑ Commission on Gender Equality
    ❑ Action on Elder Abuse SA
    ❑ South African Association of Homes for the Aged
    ❑ The Body Corporate of La Belle Vie

8.1.4 Individuals that sent submissions:
    ❑ Elizabeth M Xaba
    ❑ M.D.S Motshumi
    ❑ Thandiwe Joyce Mbongo
    ❑ Lucas Mangala
    ❑ Raliphi Master Push Xolelizwe
    ❑ HJJ Laubscher
    ❑ Peter Laubscher
    ❑ Mr FE Warner

8.1.5 Adoption: Yes, on 09 November 2005

8.1.6 Report publication – 22 November 2005

8.1.7 Debate in the House – not yet.

8.2 Hearings on the Annual Reports of the Department of  Social  Development
and the entities reporting to it.

8.2.1 Date: 19 October 2005

8.2.2 Institutions that made presentations:
    ❑ Department of Social Development
    ❑ National Development Agency
    ❑ South African Social Service Professional Council
    ❑ Central Drug Authority
    ❑ South African Social Security Agency

8.2.3 Adoption – not yet

8.2.4 Report publication – not yet.

8.2.5 Debate in the House – No

9. Papers (International Agreements, Protocols,  Reports  etc)  referred  to
the Committee: indicate the following: -


9.1 Report on the submission of the annual  reports  by  the  Department  of
Social Development and the National Development Agency.

9.2 Referral date: 31 September 2005
10.  Oversight (Local) visits

10.1 Oversight trip to North West province

10.1.1 Objectives of the trip

    ❑ Look at the delivery systems within the context of social security.
    ❑ Interact with stakeholders and service providers active within the
      purview of social security delivery.
    ❑ Interact with social development officials with the ultimate view of
      ascertaining their level of awareness regarding the broader social
      security changes as well as the pending transfer of some of the staff
      from the Department of Social Development to the South African Social
      Security Agency.
    ❑ Visit different paypoints in order to look at changes and challenging
      areas that needed urgent intervention.

   2. Dates: 01-05 August 2005

   3. Delegation

|NAME                          |POLITICAL PARTY                 |
|Direko, Ms W                  |ANC (delegation leader)         |
|Makasi, Ms XC                 |ANC                             |
|Masutha, Mr TM                |ANC                             |
|Nzimande, Mr LPM              |ANC                             |
|Weber, Ms H                   |DA                              |
|Mars, Ms I                    |IFP                             |
|Godi, Mr T                    |PAC                             |
|Rajbally, Ms S                |MF                              |

   4. Adoption of the oversight trip report – The report  is  ready  and  is
      awaiting delegates’ input. It is thus not adopted.

10. International Visits:
Our Committee has undertaken no international trip this year.


11. Budget Vote

11.1 Budget Vote 18

11.2 Referral Date: 02 March 2005
11.3 Briefing by the Department on Budget Vote 18: 16 March 2005
11.4  Public  Hearings:  There  were  no  public  hearings  owing  to   time
constraints.
11.5 Date of report publication: 29 March 2005
11.6 Debate in the House – NA – 05 April 2005; NCOP – 26 May 2005.

12. Annual reports of the Executive
 1. Referral date: 30 September 2005
 2. Date of the briefing by department: 19 October 2005
12.3 Public Hearings: There were no public hearings held.
12.4 Date of the report publication: The report is not yet adopted.


13. Other  committee  activities  (briefings  on  other  issues,  workshops,
conferences)


13.1 Workshop
The Portfolio Committee on Social Development held a two-day workshop on 12
and 13 April 2005 in order to seek clarity on certain policy issues related
to the Children’s Bill [B70 – 2003 (Reintroduced)]. The workshop was held
at the Cape Town International Convention Centre, and was attended by
Members of Parliament, representatives of civil society organizations,
child protection practitioners, academics, legal advisors and officials
from the Department of Social Development.

   1. Date: 12 and 13 April 2005
   2. Agenda: To seek clarity  on  certain  policy  issues  related  to  the
      Children’s Bill [B70 – 2003 (Reintroduced)].

   3. Presenters:
    ❑ Ms Paula Proudlock, Children’s Bill Working Group (CBWG
    ❑ Advocate Anne  Skelton,  Centre  for  Child  Law,  University  of  the
      Witwatersrand
    ❑ Mr Hendrik van der Merwe, Office of the Master of the High Court
    ❑ Ms Suraya Williams - Commission on Gender Equality (CGE)
    ❑  Ms  Linda  Mngomezulu,  South  African  National  Civic  Organisation
      (SANCO)
    ❑ Carol Bower, RAPCAN
    ❑ Dr Moses Thindisa, Doctors for Life
    ❑ Dr Eva Seobi, Doctors for Life
    ❑ Dr Janet Giddy, Director  of  HIV  Programmes  at  McCord’s  Hospital,
      KwaZulu-Natal
    ❑ Jackie Lofell – Johannesburg Child Welfare Society
    ❑ Professor Julia Sloth-Nielsen – University of the Western Cape
    ❑ Mr July Nkutha – Disabled Children’s Action Group
    ❑  Jody  Kollapen,  Chairperson  of  the  South  African  Human   Rights
      Commission (SAHRC).
    ❑ Denni Leppan – Commissioner Wynberg Children’s Court
    ❑ Zeni Thumbadoo – National Association of Child Care Workers.
    ❑ Prof Himonga, UCT


   4. Resolutions:

      At the end of the proceedings, it was felt that the Committee could
      not spend much more time debating policy issues, and that the next
      step would be for the Department’s legal drafters to provide the
      Committee with alternative drafts of those clauses that had been
      identified for further refinement. These drafts would be considered
      when the Committee next met after the recess.


14. Budget of the committee

 1. How much was allocated to the committee: R534.280.00
   1.  Expenditure: R265, 842.29
    ❑ Catering – R38, 422.76
    ❑ Provincial Visits – R157, 904.00
    ❑ Overseas Trips - None
    ❑ Public Hearings Advert – R40, 016.900
    ❑ Transfer to staff travel – R29, 500.00

   2. Balance: R268.437.11

15. Outstanding matters

    ❑ Consideration and adoption  of  the  Hearings  Report  on  the  Annual
      Reports of the Department of Social Development and entities reporting
      to it.
    ❑ Consideration and adoption of the Committee’s Annual Report.
    ❑ Consideration and adoption of the North West oversight visit report.



…………………………………                …………………


COMMITTEE SECRETARY               DATE:



…………………………………                …………………



CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY       DATE:



…………………………………                …………………


COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON                          DATE:


                            FRIDAY, 23 JUNE 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

        1) Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Amendment
           Bill [B 32F – 2005] – Act No 3 of 2006 (assented to and signed
           by President on 19 June 2006).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental  Affairs  and
    Tourism on  consideration  of  Budget  Vote  27  of  the  Department  of
    Environmental Affairs and Tourism, dated 6 June 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs  and  Tourism  having
      considered and adopted 2006/07 Budget Vote 27  of  the  Department  of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism  in terms of Rule  201  (c)  of  the
      National Assembly which states that:

      A Portfolio Committee may monitor, investigate, enquire into and  make
      recommendations concerning any such  executive  organ  of  the  state,
      constitutional institution or other body or institution, including the
      legislative   programme,   budget,   rationalization,   restructuring,
      functioning, organization, structure, staff and policies of such organ
      of state, institution or other body or  institution  [1],  reports  to
      Parliament as follows:

      1.    Introduction and Overview


      On 26 May 2006, Members of the Portfolio  Committee  on  Environmental
      Affairs and Tourism and the Select Committee on Land and Environmental
      Affairs were briefed  in  a  joint  meeting  on  Budget  Vote  27  the
      Department of Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism.  The  Departmental
      briefing focused on 2006/07 strategic priorities and budget allocation
      of programmes dealing with Administration, Environmental  Quality  and
      Protection, Marine and Coastal Management, Tourism,  Biodiversity  and
      Conservation and, Social Responsibility and Projects.

      In terms of the MTEF allocation for 2006/07, compensation of employees
      accounts for 13,5%. The Departmental Agencies such  as  Marine  Living
      Resource South African Tourism, South African Weather Services,  South
      African National Biodiversity Institute, South African National  Parks
      and Greater St Lucia Wetlands  Park  Authority,  accounts  for  48,9%,
      Social Responsibility and Projects accounting for 19,6%

      The  operational  budget  related  to  administration,   environmental
      quality and protection, marine and  coastal  management,  biodiversity
      and conservation and social responsibility projects accounts for 16,2%
      .The  budget  allocation   per   economic   classification   including
      compensation of employees, goods and services, transfers to  provinces
      and municipalities, departmental agencies  and  accounts,  households,
      machinery and equipment and software is R2 018 053, 00.

      The Medium Term Expenditure Estimate for administration will cover sub-
      programmes such as the Ministry, Deputy  Minister,  Director  General,
      Chief Operation Officer,  Planning  and  Coordination,  Communication,
      International Cooperation  and  Resources,  International  Marine  and
      Biodiversity  Cooperation,  Human  Resource  and  Transformation   and
      Strategic Performance Management.

      For  the  period  2006/2007,  the  MTE  Expenditure  estimate  of  the
      environmental quality and protection will cover sub-programmes related
      to Management, Regulatory Services, Pollution  and  Waste  Management,
      Environmental Impact Management, Air Quality  Management  and  Climate
      Change, Buyisa –e-Bag and South African  Weather  Service.  The  total
      amount allocated for 2006/07 is R 216, 559, 00.

      The MTE Estimate for marine and coastal  management  will  cover  sub-
      programme such as Administrative Support  Services,  Antarctic  Supply
      Vessel, Antarctic and Island  Research  and  Marine  Living  Resources
      Fund. The total amount allocated for 2006/07 is  R 260,  723  .2006/07
      MTE Expenditure estimate relates to sub-programme such as  Management,
      tourism Support, Tourism Development and South  African  Tourism.  The
      total amount allocated is R. 559, 254, 00.

      The Biodiversity and Conservation’s 2006/07  medium  term  expenditure
      estimate relates to sub-programme such as Management, Biodiversity and
      Heritage, Trans-Frontier Conservation and Protected Areas, Greater  St
      Lucia Wetland Park Authority, South African National Parks and,  South
      African National Biodiversity Institute. The total amount allocated to
      Biodiversity and  Conservation  programme  is  R  348,  508.  The  MTE
      expenditure estimate of the social responsibility and projects relates
      to sub-programme such as the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme.  The
      total amount allocated for 2006/07 is R 447,660, 00.

      In relation to missing of  marine  vessels,  coordination  of  Tourism
      Indaba and progress made in respect of skills development, the members
      of the portfolio and select committees were  then  informed  that  the
      Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) are aware  that
      a number of marine vessels have gone  missing  at  sea  and  that  the
      causes of these incidents are being investigated by the Department  of
      Transport.

      The  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  carries  no
      responsibility for  the  incidents,  as  to  who  is  liable  will  be
      determined  after  the   Department   of   Transport   concludes   its
      investigation. Compensation for those affected by the tragedies is set
      out in legislation by the Department of Labour.

      The recently held Tourism Indaba in Durban  was  essentially  a  trade
      fair held under the banner of SA Tourism, being led by government. The
      Indaba is a culmination of events, whereby all interested parties  may
      participate and promote their products and services. The Indaba is not
      necessarily an event intended to attract only the private sector,  but
      rather promoting South Africa as a tourist destination. The Department
      is however open to suggestions as to  how  to  improve  participation,
      especially that of the private sector during future Indaba’s.

      A strong relationship exists between the Department  of  Environmental
      Affairs and Tourism and SA Tourism, as SA Tourism is a  public  entity
      marketing South Africa domestically and internationally as  a  tourist
      destination. The Department of Environmental Affairs and  Tourism  has
      taken cognizance of the recent spate of attacks  on  tourists  and  in
      conjunction with the Department of Safety and Security and  the  South
      African Police Service are busy working on a safety strategy to ensure
      the safety of all those who visit South Africa.


      The Department is currently busy with a skills development assessment,
      assessing what  type  of  skills  the  department  requires,  offering
      bursaries as an incentive in order to gain the  skills  required.  The
      Department is also  looking  at  ways  of  retaining  current  skilled
      employees  in  the  Department,  boosting  its  capacity  in   service
      delivery. The issuing of pollution permits, which is  supposed  to  be
      issued  by  Local  Government,  still  resides   with   the   National
      Department, as this transfer process will take  approximately  2  –  3
      years. However  once  the  transfer  process  is  complete  and  Local
      Government assumes the responsibility of  issuing  permits,  they  are
      still governed by the minimum air  pollution  standards  set  for  the
      issuing of such permits.


      The Local Government however, cannot issue permits to themselves,  for
      places such as municipal incinerators, as  such  permits  have  to  be
      issue at a provincial level. The current budget  allocated  of  R  435
      million allocated to tourism falls short of the R 1 billion  that  the
      Department foresees to market South Africa  effectively,  locally  and
      internationally in preparation for 2010.


      The  Department  welcomes  any  assistance  from  both  Committees  in
      acquiring more funds from Treasury. The  Department  of  Environmental
      Affairs and Tourism does not fund Local Government to promote tourism,
      but rather  assists  Local  Government  in  building  capacity.  Local
      Governments do not see the long-term value of tourism,  which  is  why
      the Department is trying to get Local Government to develop a  tourism
      action plan and incorporate it in their  Integrated  Development  Plan
      (IDP).


      The Department does however  render  financial  assistance  to  SMME’s
      within Local Governments, with  the  aim  of  promoting  tourism.  The
      budget of R 35 million  allocated  for  the  upgrading  of  the  South
      African National Parks is not the total amount as this amount is  only
      for the 06/07 financial year, increasing  each  year  thereafter.  The
      Department is therefore confident  that  the  South  African  National
      Parks will be ready and graded by 2010.


      The Department has spent 99.6% of its budget, with a roll over of R  6
      million in respect of the construction of the Marion Island basin. The
      99.6% expenditure is a reflection of the actual budget spent  and  not
      commitments  to  spend  by  the   Department.    The   Department   of
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism together  with  the  Departments  of
      Water & Forestry, Agriculture and Land Affairs are in the  process  of
      compiling a policy document addressing the aquaculture issue. As  soon
      as the Draft Policy has been finalized the Department will forward  it
      to both Committees.


      2.    Conclusion and recommendations

      Having been briefed on 2006 Budget Vote 27, the Portfolio Committee on
      Environmental Affairs and Tourism concludes that it has considered and
      adopted the budget and further wishes to recommend as follows:

       •  The  Department  of  Environmental  Affairs  and  Tourism  should
         starting from 2006 third  term  of  parliamentary  session  submit
         monthly and quarterly reports to Parliament.

       • The Department should submit a database on  Social  Responsibility
         and Projects including locations and beneficiaries in Provinces.

       • The Department should during 2006  the  third  term  parliamentary
         session come and brief the Committee on progress made  in  respect
         of Buyisa-e-Bag campaign.



                            MONDAY, 26 JUNE 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

     1) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act,
        2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).
     2) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice
        Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of Life and
   Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons, having considered the
   request from National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces to
   further consider its report dated 2 June 2006 as published on the ATC of
   5 June 2006 (page 1152) with regard to recommending the appointment of
   commissioners to the President for the filling of vacancies on the
   National Youth Commission reports as follows:

   The Committee has previously reported that it had invited the public to
   nominate persons for consideration and recommendation to the President
   for the filling of vacancies on the Commission. Nominations and
   applications were received from 54 candidates. The Committee met on 12
   May 2006 to consider the nominations, and agreed that the following
   persons be shortlisted and interviewed on 24 and 26 May 2006
   respectively.

   Mr Xolile Majola, Ms Nobulumko Degracia Nkondlo, Mr Elroy van Rooyen,
   Mr Magic Nkhwashu, Ms Vuyiswa Gladys Tulelo, Ms Ntombikayise Nomawisile
   Sibhida, Mr David Xolile Kham, Mr Khululekani Ntshangase, Ms Lefika
   Chetty,
   Mr Sithembele Africa Peter, Mr Olwethu Sipuka, Mr Mothupi Phaladi Modiba,
   Ms Nonkululeko Mohomane, Mr Mntuwekhaya Sheperd Daki, Ms Rene Alicia
   Smith and Mr Donald Kubayi. Out of the 16 short listed candidates, Mr D
   Kubayi was not allowed to exchange his opportunity for the interview with
   Mr V Mukharhi, a friend and was subsequently disqualified.


   Having further considered its report of 2 June, the Committee, in terms
   of section 4 of the National Youth Commission Act, advises that the
   President appoint the commissioners from the following list of
   recommended candidates:


        Mr Modiba Mothupi
        Ms Nkondlo Nobulumko
        Mr Ntshangase Khululekani
        Ms Sibhida Ntombikayise
        Mr Sipuka Olwethu
        Ms Tulelo Vuyiswa
        Mr Van Rooyen Elroy


2.    ANNUAL REPORT OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE - JANUARY –
   DECEMBER 2005

   1. Name of the Committee: Joint Standing Committee on Defence


      Chairperson: Mr S D Montsitsi


      Committee Secretary: Mr Johnny Ramrock



   2. Vision and mission of the Committee



      Vision:

      To be a Parliamentary  Committee  with  a  high  level  of  expertise,
      dedication and resources to  effectively  oversee  the  Department  of
      Defence that should have the appropriate level of capacity, morale and
      state of readiness to defend and protect  South  Africa’s  territorial
      integrity and its people in accordance with the Constitution.





      MISSION:

      To ensure that the Department of Defence provides,  manages,  prepares
      and employs defence capabilities commensurate with the needs of SA, as
      regulated by legislation and parliamentary and executive direction.



3. List of public entities over which the Committee exercise oversight
        a. Armaments Corporation of South Africa (Armscor)
        b. National Conventional Arms Control Committee (NCACC)


   4. Number of meetings held and those cancelled:


      The Committee had two (2) meetings


   5. Legislation referred to the committee (Finalised and not finalised):
      None


   6. Papers referred to the Committee:
      *Letters from the President on the Employment of the SANDF to areas
      outside the borders of the country.


   |Referral dates  |Consideration date   |ATC date      |Debate in House |
|03 Nov 2004     |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |
|27 Jan 2005     |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |
|03 Feb 2005     |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |
|03 Feb 2005     |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |
|10 June 2005    |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |
|04 Aug 2005     |16 Nov 2005          |16/1105       |                |
|05 Oct 2005     |16 Nov 2005          |16/11/05      |                |


   7. Oversight (Local) visits:
      None


   8. International Visits:
      None


   9. Budget Vote

      • N/A to Committee.

  10. Annual reports of the Executive (30 September)
      • Committee constituted on 21 October 2005


  11. Other committee activities (briefings on other issues, workshops,
      conferences)
    • None
    •
  12. Budget of the committee
    • No budget yet.

   13  OUTSTANDING MATTERS:
      None

  14.  Attach the following documents
              i. Master attendance list
             ii. Copies of minutes of all meetings


NB. Please note that the Committee was only constituted near to the  end  of
2005 (21 October 2005) hence the few activities for the period  (Jan  –  Dec
2005) of the report.

  15. SUPPORT STAFF


      Committee Secretary: Mr. Johnny Ramrock


      Control Committee Secretary: Mr. Ben Kali
      Committee Assistant: Mr. E T Lourens
      Secretary to Chairperson: Ms N Lwana




……………………………………………………………………………………...

COMMITTEE SECRETARY    DATE:            DATE




…………………………………………… ………………………………………

CONTROL COMMITTEE SECRETARY  DATE:                 DATE




……………………………………………..………………………………………

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSON             DATE:      DATE





                                 APPENDIX II


REPORTS TABLED:


        |Report on Letters |To inform the NA and the  |ATC – 16/11/05        |
|from the President|NCOP                      |                      |
|on Employment of  |                          |                      |
|SANDF             |                          |                      |



                             MONDAY, 3 JULY 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     1) International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
        Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.

     2) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
     1) Government Notice No R.385 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of chapter 5 of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     2) Government Notice No R.386 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent authorities
        identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     3) Government Notice No R.387 published in Government Gazette No 28753
        dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent authorities
        identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the National
        Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


                            TUESDAY, 4 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

        1) Electricity Regulation Bill [B 29D – 2005] – Act No 4 of 2006
           (assented to and signed by President on 27 June 2006).


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit completed at
        the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development – May 2006
        [RP 92-2006].


2.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     1) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa as represented by the Department of Safety and
        Security and the Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) as
        represented by the Ministry of Interior on Police Cooperation,
        tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

                            MONDAY, 10 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)     The JTM on 26 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3),
        classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13 –
             2006 (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75).


National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


     1) The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly with
        effect from 16 May 2006:

        Khumalo, M S.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson
     1) Report of the Auditor-General on a performance audit completed at
        the South African Local Government Association (SALGA) – May 2006
        [RP 93-2006].


     2) Quarterly Report of the Auditor-General on the submission of
        financial statements by municipalities and the status of audit
        reports as at 31 March 2006 for the financial year ended 30 June
        2005 [RP 100-2006].

                            TUESDAY, 11 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker

1.    Withdrawal of International Convention


    A letter dated 6 July 2006, was received from the Minister of Safety
    and Security, requesting the withdrawal of the International Convention
    for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Explanatory
    Memorandum to the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
    of Nuclear Terrorism, tabled on 3 July 2006 in terms of section 231(2)
    of the Constitution, 1996.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government:

          a) Government Notice No 416 published in Government Gazette No
             28795 dated 12 May 2006: Setting out particulars of the area
             demarcated by the Municipality of Emalahleni which shall
             constitute as an urban development zone, in terms of section 13
             quat of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance:

          a) Government Notice No 357 published in Government Gazette No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of, the year 2006 Natura pure gold coin series, in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).

          b) Government Notice No 358 published in Government Gazette No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 Protea coin series, in terms of
             the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

          c) Government Notice No 359 published in Government Gazette No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 R1 and R2 pure gold coin series,
             in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90
             of 1989).

          d) Government Notice No 360 published in Government Gazette No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 Crown size 2½ ct sterling silver
             coin series, in terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act,
             1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).
          e) Government Notice No 361 published in Government Gazette No
             28742 dated 19 April 2006: The dimension of, design for, and
             compilation of the year 2006 sterling silver coin series, in
             terms of the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of
             1989).

          f) Government Notice No 602 published in Government Gazette No
             28798 dated 12 May 2006: Listing and classification of public
             entities, in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999
             (Act No 1 of 1999).

          g) Government Notice No 403 published in Government Gazette No
             28771 dated 26 April 2006: Notice to be issued in terms of
             section 18A to determine public benefit activities for purposes
             of deductible donations to certain public benefit
             organisations, in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (58 of
             1962).

    3.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:


          a) General Notice No 657 published in Government Gazette No 28854
             dated 19 May 2006: Proposed guidelines as part of the
             implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations
             in terms of section 24(5) of the National Environmental
             Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


          b) Government Notice No R. 494 published in Government Gazette No
             28869 dated 2 June 2006: Regulations: Qualification criteria,
             training and identification of and forms to be used by
             environmental management inspectors, in terms of the National
             Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

        (c)      Government Notice No R.385 published in Government Gazette
             No 28753 dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of chapter 5
             of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107
             of 1998).


          d) Government Notice No R.386 published in Government Gazette No
             28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent
             authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the
             National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
             1998).

          e) Government Notice No R.387 published in Government Gazette No
             28753 dated 21 April 2006: List of activities and competent
             authorities identified in terms of sections 24 and 24D of the
             National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
             1998).

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism:

          a) Convention on the Conservation and Management of Fishery
             Resources in the South East Atlantic Ocean (SEAFO), tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration:

          a) Draft Local Government: Municipal Performance Regulations for
             Section 57 Employees, 2006 in terms of section 120(7) of the
             Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of
             2000).

    6.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education, the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality
        of Life and Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons and the
        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development for
        consideration:


          a) Report of the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) on
             the Public Hearing on the Right to Basic Education, 2005.


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport for consideration and report. The Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements is referred to the Standing
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF)
             for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
             the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 34-2006].

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and the Joint Standing Committee on Defence:
         a) The President of the Republic submitted a letter dated 13 June
            2006 to the Speaker of the National Assembly informing Members
            of the Assembly of the employment of the South African National
            Defence Force in the Democratic Republic of Congo.


    9.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information
             Act, 2000 (Act No 2 of 2000).


          b) Draft Rules in terms of the Promotion of Administrative Justice
             Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000).

    10.     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts for consideration:


          a) Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  of
             the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2001-2002.


          b) Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  of
             the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2002-2003.
          c) Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  of
             the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2003-2004.

          d) Report of the Auditor-General on the  Financial  Statements  of
             the Marine Living Resources Fund for 2004-2005.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


       1) Amendment to the Water Boards pricing structure, tabled in terms
          of section 42(4) of the Local Government: Municipal Finance
          Management Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003) and supporting documents
          required in terms of section 42(3) of the same Act.

                            FRIDAY, 14 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)
    (1)     The JTM on 23 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(6)
        classified the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:

        a) Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B
           16 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 667 published in Government Gazette No 28847
        dated 26 May 2006: Listing and Classification of public entities,
        in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


     b) Government Notice No R.491 published in Government Gazette No 28884
        dated 29 May 2006: Pension Funds Amendment Regulations for 2006, in
        terms of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956).

2.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     a) Government Notice 611 published in Government Gazette No 28945
        dated 19 June 2006: Consultation process: Blyde River Canyon Nature
        Reserve and indigenous forest management areas, in terms of the
        National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 2003 (Act
        No 57 of 2003).


     b) Government Notice No R.612 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Commencement of Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations for 2006, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     c) Government Notice No R.613 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Notice in terms of section 24 and 24D:
        Amendment, made in terms of the National Environmental Management
        Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     d) Government Notice No R.614 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: List of activities and competent authorities
        identified in terms of Sections 24 and 24D, made in terms of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


     e) Government Notice No R.615 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Repeal notices in terms of Sections 21(1) and
        22(1), made in terms of the Environmental Conservation Act, 1989
        (Act No 73 of 1989).


     f) Government Notice No R.616 published in Government Gazette No 28938
        dated 23 June 2006: Repeal of regulations, made in terms of the
        Environmental Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No 73 of 1989).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


     1. Reports of the Public Service Commission


          a) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on Measuring the
             Efficacy of the Code of Conduct for Public Servants for 2006
             [RP 30-2006].


          b) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Audit of
             Affirmative Action in the Public Service for 2006 [RP 6-2006].


          c) Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Second
             Consolidated Public Service Monitoring and Evaluation Report
             for 2006 [RP 7-2006].

     2. A letter dated 3 July 2006 was received from the Minister of
        Communications, requesting the National Assembly to submit a
        shortlist of candidates for appointment as councillors of the
        Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) in
        terms of section 7 of the Independent Communications Authority of
        South Africa Amendment Act, No 3 of 2006, once promulgated.


        Dear Madam Speaker


        APPOINTMENT OF COUNCILLORS IN TERMS OF SECTION 7 OF THE INDEPENDENT
        COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH AFRICA AMENDMENT ACT NO 3 OF
        2006.


        The ICASA Amendment Act No 3 of 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
        “the Act”) was assented to and promulgated on 15th June and 22nd
        June 2006 respectively.


        Further to the above, I have duly forwarded a proposal to the
        President to proclaim the commencement of the ICASA Amendment Act
        No 3 of 2006 and Electronic Communications Act No 36 of 2005 to be
        1st July 2006.


        There are three Councillors whose terms of office have expired on
        30 June 2006. Since the assent and promulgation of the Act, the
        appointment process for new Councillors should be conducted in
        terms of the Act. I have extended the term of office of two
        councilors namely: Ms Nadia Bulbulia and Ms Mamodupi Mohlala, for a
        period of forty-five (45) days in terms of Section 7(4) of the
        ICASA Act No 13 of 2000.


        I draw your attention to section 7 of the Act, which provides that
        the National Assembly must invite the public to participate in the
        appointment process of Councillors and also publish a shortlist of
        candidates for appointment to the Council, and thereafter provide
        the Minister with a shortlist of suitable candidates to be
        appointed.


        Yours sincerely


        Signed
        IVY MATSEPE-CASABURRI, MP
        MINISTER

                            TUESDAY, 18 JULY 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     (a)    (Protocol to the OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating
        of Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum of the Protocol to the OAU Convention on the
        Prevention and Combating of Terrorism.

2.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


     a) Proclamation No 23 published in Government Gazette No 28825 dated
        12 May 2006: Referral of matters to existing Special Investigating
        Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special Investigating
        Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of 1996).

                           WEDNESDAY, 19 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Communications for consideration and report, the committee to
        report as soon as possible:

          a) The letter dated 3 July 2006 that was received from the
             Minister of Communications, requesting the National Assembly to
             submit a shortlist of candidates for appointment as councillors
             of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa
             (Icasa) in terms of section 7 of the Independent Communications
             Authority of South Africa Amendment Act, 2006 (Act No 3 of
             2006) now promulgated.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road Transport
         Agency (C-BRTA) for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
         General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 195-2005].

                            TUESDAY, 25 JULY 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


 1. The Minister of Transport

     a) Agreement between the Government of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        and the Government of the Republic of Botswana  regarding  the  Co-
        ordination of Aeronautical Search and Rescue  Services,  tabled  in
        terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the  Government  of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic  of
        Botswana regarding the Co-ordination  of  Aeronautical  Search  and
        Rescue Services.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of Auditor-General,
   dated 28 June 2006:

   The Ad Hoc Committee on Appointment of the Auditor-General, having
   considered the matter of the filling of the vacancy of Auditor-General,
   referred to it, reports as follows:


   The Committee was established by the Decision of the Speaker on 18 April
   2006, in terms of Rule 214 of the National Assembly.


   Its mandate was to recommend a person in terms of section 193 of the
   Constitution for appointment as Auditor-General.


   The Committee, through advertising in all the leading national print
   press, invited the public to submit nominations or applications to it.


   Nominations and applications were received. At the close off date of
   submission of applications, the Ad Hoc committee had received a total of
   12 applications.


   Short-listing of candidates was done on 20 June 2006 and the following
   candidates were short-listed for interviews:

    1. Mr Abdul Kariem Hoosain
    2. Mr Terrence Mncedisi Nombembe
    3. Ms Diatile Elizabeth Zondo
    4. Mr Imitiaz Fazel


   All of the short listed candidates were interviewed on 26 June 2006.
   Interviews were conducted in an open meeting where the press and public
   were present. Committee members present and who took part at the
   interviews were as follows:-

       Mr. VG Smith          (ANC)      (chairperson)
       Mr. SE Asiya                (ANC)
       Mr. M. Johnson        (ANC)
       Ms. BA Hogan          (ANC)
       Ms. LM Mashiane       (ANC)
       Dr. GG Woods          (NADECO)
       Mr. EW Trent          (DA)
       Ms. AM Dreyer         (DA)
       Mr. K Bekker          (IFP)
       Mr. S Simons          (UPSA)

   Having interviewed the candidates and deliberated on the performance of
   each candidate during interviews, the Committee unanimously recommends to
   the National Assembly the name of Mr Terrence Mncedisi Nombembe for
   appointment by the President as Auditor-General in terms of section 193
   of the Constitution.


   The Committee further wishes to propose that the term of office be seven
   years.


   Report to be considered.


                           THURSDAY, 27 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill
    (1)     Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2006] – Act No 5 of 2006
          (assented to and signed by President on 14 July 2006)


    (2)     Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] – Act No 6 of 2006
          (assented to and signed by President on 20 July 2006)


    (3)     Appropriation Bill [B 2 – 2006] – Act No 7 of 2006 (assented to
          and signed by President on 14 July 2006)


    (4)     Repeal of Black Administration Act and Amendment of Certain Laws
          Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2006] – Act No 8 of 2006 (assented to and
          signed by President on 20 July 2006)


    (5)     Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill
          [B 14 – 2006] – Act No 9 of 2006 (assented to and signed by
          President on 20 July 2006)


    (6)     Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws
          Bill [B 15 – 2006] – Act No 10 of 2006 (assented to and signed by
          President on 14 July 2006).


2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted
         by the Minister of Sport and Recreation on 18 July 2006.

3.    Withdrawal of tabling and referral to Committees
    (1)     A letter dated 18 July 2006 was received from the Minister  for
        Justice and Constitutional Development, requesting  the  withdrawal
        of the Draft Rules made in terms of section 79(1) of the  Promotion
        of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No  2  of  2000),  and  the
        Draft Rules made in terms of  section  7(3)  of  the  Promotion  of
        Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No 3 of 2000), tabled  on  26
        June 2006.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

     (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 24 July 2006 in accordance with Rule
         234:

         (a)     Fund for Victims of Violent Crime Bill (Ms D Kohler-
             Barnard)

         In accordance with Rule 235 the Speaker has referred the
         legislative proposal has been referred to the Standing Committee on
         Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

  1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     General Report of the Auditor-General on the  Provincial  Audit
        Outcomes for 2004-05 [RP 99-2006].

National Assembly

 1. The Speaker

    (a)     Letter dated 18 July 2006, received from the President of the
        Republic of South Africa informing Parliament of the employment of
        the South African National Defence Force for service in fulfillment
        of the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa:


        EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE   FORCE   IN
        DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO, FOR  SERVICE  IN  FULFILMENT  OF  THE
        INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS OF THE  REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  TOWARDS  THE
        DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that I have  authorised
        the employment of South  African  National  Defence  Force  (SANDF)
        personnel to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in fulfillment
        of the international obligations of the Republic  of  South  Africa
        towards the DRC in support of the electoral process. The  Elections
        in the DRC are scheduled to take place on 30 July 2006.


        This employment was authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 93 of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act No
        42 of 2002). A total of twenty seven (27) members are employment as
        from 19 July 2006 to 15 August 2006. The total estimated cost to be
        borne by  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  from  the  African
        Renaissance Fund for the deployment of the personnel is R  3,  131,
        937.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and the Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on
        Defence, and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof  to
        the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        TM Mbeki

                            MONDAY, 31 JULY 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159 referred to
    Committees
    (1)     National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted
         by the Minister of Sport and Recreation on 18 July 2006 (see ATC 27
         July 2006, p 1709) is hereby referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Sport and Recreation and the Select Committee on Education and
         Recreation.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Private Members’ Legislative Proposals

     (1)    The following private member’s legislative proposal was
         submitted to the Speaker on 27 July 2006 in accordance with Rule
         234:

         (a)     South African Schools Act Amendment Bill (Mr G G Boinamo)

         In accordance with Rule 235 the Speaker has referred the
         legislative proposal to the Standing Committee on Private Members’
         Legislative Proposals and Special Petitions.

2.    Speaker

    DECISION BY THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY TO ESTABLISH AN AD HOC
    COMMITTEE


    I have, after direct and indirect consultation with the Chief Whips and
    party representatives, decided, in terms of Rule 214, to establish an
    Ad Hoc Committee to inquire into operational problems being experienced
    by the office of the Public Protector as reported to me by the Public
    Protector;


    The committee to:-


     a) investigate the operational problems experienced in the office of
        the Public Protector;
     b) consist of members of the Assembly as follows: African National
        Congress 3, Democratic Alliance 2, Inkatha Freedom Party 1, and
        other parties 1;
     c) exercise those powers in Rule 138 that may assist it in carrying
        out its functions; and
     d) submit a report with its findings and recommendations to the House
        by 25 August 2006.




    Baleka Mbete, MP
    Speaker of the National Assembly

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Annual Report of the Bank Supervision Department on the South
         African Reserve Bank for the year ended 31 December 2005.
      b) Government Notice No 797 published in Government Gazette No 28937
         dated 23 June 2006: Listing and classification of public entities
         in terms of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
         1999).

      c) Government Notice No R.621 published in Government Gazette No
         28953 dated 23 June 2006: Determination of limit on amount of
         remuneration for purposes of determination of contribution in
         terms of section 6 of the Unemployment Insurance Contributions
         Act, 2002 (Act No 4 of 2002).

      d) Government Notice No R.609 published in Government Gazette No
         28938 dated 23 June 2006: Determination of amounts in terms of
         sections 1 and 5 of the Military Pensions Act, 1976 (Act No 84 of
         1976).


2.    The Minister of Minerals and Energy


     a) Report of the Mine Health and Safety Inspectorate for 2005-2006 [RP
        108-2006].

                           THURSDAY, 3 AUGUST 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (a)     Children’s Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of
         Social Development on 27 July 2006. Referred to the Portfolio
         Committee on Social Development and the Select Committee on Social
         Services.

2.    Membership of Committees

    1.      The following changes have been made to the membership of Joint
        Committees, viz:


        Budget Committee
        Appointed: Van Dyk, Dr S M

National Assembly

1.    Membership of Committees

      1.    The following changes have been made to the membership of
           Portfolio Committees, viz:

           Education
           Appointed: Ellis, Mr M J (Alt)


           Science and Technology
           Appointed: Dreyer, Ms A M
           Discharged: Boinamo, Mr G G


2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Public Accounts and to the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and
        Local Government for consideration:

           a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Provincial Audit
              Outcomes for 2004-2005 [RP 99-2006].


    2.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Transport:


          (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
              Africa and the Government of the Republic of Botswana
              regarding the Co-ordination of Aeronautical Search and Rescue
              Services, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
              Constitution, 1996.


           b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
              Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
              of the Republic of Botswana regarding the Co-ordination of
              Aeronautical Search and Rescue Services.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
        on Defence for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Foreign Affairs for information:

           a) Employment of the South African National Defence Force in the
              Democratic Republic of Congo, for service in fulfillment of
              the international obligations of the Republic of South Africa
              towards the Democratic Republic of Congo.


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
         Fund for 2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005, including the
         Reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for
         2001-2002, 2002-2003, 2003-2004, 2004-2005 [RP 41-2006].


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Overview
        of Financial Misconduct for 2004-2005 Financial Year  [RP 228-
        2005].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

 National Assembly

1.    Forty-First Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Media
      Development and Diversity Agency, dated 15 March 2006:

1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of  the  Media  Development  and  Diversity
           Agency for the year ended 31 March 2005,  tabled  in  Parliament
           and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Media Development and  Diversity
           Agency is necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


2.    Forty-Second Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  High
      School Vorentoe Disaster Relief Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

                     1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the High School Vorentoe Disaster Relief
           Fund for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament  and
           referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the High  School  Vorentoe  Disaster
           Relief Fund is necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


3.    Forty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Business
      and Arts South Africa, dated 15 March 2006:

          1. INTRODUCTION

          The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the
          Annual Report and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
          Financial Statements of the Business and Arts  South  Africa  for
          the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament  and  referred
          to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

          The Committee noted the unqualified audit  opinion  expressed  by
          the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit  opinions  will
          be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

          The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
          Accounting Authority of the Business and  Arts  South  Africa  is
          necessary for the financial year under review.


          The Committee therefore awaits the next  Annual  Report  and  the
          Report of the Auditor General.

4     Forty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  SASRIA,
      dated 15 March 2006:
      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the Report of the Independent Auditors on  the
           Financial Statements  of  SASRIA  Limited  for  the  year  ended
           31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,  reports
           as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Independent Auditors, and trusts that future audit  opinions
           will be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of SASRIA Limited is necessary for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Independent Auditors.


5.    Forty-Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Disaster
      Relief Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

              1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Disaster Relief Fund  for  the  year
           ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
           reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the  Accounting  Authority  of  the  Disaster  Relief  Fund   is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

6.     Forty-Sixth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Pelladrift Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Pelladrift Water Board for the  year
           ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
           reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting  Authority  of  the  Pelladrift  Water  Board  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.

           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


7.    Forty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Bloem
      Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

                 1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Bloem Water Board for the year ended
           31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,  reports
           as follows:
                 2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


                 3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Bloem Water Board  is  necessary
           for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


8.    Forty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Albany
      Coast Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

                    1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Albany Coast  Water  Board  for  the
           year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to
           it, reports as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


                    3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the  Albany  Coast  Water  Board  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


9.    Forty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  Office
      of the Public Protector, dated 15 March 2006:

                 1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Office of the Public  Protector  for
           the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred
           to it, reports as follows:

                 2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.
                 3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Office of the  Public  Protector
           is necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


10.   Fiftieth Report of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Nelson
      Mandela Museum, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela Museum for  the  year
           ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
           reports as follows:

                     2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


                     3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the  Accounting  Authority  of  the  Nelson  Mandela  Museum  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

11.   Fifty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  National
      Electronic Media Institute of South Africa, dated 15 March 2006:

               1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media  Institute
           of South Africa (NEMISA) for  the  year  ended  31  March  2005,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:


               2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


               3. GENERAL MATTERS:

           The Committee further noted with concern that:
             • The internal audit function and a risk  management  strategy,
               incorporating a fraud prevention plan was not established;
             • NEMISA did not have Treasury  approval  with  regard  to  its
               supply chain management policy.

               4. RECOMMENDATION


           The Committee recommend that NEMISA report to Parliament  within
           60 days after receipt of this resolution on:
             • the status of implementation of its risk management  strategy
               and plans regarding the establishment of the  internal  audit
               function; and
             • Treasury approval of its supply chain management policy.


               5. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of  the  view  that,  except  for  the  aspects
           highlighted above, no further interaction with the NEMISA  would
           be necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General.


12.   Fifty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Market
      Theatre Foundation, dated 15 March 2006:

        1. INTRODUCTION
           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Market Theatre  Foundation  for  the
           year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to
           it, reports as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the  Market  Theatre  Foundation  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


13.    Fifty-Third  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Mhlathuze Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

        1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Mhlathuze Water Board for  the  year
           ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
           reports as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the  Accounting  Authority  of  the  Mhlathuze  Water  Board  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.

           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


14.   Fifty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Lepelle
      Northern Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

        1. INTRODUCTION

          The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered  the
          Annual Report and  the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
          Financial Statements of the Lepelle Northern Water Board for  the
          year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament  and  referred  to
          it, reports as follows:
        2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Lepelle Northern Water Board  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

15.    Fifty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Government Communication and information System, dated 15 March 2006:

        1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial  Statements  of  the  Government   Communication   and
           Information System for the year ended 31 March 2005,  tabled  in
           Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of  the  Government  Communication  and
           Information System is necessary for  the  financial  year  under
           review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

16.   Fifty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  ETDP-
      SETA, dated 15 March 2006:

           1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial  Statements  of  the  ETDP-SETA  for  the  year  ended
           31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,  reports
           as follows:

           2. AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions shall
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    GENERAL MATTERS


           The Committee finds it totally unacceptable that ETDP  SETA  did
           not respond to Parliament’s resolution of 2004.


           The Committee further requests ETDP SETA to  supply  a  thorough
           explanation why the 60 days deadline was not met.


      4.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of  the  view  that,  except  for  the  aspects
           highlighted above; no further interaction  with  the  Accounting
           Authority of the ETDP-SETA is necessary for the  financial  year
           under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


17.    Fifty-Seventh  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
      MERSETA, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial  Statements  of  the  Manufacturing  Engineering   and
           Related Services (MERSETA) for the  year  ended  31 March  2005,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

     2.     AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.




     3.     CONCLUSION

          The Committee is of the view that no further interaction with the
          Accounting  Authority  of  the  MERSETA  is  necessary  for   the
          financial year under review.


          The Committee therefore awaits the next  Annual  Report  and  the
          Report of the Auditor General.


18.   Fifty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Council
      for Medical Schemes, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Council for Medical Schemes for  the
           year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to
           it, reports as follows:


      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


           3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Council for Medical  Schemes  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

19.   Fifty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Council
      for Higher Education, dated 15 March 2006:

        1. INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Council on Higher Education for  the
           year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to
           it, reports as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION

          The Committee noted the unqualified audit  opinion  expressed  by
          the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit  opinions  will
          be equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the Council on Higher  Education  is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


20.   Sixtieth Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Botshelo
      Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Botshelo Water Board  for  the  year
           ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to  it,
           reports as follows:
      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the  Accounting  Authority  of  the  Botshelo  Water  Board   is
           necessary for the financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the
           Report of the Auditor General.

                            FRIDAY, 4 AUGUST 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


          a) National Sport and Recreation Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of
             Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
             Government Gazette No 27787 of 22 July 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
         Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

      1. The following changes have been made to the membership of the
         following Portfolio Committees, viz:

        Defence
        Appointed: Jankielsohn, Mr R
        Discharged: Shah, Mr R


        Environmental Affairs and Tourism
        Appointed: Shah, Mr R
        Discharged: Morgan, Mr G R


        Health
        Appointed: Morgan, Mr G R
        Discharged: Kohler-Barnard, Ms D


        Safety and Security
        Appointed: Kohler-Barnard, Ms D
        Discharged: Jankielsohn, Mr R

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the 2010
      FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13 – 2006
      (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly - sec 75), dated 25 July 2006:

          The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
          the subject of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
          Measures Bill [B 13 – 2006 (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly -
          sec 75), referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging
          Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, presents the 2010 FIFA World Cup
          South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13B - 2006].

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on the 2010
      FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 16 – 2006]
      (National Assembly - sec 76), dated 25 July 2006:

          The Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, having considered
          the subject of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
          Measures Bill [B 16 – 2006] (National Assembly - sec 76), referred
          to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section
          76 Bill, presents the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
          Measures Bill [B 16B - 2006].


                           TUESDAY, 8 AUGUST 2006

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


     a) Government Notice No 671 published in Government Gazette No 29004
        dated 14 July 2006: Exemptions of 1.1 (IDC and its subsidiaries –
        Findevco (Pty) Ltd, Konoil (Pty) Ltd, Impofin (Pty) Ltd, Export-
        Import Finance Corporation of SA (Pty) Ltd, 1.2 (Foskor Limited.),
        1.3 (Debt Restructuring subsidiaries of the IDC.), in terms of
        section 92 of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999).


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises
     a) Report and Financial Statements of Eskom Holdings Limited (Eskom)
        for 2005-2006, including the Reports of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements for 2005-2006.

3.    The Minister of Environmental Affairs and Tourism


     a) Government Notice No 682 published in Government Gazette No 29027
        dated 14 July 2006: Natal National Botanic Garden: Change of Name,
        made in terms of the National Environmental Management:
        Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Sixty-First Report of Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  FAIS
      OMBUD, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of  the  FAIS  OMBUD  for  the  year  ended
           31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,  reports
           as follows:

        2. AUDIT OPINION
           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           Auditor- General, and trusts that future audit opinions will  be
           equally unqualified.


        3. CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the FAIS OMBUD is necessary for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor-General.


2.    Sixty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  PAETA,
      dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the Primary  Agriculture  Education  and
           Training Authority (PAETA) for the  year  ended  31 March  2005,
           tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of PAETA is necessary for the financial
           year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

3.    Sixty-Third Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  FASSET,
      dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the FASSET for the year  ended  31 March
           2005, tabled in  Parliament  and  referred  to  it,  reports  as
           follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.

      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the  FASSET  is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.

4.    Sixty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  CTFL  –
      SETA, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the  Clothing,  Textiles,  Footwear  and
           Leather Education and Training  Authority  (CTFL-SETA)  for  the
           year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and  referred  to
           it, reports as follows:


      2.    AUDIT OPINION
           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the CTFL-SETA is necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.


5.     Sixty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      BANKSETA, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the BANKSETA for the year ended 31 March
           2005, tabled in  Parliament  and  referred  to  it,  reports  as
           follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.


      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority of the BANKSETA is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


           The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual  Report  and  the
           Report of the Auditor General.
6.     Sixty-Sixth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on   Public   Accounts:
      Construction Industry Development Board, dated 15 March 2006:

      1.    INTRODUCTION

           The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
           Annual Report and the  Report  of  the  Auditor-General  on  the
           Financial Statements of the  Construction  Industry  Development
           Board (CIDB)  for  the  year  ended  31 March  2005,  tabled  in
           Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

      2.    AUDIT OPINION

           The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion  expressed  by
           the Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions  will
           be equally unqualified.
      3.    CONCLUSION

           The Committee is of the view that no  further  interaction  with
           the Accounting Authority  of  the  CIDB  is  necessary  for  the
           financial year under review.


          The Committee therefore awaits the next  Annual  Report  and  the
          Report of the Auditor General.

7.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works on the Government
     Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1-2006] (National Assembly – sec
     75), dated 31 May 2006:


     The Portfolio Committee on Public Works having considered  the  subject
     of the Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1-2006]  (National
     Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports as follows:

     1. During the meeting of the Portfolio Committee held on 3  May  2006,
        the Committee was informed by the Department of Public Works of the
        existence of complexities on the extension of the scope of the Bill
        to local government. The Department was directed to revisit and  do
        extensive consultation on those complexities  and  also  include  a
        chapter on local government, which the Department undertook to do.

     2. At the meeting of the Committee held on 24 May  2006,  pursuant  to
        and in response to the  meeting  of  3  May  2006,  the  Department
        reported to the Committee on the outcome of their consultation with
        the Department of  Provincial  and  Local  Government  (DPLG).  The
        Department proposed that the Bill be passed in its current form and
        a future amended Bill incorporating a local government  chapter  be
        considered at a later stage. Further that the Committee  recommends
        to the House that the extension of the scope of the Bill  to  local
        government be referred to  the  Departments  of  Public  Works  and
        Provincial  and  Local  Government  for  further  consultation  and
        consideration.

     3. The Committee noted the proposals by the  Department  but  referred
        the Department back to consider the Bill, as reasons  advanced  for
        not incorporating a local government chapter were unconvincing  and
        unacceptable.

     4. At the meeting of the Committee held on 31 May 2006, the Department
        informed the Committee that it did not  sufficiently  consult  with
        DPLG and South African Local  Government  Association  (SALGA)  and
        proposed that the Bill could either be withdrawn from  the  current
        parliamentary session  or  be  passed  in  its  current  form,  and
        thereafter an amendment to be incorporated into the  Bill  be  fast
        tracked.


Recommendations

The Committee considered the matter and resolved that:

  • The House requests the Minister of Public Works to withdraw the Bill for
    reconsideration.
  • A chapter on local government be incorporated into the Bill and the Bill
    be reintroduced as soon as possible.

Report to be considered.

                           FRIDAY, 11 AUGUST 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


     1. The following members have been appointed to serve on the Ad Hoc
        Committee on Operational Problems in the Office of the Public
        Protector, viz:


        African National Congress
        Asmal, Prof A K
        Njobe, Ms M A A
        Johnson, Ms C B


        Democratic Alliance
        Camerer, Ms S M
        Joubert, Mr L K


        Inkatha Freedom Party
        Van der Merwe, Mr J H


        Independent Democrats
        Harding, Mr A


     2. Prof A K Asmal has been elected as Chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on Operational Problems in the Office of the Public
        Protector with effect from 10 August 2006.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.    The Minister of Safety and Security

     a) International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
        Terrorism, tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution,
        1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the International Convention for the
        Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.


 COMMITTEE REPORTS


   National Assembly


 CREDA PLEASE INSERT REPORT - INSERT T060811E-rp PAGES 1739-1746

                           MONDAY, 14 AUGUST 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly


The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly


     (1)    The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr N P Nhleko vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1 September 2005,
        had been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of
        Mr V H Nhlapo.


     2) The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr N A Ramathlodi vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 22 September 2005,
        had been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of
        Ms M D Seadimo.


     3) The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms C E Gillwald vacating her
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 31 January 2006, had
        been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Mr T
        L Mahlaba.


     4) The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr M K Lekgoro vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 23 March 2006, had
        been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Ms P
        Daniels.


     5) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        death of Ms S N Sigcau on 7 May 2006, had been filled with effect
        from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Ms Z N Nawa.


     6) The vacancy which occurred owing to Rev M S Khumalo vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 16 May 2006, had
        been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Ms M
        F Tlake.


     7) The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr G P Ngomezulu vacating his
        seat in the National Assembly with effect from 1 June 2006, had
        been filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Mr A
        J Nyambi.


     8) The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr R S Ndou vacating his seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 9 June 2006, had been
        filled with effect from 24 July 2006 by the nomination of Mr P S
        Gabanakgosi.


     9) The vacancy which occurred owing to Mr L S Gabela vacating his seat
        in the National Assembly with effect from 15 May 2006, had been
        filled with effect from 7 August 2006 by the nomination of Mr N W
        Ngcobo.


    10) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        death of Mr D V Mabuyakhulu on 12 July 2006, had been filled with
        effect from 7 August 2006 by the nomination of Mr M J Nene.


    11) The vacancy which occurred owing to Ms H Blose vacating her seat in
        the National Assembly with effect from 7 August 2006, had been
        filled with effect from 7 August 2006 by the nomination of Mr M E
        Mbili.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
     1) Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of
        Spain for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
        Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

     2) Explanatory Memorandum to the Convention between the Republic of
        South Africa and the Kingdom of Spain for the Avoidance of Double
        Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes
        on Income and on Capital.
     3) Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania for the
        Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
        with respect to Taxes on Income, tabled in terms of section 231(2)
        of the Constitution, 1996.

     4) Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government of
        the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United
        Republic of Tanzania for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
        Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.


                           TUESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill
     (1)    The Minister of Transport


          a) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2006] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No  29118 of 10 August 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Transport
         of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging
         Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Designation of Acting Speaker and Deputy Speaker

    As both the Deputy Speaker and I will be absent from Parliament during
    the period 11 to 15 August 2006, in accordance with the resolution
    adopted by the House on 24 June 2004 I designate House Chairperson Mr G
    Q M Doidge to act as Speaker and House Chairperson Mrs C-S Botha to act
    as Deputy Speaker for this period.


    As I will further be absent from Parliament for the period 16 to 18
    August 2006, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House on
    24 June 2004 I designate Deputy Speaker G L Mahlangu-Nkabinde to act as
    Speaker and House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge to act as Deputy Speaker
    for this period.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Interim Report of the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) for the
        period April 2005 to September 2005.

2.    The Minister of Finance

     1) Government Notice No 972 published in Government Gazette No 29033
        dated 21 July 2006: Minister of Finance, acting in terms of Section
        66(3)(b) of the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of
        1999), approve that the accounting authority for Rand Water may
        commit to a shareholder’s loan of USD 245 000, a performance bond
        of USD 1 470 000 and provide bid security amounting to USD 122 500
        for the Joint Venture with the Vitens International BV of the
        Netherlands pursuant to effect the management contract awarded by
        the Ghana Water Company, in terms of the Act. The above approval is
        granted subject to Rand Water not exceeding their debt limit
        provided in the Government Gazette Notice 23450 of 31 May 2002.
     2) Government Notice No 669 published in Government Gazette No 29010
        dated 21 July 2006: Notice setting out particulars of arrears
        demarcated by Municipality of Matjhabeng in terms of section 13quat
        in terms of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).

-----------------------
[1]See, Rules of the National Assembly, 4th Edition, January 2004, 53


