---
title: 'National Assembly - 08 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-08
---

THURSDAY, 8 JUNE 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Resumption of debate on Vote No 1 – The Presidency (reply by President):

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Madam Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon
members of the National Assembly, fellow South Africans, I am certain that
many of us present in the House today and others among our people will
recall the day almost three months ago when the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, the hon Kofi Annan, addressed our Parliament and nation
from this podium. That was on 14 March.
I do not know what the majority of us felt and thought as Kofi Annan spoke
about what our country has come to represent in the eyes of the world
community of nations. Later that day, the Secretary-General told me that he
spoke as he did, because he believed that we might perhaps be too close to
our own experience and too engrossed in our daily challenges to fully
understand the meaning to all humanity of what we have been trying to do
during the very short period of 12 years of our liberation.

I regret now that I did not tell him what I felt as he spoke from this
podium, in praise of the nobility, the wisdom and the humanism of our
people. Up to now I have not explained to him that I might have seemed
tongue-tied, because I was truly humbled by what was said about us by such
an eminent statesperson, an outstanding African and the occupant of the
high position of Secretary-General of the United Nations.

I am certain, also, that except for those who are prone to conceit and
vanity, it is always difficult to know how to respond to genuine words of
praise that are spoken with honest and disinterested intent. Very often,
both perversely and in a positive sense, such praise embarrasses those who
are the subject of the accolades. This, I am convinced, describes the
response among many of us as we listened to the hon Kofi Annan three months
ago.

If you will allow me, I will now proceed to remind the National Assembly of
some of the things about our country that Kofi Annan stated from this
podium. Among other things, the Secretary-General said:


  The truth is that development in Africa requires a new approach; and the
  good news is that South Africa is pointing the way. First, you are
  pointing the way by what you are doing at home. South Africa today
  reminds us all of the remarkable African capacity for forgiveness and
  reconciliation, despite the pain of racial discrimination and oppression.


  Your robust economy, stable democracy, support for the rule of law and –
  perhaps most important – your fully inclusive Constitution, have made
  South Africa a beacon of tolerance, peaceful co-existence and mutual
  respect between people of different races, languages and traditions.


  Your “rainbow nation” shines out in the very shape and composition of
  this Assembly. As I look around this Chamber I am impressed not only by
  the variety of races and colours that are represented, but also by the
  number of women. You put the General Assembly of the United Nations to
  shame!

[Applause.] He continued:

  Secondly, you are pointing the way by what you are doing in your
  subregional neighbourhood ... This is very important, because no country
  today can be unaffected by events in its neighbourhood, and it is the
  responsibility of the stronger countries in each neighbourhood to lend a
  hand to the weaker, without seeking to impose their domination.


  Thirdly, you are pointing the way through your leading role in Africa as
  a whole ... South Africa is pointing the way by what it is doing in the
  wider world.


  In his speech to the World Summit last September, President Mbeki
  referred to “the widely disparate conditions of existence and interests
  ... as well as the gross imbalance of power”, which define the
  relationship among the member states of the United Nations. He identified
  these as the main reason why we have not yet achieved the security
  consensus that we must reach, if we are to maintain peace in the world on
  a basis of agreement and collective action rather than the unilateral
  application of power.


  I agree. The imbalance must be redressed. But the imbalance itself means
  that those seeking to redress it do not have the leverage to impose their
  will on the rest of the world. Only with a good strategy and wise
  leadership can they make progress towards their goal.


  Today, the kind of things South Africa is doing at home, and promoting on
  the wider African scene, may show us the best way for developing
  countries in general to respond to today’s world.


  In his valedictory address to a joint session of this Parliament, nearly
  two years ago, Nelson Mandela said: “The memory of a history of division
  and hate, injustice and suffering, inhumanity of person against person
  should inspire us to celebrate our own demonstration of the capacity of
  human beings to progress, to go forward, to improve, to do better.”


  Indeed, my dear friends, I believe it has inspired you, and you, in turn,
  have inspired Africa and the world.


  Your Truth and Reconciliation Commission has given the world an idea, and
  a mechanism, which many other countries have used, or are now using, to
  confront an ugly national past.


  You have shown that a nation need not be imprisoned by its history; that
  even people whose communities have been in bitter conflict, and have
  endured or committed the worst injustice, can work together to build a
  common future.


  I believe this example can serve not only other individual nations, but
  also the world as a whole, which today is seething with resentment based
  on past and present injustice, and with misunderstandings based on
  differences of culture and belief.


  Perhaps the most important task of the United Nations today is to help
  its member states overcome those resentments and misunderstandings, both
  between communities within their borders and between different regions of
  the world. In that task, we have much to learn from South Africa.


  As F W de Klerk said in his 1993 Nobel Lecture, peace “is a frame of mind
  in which countries, communities, parties and individuals seek to resolve
  their differences through agreements, through negotiation and compromise,
  instead of threats, compulsion and violence”.


  South Africa’s particular wisdom, derived from its own history of
  overcoming resentment and mistrust, can be used to convince other
  countries that injustices and misunderstandings are not cured by
  confrontation or threats, since these only strengthen the determination
  of the powerful to keep power in their own hands.


  South Africa can teach all of us that, on the contrary, the way to a
  better balance lies through dialogue and the establishment of mutual
  trust. Only in such an atmosphere can the weak win attention and respect
  from the strong.


  South Africa can teach its fellow developing countries to make good use
  of the United Nations, which is the natural forum for a global dialogue
  leading to better trust and understanding between rich and poor, between
  weak and strong, and so to a more balanced and inclusive way of taking
  decisions that affect the fate of all humanity.


What I have quoted is but a portion of what the Secretary-General of the
United Nations told our Parliament and nation on 14 March, about what
democratic South Africa has come to mean to the world community of nations.
It may very well be that some among us have today listened again to the
words spoken by the UN Secretary-General with a sense of disbelief.

If such disbelief exists, I will not question or challenge it. In any
event, fear of the legitimate accusation of vanity imposes the outcome that
it becomes almost impossible for me to claim and assert that the Secretary-
General was correct to arrive at the conclusions he boldly asserted from
this podium. That, in any case, is not the principal challenge we face in
terms of what we need to do to respond to the humbling observations of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

I believe that the heart of the message of the Secretary-General to the
leadership of our people that sits in our Parliament, and our people as a
whole, was and is that we have an obligation to live up to the practices he
identified as constituting what our actions have meant with regard to the
noble goal of conveying the message of hope to all humanity that, indeed,
tomorrow will be better than today.

I must therefore pose the question to all our members of Parliament: Was
Kofi Annan wrong in his assessment of what we have done in regard to our
own country, our continent, the developing world and the rest of humanity?
I must ask of all our members of Parliament: Did Kofi Annan read us wrongly
when he concluded that ours is a nation committed to the creation of humane
and people-centred societies, nationally and globally?

I must ask the question: Was he mistaken in his view that the practice of
human solidarity, bridging all the boundaries that might divide diverse
societies, is the central impulse driving what we have sought to do to
advance the dignity of all human beings at home and abroad?

I must ask all our members of Parliament: Was he wrong to come to the
conclusion that our actions during the years of democracy have been
inspired by the message communicated by Nelson Mandela when he said:


  The memory of a history of division and hate, injustice and suffering,
  inhumanity of person against person, should inspire us to celebrate our
  own demonstration of the capacity of human beings to progress, to go
  forward, to improve, to do better.

I am convinced that all our members of Parliament, the national collective
of popularly elected leaders of our people, will in unison answer all these
questions, saying that the Secretary-General of the United Nations was
right to reach the conclusion that he did. [Applause.]

Accordingly, the task that faces all of us together, regardless of our
partisan political formations, is what we must do today, tomorrow and the
day after to sustain the message of hope and human fulfilment that Kofi
Annan saw in the things we have sought to do together during the few years
of our liberation.

Yesterday’s debate on the Budget Vote of the Presidency has convinced me
that the Secretary-General of the United Nations - an esteemed member of
the Order of the Companions of O R Tambo - the masses of our people, Africa
and the rest of the world can indeed enjoy nights of restful sleep.

This is because this debate communicated the unequivocal message that the
national political leadership that constitutes the membership of the
National Assembly and the formations this leadership represents are indeed
truly determined to sustain the message of hope and human fulfilment that
Kofi Annan saw in the things we have sought to do during the few years of
our liberation.
Yesterday you, hon members, regardless of political affiliation, firmly
stated your unequivocal support for our country’s Presidency, correctly
emphasising that this leading organ in our system of governance must
continue to discharge its responsibilities, operating within the boundaries
defined by our Constitution, as it has done in the past.

I would also like to express my profound appreciation for the positive
statements made by many members across party lines about me personally,
within the context of the fulfilment of my responsibilities as the
President of the Republic. [Applause.]

I value deeply and without qualification the support that the hon members
from all parties communicated in their heartfelt comments. In this regard,
I would like to assure the hon members that I fully appreciate the intent
of the frank and critical remarks directed at the President by some of the
members. I accept unreservedly that what informed these remarks was the
legitimate objective to ensure that the President and the Presidency
improve their performance in terms of serving the people of our country and
respecting their constitutional obligations. [Applause.]

We will therefore respond to the concerns expressed by two or three of the
hon members. However, I would also like to advise them that should any of
the members seek to reach me quickly, they should contact my very capable
parliamentary counsellor and member of the House, the hon John Jeffery.
[Applause.]

It is not right that I hear about horrible and heart-rending stories of the
murder and rape of children and the appeals of the affected parents to the
President in this regard only because the National Assembly has scheduled a
parliamentary debate involving the President. I am convinced that we should
consider ourselves privileged to accept the challenges that the Secretary-
General of the United Nations honestly and frankly laid at our feet on 14
March.

To discharge our obligations in this regard, I believe firmly that we
should integrate in the national consciousness and psyche the profound
observations made by, among others, the hon Nkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi, the
hon Kader Asmal, the hon Bantu Holomisa, the hon Isaac Mfundisi, the hon
Carol Johnson, the hon Sindiswe Chikunga, the hon Pandelani Nefolovhodwe,
the hon Don Gumede, the hon Wilma Newhoudt-Druchen, the hon Jane Matsomela
and others.

In this context I must also express appreciation for the remarks made by
the hon Tony Leon and the manner in which he expressed his views. I was
indeed pleased to note the fact that the hon members truly respected his
right to state his views by containing their heckling, making it possible
for all of us to hear what he had to say, regardless of its merits.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: We extend the same privilege to you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: I hasten to apologise for mentioning the
names of some of the hon members who spoke yesterday while excluding
others. I value the important comments made by other members of the
National Assembly to whom I have not referred, and will take the necessary
steps to respond to them.

These include the hon Sydney Opperman, who clearly has problems with the
Native Club and, for whatever reason, seems to have decided, quite wrongly,
that this interesting initiative of the black intelligentsia is the
property of the President of the Republic.

In this regard, like the hon Koos van der Merwe, I am happy that I too am a
native of South Africa. I would therefore have no problem in approaching
the Native Club to seek to participate in its activities. I hope I would
find in its ranks the Afrikaners to whom the hon Carol Johnson referred,
who hoped that one day they would have the possibility to proclaim that
they are proudly South African and African natives!

The hon Dr Buthelezi, Kader Asmal, Bantu Holomisa, Don Gumede and others
took the bold step to speak to the various fractious debates and activities
our country has lived through during the past 12 months or more. I thank
them for their considered and elevating views in this regard.

However, I would like to make so bold as to say that the things they said
have a meaning and relevance that extend beyond whatever might constitute
the events and statements that evoked their own statements. What I will now
say is perhaps nothing more than a declaration of faith, with no force
beyond its moral force as a declaration of faith.

In this context, I am privileged to say that I am proudly South African. I
am proud of the people to whom I owe my being. I am humbled by the
opportunity they gave me to lead them.

I have sought to play this temporary role fully conscious of the imperative
never to act in any manner that is inconsistent with what the masses of our
people consider to be the soul of our nation, as defined by a particular
value system that continues to reaffirm the tenets of the traditional
perspective of ubuntu.

I speak here of a people, regardless of race, colour and gender, that is
truly cultured. The millions of our people know what is right and what is
wrong. They know what kinds of behaviour enhance our dignity as a nation
and what kinds of behaviour demean all of us.

They know of the importance that all our cultures attach to the notion and
practice of respect and its relevance to the building of a civilised
society that honours the dignity of all persons. They know that
truthfulness signifies honesty and integrity. They know too that it is not
necessarily he or she who has the loudest voice that is the wisest.

Surely, all of us who claim that we lead these masses have an obligation to
respect, honour and promote the values they cherish, and resist all
temptations to behave as though the fact of our leadership positions
entitles us to dishonour the simple goodness that our people display every
day. [Applause.]

I know, as a matter of fact, that our people deeply value the democracy
they brought about through struggle. I know that they are convinced that
this democracy guarantees that tomorrow their life will be better than it
is today. They know that it is only in a democratic and law-governed South
Africa that they will realise their dreams for happiness and human
fulfilment.

Because of all of this, I am certain that our democratic system is safe.
Nevertheless, I believe that all of us, severally and collectively, have an
obligation to speak and act in a manner that further deepens and
consolidates the great gifts of democracy and peace we secured at great
cost. As the Freedom Park Trust always says, “freedom was not free”.
I thank the hon members for their participation in a debate that
demonstrated that we are indeed firmly united behind the fundamental values
and perspectives so clearly defined in our Constitution. I am certain that
if the hon Kofi Annan had been present in the House yesterday, he would
have been reassured that his confidence in our country is not misplaced.
[Applause.]

I am very pleased and honoured to thank our Deputy President, our Ministers
and Deputy Ministers, the staff of the Presidency that is ably led by the
Rev Frank Chikane, his fellow directors-general, my advisers and the Public
Service in general for the support they have given me personally, and the
things they have done that seek to give meaning to the promise we made that
we have entered our age of hope. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S E OPPERMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice on behalf of the DA
that I shall move:

  That the House debates the DA’s landslide victory in the Tafelsig by-
  election as well as the total implosion of the ID.

Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Speaker, I give notice that I will move on the
next sitting day of this House:

  That the National Assembly debates and discusses the crossing-of-the-
  floor legislation in view of the President’s invitation to receive
  proposals and suggestions on how this legislation could possibly be
  improved, it being of paramount importance that Parliament reflects on
  this matter.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, on behalf of
the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the draft resolution printed
in his name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on the Sectional
   Titles Amendment Bill [B 8 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 75) today.

Agreed to.

                       DEEDS REGISTRIES AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)
There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

                       SECTIONAL TITLES AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 14:32.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)


     (1)    The JTM on 8 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(3) classified
         the following Bills as section 75 Bills:


         (a)     Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
              of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 9 –
              2006] (National Assembly – sec 75).


         (b)     Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
              Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 11 – 2006] (National Assembly –
              sec 75).

     (2)    The JTM on 8 June 2006 in terms of Joint Rule 160(4) classified
         the following Bill as a section 76 Bill:


         (a)     Health Professions Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2006] (National
              Assembly – sec 76).


TABLINGS:


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the Evaluation
        of the Policy Framework on Managing HIV and AIDS in the Public
        Service for 2006 [RP 35-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Convention for
    the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air,
    dated 7 June 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
        for approval by Parliament of the Convention for the Unification of
        Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air, referred to it,
        recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
        Constitution, approve the said Convention.

    Request to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Protocol to the
    Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters
    Specific to Aircraft Equipment, dated 7 June 2006:

        The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
        for approval by Parliament of the Protocol to the Convention on
        International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters Specific to
        Aircraft Equipment, referred to it , recommends that the House, in
        terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said
        Protocol.

    Request to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on the Convention on
    International Interests in Mobile Equipment, dated 7 June 2006:
        The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having considered the request
        for approval by Parliament of the Convention on International
        Interests in Mobile Equipment,  referred to it , recommends that
        the House, in terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve
        the said Convention.

    Request to be considered.


