---
title: 'National Assembly - 23 May 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-05-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 MAY 2006
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 10:02.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICE OF MOTION


Mr C M LOWE: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that I shall move on behalf
of the DA:


   That the House debates the need for South Africa to undergo a skills
   revolution, if it is to meet the goals of Asgisa.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Debate on vote 34 – Water Affairs and Forestry:
The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I need some water.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): We can provide you with that,
Minister. We deliver at Parliament.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, hon members of
Parliament, our stakeholders from all areas of the sector, members of civil
society, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I’m delighted to
present the contribution made by water, sanitation and forestry to the age
of hope and the related challenges that President Mbeki referred to in his
state of the nation address earlier this year.

The aforesaid address highlighted the need to move faster to tackle the
challenges of poverty, underdevelopment and marginalisation confronting
those caught within the second economy. We humbly submit that today our
Budget Vote is a vehicle to finance the instruments aimed at addressing
some of these challenges.

I am tabling our budget under the theme: “Water and forests for shared
growth and economic development.” In our response to a call by our
President on the need to contribute to building the capacity of the state,
our department has instructed the Water Research Commission to conduct a
study of all capacity-building initiatives currently taking place within
the water sector. The results of this study will inform our 2025 vision on
capacity-building.

We have initiated partnerships with the Tshwane University of Technology
and the University of the Western Cape, Free State, Cape Town and KwaZulu-
Natal respectively, to develop learning interventions to improve the skills
base of the department and to create a pool of technicians and engineers.

We also have an education programme for school children, which is currently
being undertaken by our department in partnership with the Rand Water Board
and the Water Research Commission. Government identified the lack of skills
as a major impediment to the acceleration of service delivery and economic
growth.

Our contribution to Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills
Acquisition, driven by the hon Deputy President, knows no boundaries. And
I’m pleased to announce that we have negotiated a third agreement with the
People’s Republic of Cuba in terms of which a team of engineers from Cuba
will be seconded to the department to facilitate service delivery and
undertake on-the-job training of our technicians. [Applause.]

I must say that from the engineers that are here from Cuba we have already
benefited by getting 1 000 people trained in terms of that initiative.
[Applause.]
We have also been offered an opportunity by Cuba to send students to Cuba
for training. So this is a two-pronged approach. They will be coming over
to our country, but we’ll also be sending our children to study in Cuba.

In order for us to reposition the department for accelerated service
delivery we have undertaken internal restructuring and organisation. This
led to the establishment of the forestry branch and the gender and
disability unit.

In response to the President’s call to place women at the centre of
decision-making, we have appointed five women to management positions
within the past two months. [Applause.] We have also taken steps recently
to strengthen the strategic role of our regional offices, which, as you
might know, are the implementation arm of the department.

Support to local government is part of our main role as a sector leader. A
major project has been launched to assess each and every water services
authority in terms of complying with water-related legislative and
regulatory requirements.

The provincial water summits that we held in all the provinces, which
culminated in the first-ever national water summit in the country, have
enriched our understanding of the service delivery challenges faced by
municipalities throughout the country. This you will couple with the local
government initiative that culminated in the project popularly known as
Project Consolidate. We have also been part of that programme; as you know,
there is a lot of overlap between the two departments.

Our department has placed great emphasis on a sector-wide approach, in
terms of which we have accessed donor funding and pooled it to achieve
common objectives under the auspices of the EU-funded Masibambane
programme. These funds have enabled municipalities to address capacity and
institutional constraints.

We have literally facilitated the transfer of millions of rands to capacity-
building programmes for local government. We are looking forward to
strengthening this relationship between the EU and South Africa so that
this programme continues.

Our department has also successfully spearheaded a number of collaborative
initiatives, such as the establishment of water sector forums in all the
provinces, and the national joint response teams comprising the Department
of Water Affairs and Forestry and our partners, the Department of
Provincial and Local Government, the SA Local Government Association, the
National Treasury and corresponding provincial joint response teams.

These response teams support municipalities in deciding on the most
appropriate arrangements for water services providers and taking transfer
of assets and staff. We will continue with this support until all water
service authorities have put in place water service provision arrangements
and have taken transfer of these assets and staff that fall within their
jurisdiction.

We also have signed a memorandum of understanding with the labour movement,
specifically Cosatu and Nactu, committing ourselves to job creation, which
would benefit the people at the local level, where these projects are
happening.

Much work has been done to develop our water services sector support
strategy, which will be launched later this year. Part of the process has
included provincial workshops, as well as focus groups, to identify key
services provision problems and challenges facing municipalities.

We are all aware of the huge demands of local government and the human
resources constraints many of them face. We will, in the current financial
year, within the intergovernmental relations framework, continue to provide
hands-on support and expertise to address the capacity gaps in local
government. That is what we are supposed to do as a sector leader, to
provide this support, while local government implements. However, we need
to give them capacity to enable them to implement all our strategies and
policies.

Officials from our nine regional offices are working with municipalities.
Engineers and technicians have, in the same vein, been mobilised and
deployed to the weakest municipalities.

I am proud to announce that South Africa is the first country to implement
the 2004 decision taken at Dakar that all countries should hold a
sanitation week. We launched the first-ever sanitation week in March 2006
with the aim of promoting health and hygiene, and raising the profile of
sanitation in our country.

We have, therefore, launched a sanitation acceleration delivery strategy,
called “Operation Gijima”, which targets the provision of rural sanitation.
It is designed to create jobs in the process of eradicating the sanitation
backlog.

To make sure that this happens, we have allocated R11,4 million for 2006-07
for a sanitation job creation project and we have deployed 21 engineers to
focus specifically on the bucket eradication project.

I also want, maybe, to give an example of what is happening on the ground
as far as the delivery of sanitation is concerned. Presently there is
progress at that level. The Alfred Nzo District Municipality in Mount
Ayliff is delivering sanitation to 1 900 households per month. We think
that will contribute significantly to the eradication of the backlog.
[Applause.]
The backlog of sanitation in schools has been reduced from 4 300 in
September 2004, to 2 118 by March 2006. We think that we can increase
delivery and the pace of delivery in this area, and we are presently co-
ordinating with all the relevant departments, Provincial and Local
Government and Education, so that we can eradicate this even before the
given target. We believe that it is possible. We just need to come together
and ensure that we plan together and co-ordinate all our efforts.

We have targeted 2 117 schools to be provided with sanitation this
financial year, and as I have already indicated, it can be done, and I
think it will be done. As many as 300 clinics still lack sanitation
facilities, but we are still working together with the Health department
and we believe that we will be able to eradicate this backlog as well.

Delivery of water remains constant, with approximately 1 million people per
annum benefiting. But we see a steady increase in the delivery of
sanitation services.

Approximately 19,2 million people, of our 22 million people, that is 85% of
all poor households, are currently receiving their water free of charge.
[Applause.]

There’s a lot of improvement that needs to happen in this area because
municipalities, which have unique challenges, in terms of their financial
muscle and technical capacity to deliver on it, are implementing this
policy. However, this is something we need to be proud of, while
acknowledging that there is room for improvement in that area.

Our department is addressing the policy challenges that have been
identified in the implementation of the free basic water policy so that all
our communities can benefit from this service.

Senzela ukuba abantu abahlelelekileyo balixhamle ilungelo labo lokufumana
amanzi nokuba abanayo imali. Akufanelekanga ukuba abantu abahlelelekileyo,
njengoko sisazi ukuba amanzi ayahlawulelwa, bangawafumani amanzi. Luxanduva
lukarhulumente ukuba wonke umntu eMzantsi Afrika awafumane amanzi, njengoko
uMgaqo-siseko usitsho. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Sizibophelele kule nto, kwaye le yinto esingasoze siyiguqule ngoba kaloku
thina sizibophelele ekuguquleni impilo yabantu ibe yimpilo engcono.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[We do it so that poor households can enjoy their right to receive water
even if they don’t have money. We know that one must pay for water, but it
is not right for the poor households not to receive water. It is the
responsibility of the government that every South African citizen must
receive water, as is declared in the Constitution. [Applause.]
We are committed in this regard, and we cannot deviate from this because we
are committed to changing people’s lives for the better.]

Specific challenges around the volume of free basic water within the
context of HIV and Aids, as well as certain implementation issues, have
been identified.

Abantu bayakhala ngokuba kwimizi yabantu apho kukho abantu abagula sisifo
SikaGawulayo neNtsholongwane yaso kuye kucace ukuba ezi litha zingama-25
azanelanga. Siyawuphonononga ke lo mba, ngoba sicinga ukuba sifanele ukuba
noko abantu bethu sibabonelele ngokubhekisele kulo mba. Siphonononga umgaqo-
nkqubo wethu ukwenzela ukuba ukwazi ukujongana nezinto ezinjalo
ngokubhekisele kulo mgaqo-nkqubo wamanzi asimahla. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[People are complaining that in their homes where there are people living
with HIV and Aids, it is clear that 25l are not enough for them. We are
still reviewing this matter, for we think that we should provide for our
people in this regard. We are reviewing our policy so that this issue in
regard to the policy of free water can be rectified.]

Our department has been hard at work during this past year, holding summits
in each of our nine provinces to better appreciate the water and sanitation
needs of each province, and to ensure that water and sanitation are
integrated in the provincial growth and development strategies.


These summits were not only a success, but they proved to be very useful
strategies to ensure that the machinery of government functions more
smoothly.  These summits provided an opportunity for the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry, as a sector leader, to engage in a real-time
joint needs analysis and prioritisation with provincial and local
government, the private sector, academic institutions and other
stakeholders within the sector.


The outcomes of the summits held by the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry will definitely influence the policy formulation processes and the
trends in budget allocations within the department.  Dwaf has commenced
with processes to amend the National Water Act and the Water Services Act
respectively.  The amendments to the Forestry Act have been completed and
we have begun to put them into effect.


If we are serious about accelerating economic growth and development we
have to ensure optimal use of our resources and ensure that our
institutions are functioning effectively and efficiently, and are
financially sustainable.  We cannot effectively address our backlogs and
service delivery challenges while our water service institutions remain
fragmented and undercapacitated. We are working on that, as well, to ensure
that there is better co-operation and integration amongst all of these
institutions.


Our institutional reform strategy is designed to create regional water
service providers to achieve greater efficiencies based on financial
viability. Through this strategy we want to take advantage of the economies
of scale, ensure optimal use of water resources, achieve alignment of
existing and future regional infrastructure and ensure equitable access to
water services between developed and underdeveloped areas. We are very
committed to this one as well.


We expect that through this process, we will maximise benefits derived from
the existing capacity of our Water Board.


In accordance with the international best practice of decentralising and
democratising water resources management, great strides have been made in
terms of the establishment of the Catchment Management Agencies. The
Inkomati Catchment Management Agency has already been established and we
are in the process of establishing more. We envisage establishing the
Thukela, Usutu-Mhlathuze, Gouritz, and Olifants-Doorn Catchment Management
Agencies in this current financial year.


Dwaf as a supporter, leader and regulator within the sector, has
necessitated that our budget for Water Resources Management be increased
from R1,6 billion in 2005-06 to R2,2 billion in 2006-07. This allocation is
expected to rise to R2,4 billion and R2,96 billion in 2007-08 and the outer
year.

In the recently held National Water Summit, we were pleasantly surprised by
a call from local government for stronger regulation by our Department.
Many municipalities have indicated that without stronger regulation,
budgets will not be spent efficiently and that sustainability of service
delivery may be under threat as functions like operation and maintenance
may not be prioritised.

Siyafuna ke ukuyigxininisa le ndawo yezisetyenziswa zoluntu, emalunga
nokusetyenziswa, ukuphathwa kunye nokulungiswa kwazo, (operations and
maintenance of the infrastructure) ngoba ibalulekile. Ukuba ngaba izinto
ezisetyenziswa luluntu (infrastructure) lwethu, abazilungisi bazigcine
kakuhle oomasipala ngendlela efanelekileyo siza kuba nengxaki yokuzisa ezi
nkozo besisele sizizisa ebantwini. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[We want to emphasise the ones used by people, in regard to operations,
maintenance and how they are restored (operations and maintenance of the
infrastructure), because they are important. If the municipalities don’t
maintain and keep the equipment that is used by our people in a safe and
appropriate manner, we will have a problem in delivering the services
intended for the people.]
We therefore make our commitment to finalise our strategy to regulate the
municipalities by the end of the current financial year.


Subsequent to the problems experienced in the famed Delmas, we embarked on
a comprehensive and robust drinking water quality management programme to
both regulate and support municipalities in ensuring that drinking water
adheres to the standard we have set. We have thoroughly investigated
allegations of maggots.

Hayi azikho iimpethi emanzini. Amanzi ethu acocekile. [There are no maggots
in the water. Our water is clean.]

It was very interesting when this thing came up, because the question that
I was asking myself was why are people beginning to say that the quality of
our water is questionable. You have this house, number 15, where it is
reported that the maggots were found, getting water from the same source as
499 other houses in the same locality, but only in house number 15 are
maggots found. Interestingly, the media knew where to go and where to get
the maggots. They also knew where to catch the maggots coming out of the
tap. For a lay person like myself, it was a very interesting question. I
wish there could have been scientific evidence in response to that
question. [Applause.]

The lesson that we learned was to make sure that there is a strategy to
ensure that we monitor the quality of our water. As we speak, there is a
database outside there in our exhibition, which tells us that in the Free
State, where we were working together with the CSIR, certain towns in the
Lejwe-Leputswa municipality have a problem with their water. The quality of
water is not good enough because you have more fluoride than is necessary
in the water, and we are 3% off in terms of the quality of the water.

It helps us to know where the problem is, and be able to intervene
appropriately. I think this is a very good achievement, and I want to
commend the Director-General and his team for coming up with this. We are
not yet there in terms of what we should be doing, but this is a very good
start. It is a first, it has never happened in this country, and I think we
should be proud of that achievement. It is, of course, work in progress.
[Applause.]

Chairperson, water is an engine to development and poverty alleviation. It
is an important input into the accomplishment of the Accelerated Shared
Growth Initiative of South Africa, Asgisa. Three years ago the President
announced, in this House, the Olifants River Water Resources Development
Project in the Mpumalanga and Limpopo Provinces to provide water for this
hugely underserviced area of our country, and to unlock the mining
potential in support of the growth and development strategies of these
provinces.
I am glad to announce the raising of the flag of the Boshielo Dam as the
first phase of this project is almost complete. We are now continuing with
the preparation for the implementation of the second phase and an amount of
R300 million has been provided for in the budget. The construction of the
De Hoop Dam will comprise the first component of the second phase. This
will not only anchor the project but will also bring hope to those citizens
who have been deprived of basic human needs for so long. It will also
create an opportunity for expanding the mining activities in the area with
associated stimulation of economic growth and the creation of jobs.

The people living in Sekhukhune will benefit, especially in relation to the
construction of a road around the reservoir and the commencement of the
construction of the De Hoop Dam on the Steelpoort River. Some of the
benefits associated with a large infrastructure project will also be shared
in the Greater Tubatse district municipality.

Implementation activities will take into account the need to minimise
negative impacts on people and ecological systems. I want to emphasise
this, and I know that environmentalists are here. They are on our case in
this matter, but I want to assure them that we comply with the
environmental impact assessment regulations. We will ensure that we do what
we are required to do, but I want to stress this. It cannot be environment
at the expense of development. Neither can it be development at the expense
of the environment. The balance is what is the challenge. You can’t have an
either / or, but the balance is what is important.

Environmentalists must help us to ensure that we deliver, to our people,
the services that they have been deprived of for decades. We will also help
them by ensuring that we comply with the protection of the environment.
[Applause.]

In the Eastern Cape, there is a development programme in the Umzimvubu,
which is focusing on hydropower, forestation and agricultural development.
The Department is looking at water needs to support this initiative of the
province. There is also the Gariep Dam, which is also a very important
project for the Eastern Cape, especially given the fact that the Eastern
Cape is one of the poorest provinces. We think that these interventions are
quite important if we are to ensure that we share the growth as we share
the economic development through ensuring that there is water in those
areas.


In the light of our announcement, last year, of a relevant feasibility
study being undertaken, it gives me great pleasure to announce that on 3
August 2005 Cabinet gave us a go-ahead to start the process of establishing
a national water resource infrastructure agency whose main purpose would be
to develop and manage infrastructure to ensure economic benefits whilst
providing for social needs. It will work like Eskom, but it will
concentrate on the development of water infrastructure. Of course we will
learn from the mistakes of other people and try to ensure that this agency
avoids such mistakes.


We are almost completing the pilot project of our rainwater-harvesting
programme with 73 rainwater-harvesting tanks, affectionately known as the
Matangwana in the Free State, around Thaba Nchu, being built in 25 villages
across four provinces. We are spending R25 million to ensure that 1 500
rainwater harvesting tanks across the five provinces are established. This
is important as an intervention for poverty alleviation.

Amanzi mayibe ngamanzi aza kunceda abantu ukuba basuke endlaleni. Asithethi
ngokususwa kwamanzi emlanjeni siwacoce, ukuze siwase ezimpompeni.
Ibalulekile loo nto kodwa mayingapheleli apho, mayiphelele ekubeni siwabone
amanzi ngenene esenza iinguqu kubantu abahlelelekileyo. Ukuba ube unokuya
kulaa ndawo bendiye kuyo ise Free State inoMatangwana. Abantu bethu bavuna
umbona omhle phaya. Indlala iyemka. Ke ngoku sizama ukuphuhlisa elo linge
lokusondeza amanzi ebantwini. Ndicinga ukuba libalulekile njengokuba
lingenelela kuliwo lwendlala. Liyaphela ixesha lam kodwa ... (Translation
of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The water must be water that will help people to escape poverty. We are
not talking about recycling and purifying water from the river in order to
bring it to the taps. That is important, but it is not enough. It will
indeed be enough if we really see water make a change in the lives of poor
households. If you go to that place I recently visited in the Free State at
noMatangwana, you will see that our people are harvesting good mealies
there. Poverty is vanishing, so now we are trying to develop that
initiative of bringing water closer to the people. I think this is
important, because it helps to fight poverty. My time is up but ...]

I have to talk about the water allocation reform programme, which is quite
important. This is where we are transforming the sector to take excess
water from the commercial farmers who have more water than they are
utilising. We are not going to take what they are utilising. If they are
utilising what is available to them, we won’t take anything from them. But
if they have an excess, then we have to take that to give to the emerging
farmers.

This programme has actually delayed the transformation. It was supposed to
have run concurrently with the land reform programme, so that as we make
land available, we don’t just give this land and leave it with people or
have it lying fallow because there is no water to irrigate the land. This
is what we are doing through this programme. [Applause.] We have allocated
R13,2 million for this.

There are a number of things that one has to mention, but the time is just
not there. But it is important that I mention the Forestry Sector Charter.
By the end of this month of May, the final charter will be presented to the
Minister. We are looking at holding a workshop or an indaba where we will
be having discussions on how best we can ensure that the poorest people who
work in the forest also become shareholders, and not the other way round.
This is my dream. [Applause.]

If we are to be true to changing the lives of the people who are in the
second economy, we need to ensure that they are shareholders in these
initiatives. I hope that it will be realised. I want to take this
opportunity to thank everybody in the department, from senior management to
the people who are doing smaller tasks in the department. I think they have
done a great job. Thank you for your support.

Lastly, we have been able to put together a book that gives a history of
the first decade of water services delivery in South Africa, from
1994–2004. The title of the book is A History of the first Decade of Water
Services Delivery in South Africa – 1994-2004. I want to dedicate this book
to President Mandela, President Thabo Mbeki, the Ministers of Water Affairs
before me, Minister Kader Asmal and Minister Ronnie Kasrils.

I am highly indebted to all of these people for laying a very sound
foundation in the department, and also for providing good leadership. I
think if we could continue with what has been achieved, we shall go a long
way in terms of achieving universal access for all our people.

To the director-general, Comrade Jabu Sindane, thank you for your
leadership. I have already indicated senior managers, and thank you to all
the civil society up there, and all the stakeholders. I am still your
friend and your partner. In all the good things that you have been doing
and you will still be doing, I thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Ms C C SEPTEMBER: Chairperson, Minister, and all the guests here today, the
budget as far as the ANC concerned is a tool through which a developmental
state implements its transformation efforts. Because we are part of the
people we have a deep commitment to their needs. Water must not be
underestimated as a very important component in the strengthening of our
agricultural, industrial, economic and social development.

Therefore, we debate this Budget Vote under the theme, “actual progress
gives us real hope for the future” - as we have listened to the number of
issues that the Minister mentioned.

We must, for instance, note what increases and decreases in the budget have
to do with the transformation and necessary arrangements to strengthen
service delivery at local level. A case in point in the budget is an
increase of R164 million in the department’s expenditure between 2004-05
and 2005-06. This has to do with additional funds that were granted for
transfer functions between national and local government, and a one-off
allocation to deal with the challenge of drought that we have had around
the country and the devolution of funds to Public Works.

However, between 2003-04 and 2004-05 there was a decrease in expenditure.
This has to do with the department’s 10-year programme to restructure
itself, as we believe that the national department’s role in ensuring
better service delivery at local level and in a variety of water service
institutions, can be strengthened.

Along this 10-year restructuring process the programme in the Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry is in the process of separating its
implementation and regulatory functions.

Die ANC steun die herstruktureringsproses in soverre dit in pas is met die
doelwitte van die Heropbou- en Ontwikkelingsprogram. Die HOP, in die
bereiking van die basiese behoeftes van die mense, sê dat die Departement
van Waterwese en Bosbou verantwoordelik moet wees vir die bestuur van die
land se waterbronne tot voordeel van die hele land. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The ANC supports the restructuring process in as far as it is in line with
the objects of the Reconstruction and Development Programme. The RDP, in
meeting the basic needs of the people, states that the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry should be responsible for the management of the
country's water resources to the benefit of the entire country.]

It goes on to say that, at a secondary level, water resource management
must be founded on catchments management-based institutions to ensure
effective control over and supply of water resources as well as the
effective management of and control over wastewater. At the local level,
local governments must be made responsible for water distribution, adequate
sanitation facilities, waste removal and financing through appropriate
tariffs.

This process includes the following in as far as the restructuring is
concerned; out of it comes the establishment of catchments management
agencies and making appropriate institutional arrangements for managing and
developing national water resource infrastructure; delegating these
operations and maintenance of government irrigation water schemes to water
user associations; also transferring the management of commercial
plantations and indigenous forests to the appropriate institutions;
establishing the necessary policy and regulatory functions to ensure the
sustainable management of all forest resources; transferring department-
owned water service schemes as we are seeing currently and operations to
water services authorities in the municipalities; but of course, ensuring
effective service delivery by competent water services, authorities and
institutions.
Dit is binne dié raamwerk wat die ANC gelyke toegang tot water en die
ontwikkeling van ’n nasionale waterkostestrategie verwelkom. Water is ’n
natuurlike hulpbron en behoort ten bate van alle Suid-Afrikaners beskikbaar
gestel en onderhou te word. Dit is nog ’n poging van die ANC-regering om
die situasie van die verlede, waar ’n klein minderheid toegang tot
waterbronne gehad het en die meerderheid armes in die land min of geen
watersekuriteit gehad het nie, reg te stel. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[It is within this framework that the ANC welcomes equal access to water
and the development of a national water pricing strategy. Water is a
natural resource and should be made available and maintained on behalf of
all South Africans. This is another effort by the ANC government to rectify
the situation of the past where a small minority had access to water
resources and the majority of poor people in the country had little or no
water security.]

As the national pricing strategy is unfolding, the ANC would want the
process to have as its outcome firstly, in line with what the RDP says, a
lifeline tariff to ensure that all South Africans can afford water services
sufficient for health and hygiene; and in urban areas, a progressive block
tariff to ensure that the long-term costs of supplying large-volume users
are met and that there is a cross-subsidy to promote affordability for the
poor. In rural areas we want a tariff that covers operating and maintenance
costs of services and recovery of capital costs from users on the basis of
a cross-subsidy from urban areas in cases of limited rural affordability,
as stated in the RDP.

The creation of a single water service regulator, as stated by the Minister
already, to focus on policy and regulation, is an important opportunity for
other entities involved in water provision. The devolution of water service
provision to municipalities in South Africa offers opportunities to engage
in very innovative ways with the learning phase of the reform process.

However, of crucial concern is the success of service delivery in terms of
whether institutions of service delivery are accountable to citizens. The
challenge is thus, not to fix the pipes, but to fix the institutions that
fix the pipes. Institutional changes, which ensure that service providers
are accountable to all citizens, are a highly political endeavour.

Undertaking such changes on a pilot basis may be difficult enough; scaling
it up across jurisdictions and sustaining it over time, is indeed a
daunting challenge. Yet, it is precisely the scaling up of institutional
change that is needed to ensure that the goal of universal access to basic
services can be realised.

In die geval van Bosbou, saam met die transformasie van die bestuur van
kommersiële, inheemse en gemeenskapsbosbou in nasionale, gereguleerde
belang, is die departement natuurlik ook besig om beleid te ontwikkel, om
programme in werking te stel wat kan moniteer en evalueer, en om tegniese
ondersteuning aan die bedryf te verskaf. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[In the case of Forestry, in addition to transforming the management of
commercial, indigenous and community forestry in the national, regulated
interest, the department is of course also busy developing policy,
implementing programmes that can monitor and evaluate, as well as providing
technical support to the industry.]

The ANC also welcomes the fact that the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry’s programmes show that people are placed at the centre of national
forestry management. Following this principle, the sustainable management
of state plantations has been prioritised to prepare for the necessary
transfer to other beneficiaries.

The ANC has as policy the creation of jobs for all who live on the land. We
have over time amended some of our policies to be more realistic so that we
can ensure that where there are possibilities for job creation, programmes
are put in place to create jobs for those who need it. The forestry sector
in our view holds such possibilities. In addition to creating more jobs, it
would assist with rural development.

In line with these recognised possibilities, the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry developed, as we have heard, the Forestry Sector
Charter, as announced by the Minister last year. This charter is being
further developed to ensure that more opportunities arise for social and
economic development and the broad-based black economic empowerment.

Traditionally, we all know that the forestry sector has had limited
ownership. A broad-based black economic empowerment charter, committing the
sector to equity goals, not just in growing trees, but throughout the value
chain, should be initiated. We do think that we should maybe turn some
attention to what we can do with our people in so far as conservation is
concerned.

In Agenda 21, for example, the international community and governments were
called on to draw on the active participation of indigenous people and
their communities and to incorporate their values, their views and
knowledge, including the unique contribution of indigenous women, in
resource management and other policies and programmes that may affect them.

Further, international development agencies and governments were requested
to commit financial and other resources to education and training for
indigenous communities to develop their capacities to achieve sustainable
self-development, and to contribute to and participate in sustainable and
equitable development at the national level.

Indigenous people remain particularly vulnerable to water shortages and
water quality problems as a result of a history of dispossession and
marginalisation. Yet, indigenous people have extensive traditional
knowledge regarding water sources and conservation. Water sources on
indigenous lands are often considered as a sacred element, and indigenous
women may be the holders of water knowledge. Indigenous people possess
traditional knowledge and skills concerning the sensing, the locating, of
water and its conservation. Their traditional land management skills often
provide the most effective method of water resource management in their
settlement areas.

However, due to their lack of sovereignty over natural resources,
indigenous people are seriously affected by their uncompensated and
unsustainable loss of water to farming and other industries.

Effective water governance requires a change in attitudes and behaviour
amongst individuals, institutions, professionals, and decision-makers; in
short, among all involved.

Key aspects of sustainability include empowerment of local people, self-
reliance and social justice. These aspects reflect concern about principles
of equity, accountability and transparency.

One way to incorporate these principles into real, live management is to
move away from conventional forms of water governance, which have usually
been dominated by a top-down approach and professional experts in the
government and the private sector, and move towards the bottom-up approach,
which combines the experience, knowledge and understanding of various local
groups and people.

We have, as the ANC, been very concerned with the status reports that we
have received about the rivers in our country. The Water Act requires that
we protect our water resources, rivers, wetlands, estuaries and aquifers so
that we can benefit from their ecosystems now and in the future. We are not
managing rivers for the sake of managing rivers but to ensure that future
generations can continue to enjoy them. In this regard the ANC wants to
call upon all members in this House, led by the ANC, of course, to adopt a
river in their constituency or where they live. I will adopt a river in my
own constituency. [Applause.]

As I was walking into this House, hearing that rivers needed to be adopted,
it assured me that indeed the hon Pieterse would adopt a river in his
constituency. We call upon all the members in this House to follow the lead
of hon Pieterse and, of course, the members in the portfolio committee.

We support this budget that we believe stresses the direction which our
past political struggles mapped out for us, as its principles and values
are enshrined in the Constitution of this country. We believe that it will
contribute towards our vision to build a society that is nonracial,
nonsexist and a single and integrated economy that benefits all.

This Budget Vote No 34 and the Dwaf’s Strategic Plan is aligned to achieve
the eradication of the bucket system in the 2006-07 financial year and to
have clean running water in every household by 2010 and to give the poorest
of the poor access to forestry.

We know that in future we will have a partner to make sure that water is
used properly in the mineral and energy sector. That partner whom we are
going to have is the hon Minister Sonjica. She will ensure that our
partnership is making sure that the industry does not pollute and / or over
use water. We are indeed happy that such a partnership is going to continue
in that regard. Since we know that this will happen, the ANC supports this
Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J A SEMPLE: Chairperson, the DA would like to congratulate the Minister
on her appointment as Minister of Minerals and Energy. I have not been in
this portfolio very long, but I know the Minister is held in high regard
and she will be sorely missed for her focused approach and her honesty
regarding challenges in her department. [Applause.] On behalf of the women
and children in South Africa who have benefited from the provision of water
and sanitation under your leadership, I would like to say thank you,
Minister.

This is probably also an appropriate time to congratulate the chairperson
of the portfolio committee on her very capable direction of the committee
and to thank the members for the good spirit that prevails in the committee
itself. [Applause.]

It is often said that water is life and that for a water-scarce country
such as South Africa, this precious resource must be retreated with respect
and care. Water and sanitation are the most basic of human rights and our
Constitution guarantees basic human rights to all South Africans.

The purpose of Programme 3: Water Services, is to ensure that all people in
South Africa have access to an adequate, sustainable, viable, safe,
appropriate and affordable water and sanitation service to use water wisely
and to practice safe sanitation.

In his state of the nation address, the President committed the department
to two very important delivery goals for which the nation will hold the
department accountable, and for which the Minister or the new Minister will
be held responsible, namely, the provision of clean running water to all
households and decent and safe sanitation.

Of major concern to all of us who are concerned with the health and dignity
of our people, is the eradication of the dehumanising bucket system in
informal settlements by the end of 2007. The Director-General of Water
Affairs and Forestry took great pains to emphasise to the portfolio
committee that this was a moving target; that is, informal settlements are
given buckets on an interim basis by municipalities, so the bucket system
is going to be a fact of life for as long as we have informal settlements.
What is the difference between an informal settlement and an established or
formal area, you might ask?

The Gauteng Provincial Government claims to have eradicated 83% of the
buckets in Gauteng. But the continuous migration of rural and foreign
people to this province means more informal shack settlements spring up
continuously. With this in mind, one must question whether the goal will
actually ever be attainable. Some municipalities still have not formulated
the bylaws necessary to implement the free basic water supply programme,
which means they cannot supply the 6 000 kl of water to those who need it
most. Nor can they identify these people.

The department, as we have heard, is currently in a ten-year restructuring
programme - meaning that most of its implementation functions will be
transferred to more appropriate levels of government and institutions. This
will allow the department to focus on policy development, macro planning,
regulation, sector leadership, oversight and monitoring. It also means, in
more practical terms, that the department has changed its role in the
sector from a provider to a regulator.
The primary responsibility for water service has shifted to local
government, but severe capacity constraints and skill shortages in the
water services sector are causing problems in delivery. This particularly
applies to the water service providers where capacity is defined in terms
of technical skills and the operational requirements necessary to ensure a
sustainable service to consumers. Transformation of the water service
sector also means that the role of staff has changed from implementing
capital projects or operating and maintaining water schemes to a focus on
organisational development in order to assist and prepare local government
to perform its functions. Apart from formal training and re-skilling,
mentorship programmes are key in developing the required skills in this
sector. And we were very pleased to hear from the Minister of the
initiatives being taken in this regard by the department.

Of concern is the Energy and Water Sector Education and Training Authority,
EWSeta, which is responsible for training in the water services sector. It
would be interesting to know how many people have been trained and what
positions they hold in the sector. Is this Seta meeting its training target
in this vital delivery sector?

The Eastern Cape is quoted as having the highest proportion of households
without access to clean water – 50,6% in 2004. It is also the province most
in need of economic development and job creation with the lowest growth
geographic product, GGP, per head of all the provinces. The Eastern Cape
has areas ideally suited for pineapple, chicory and dairy farming but they
need water.

Bathurst, for example, had the opportunity of developing its own pineapple-
canning factory but this was not possible because there was not enough
water. Chicory production in the Alexandria area has virtually grown to a
halt for the same reason – no water. Dairy farming is suffering the same
fate. But when you look at the Sundays River Valley in the same province,
it is one of the most productive farming areas in the country because of
its irrigation schemes.

Enquiries to the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Dwaf, in the
province for an additional water supply to Nhlambe area are met with the
response, ``There is no funding available’’. We know this is not true,
Minister, especially as far as shared economic growth and development is
concerned. Please can we ask you, on behalf of the people of Nhlambe, to
investigate an alternative water supply; perhaps a new pipeline from the
Glen Melville Dam, for example.

Time does not permit me to engage in all the aspects of this very exciting
portfolio. Delivery of water and sanitation are key goals. It seems to me a
little unfair that this Minister should be responsible for achieving these
goals while her department is not the implementing agent.

Forestry seems to be the stepchild of the department and although it has
significant potential for rural development and job creation in
undeveloping areas, basic human rights must come first.

Hon September, I am delighted to take up your challenge and I would like to
adopt the Jukskei River in my constituency. And that is a challenge.
[Applause.]

The DA supports the budget of this very important delivery area and we wish
the Minister well in her new portfolio. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Chair and colleagues, for us service delivery is the key
issue. The stated aims of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry is
to ensure the availability and supply of water at national level; to
facilitate equitable and sustainable socioeconomic development; to ensure
the universal and efficient supply of water services at local level; and to
promote the sustainable management of forestry. The four programmes of the
department are administration, water resource management, water services
and forestry.

The overall allocation of the department has increased from R4 billion in
the 2005-06 adjusted appropriation to R4,5 billion in 2006-07. This is
mainly owing to the water resource management programme which received a
33,5% nominal increase to its allocation that now stands at almost
R2,2 billion. The allocation to Programme 4: Forestry, decreased by 4,1%.
The department is pursuing a reform programme in the forestry sector, which
will see the government leasing all state-owned forestland to private
sector operators. Of the 140 000 hectares managed by the department in
1994, more than 100 000 have been transferred. We hope that the question of
the Ingonyama Trust will be resolved amicably.

Without water there is no life. Access to clean water and all the benefits
that come with it is a right that each and every South African should
enjoy. The impact that clean tap water and sanitation have on the lives of
people is immense.

Poverty alleviation, food security and low economic growth are some of the
problems associated with developing countries. The people that are most
affected by these problems are the rural poor. Sanitation, as well as
access to clean water, can play a major role in alleviating these problems
and creating a better life for all.

Many people in rural areas rely on subsistence farming. The failure to
acquire water for the irrigation of their crops poses a major challenge and
also creates an unnecessary risk that can contribute to a poor harvest and
even crop failure.

We therefore believe that development projects in these areas are of major
importance. Not only will they ultimately lead to the social upliftment of
many rural communities, they will also provide much-needed employment, as
many projects are labour-intensive. This will therefore give an economic
boost to these areas.

When engaging in development projects within these rural areas, the active
involvement of the amakhosi and their councillors is of paramount
importance. The deployed municipal councillors must work together with
their traditional counterparts to ensure that these projects reach their
true potential and contribute to the improvement of the quality of life for
these people.

It is easy for us to take essential services, such as tap water and toilets
that flush, for granted. The opening of a tap or the flushing of a toilet
have become routine exercises that we don’t even notice any more, and yet
for the many people in rural areas these are luxuries that they still do
not have.

While the work and progress the department has made in this regard is
commendable, there is still much that has to be done. Many people are still
without proper sanitation, which makes them more susceptible to various
diseases and health problems. No stone must be left unturned in stopping
pollution and the occurrence of aquatic parasites such as the rat-tailed
maggots that were recently found in the drinking water in some areas.

The bucket system must be eradicated from all households, and all South
Africans must have access to clean water that is of a high quality. It was
therefore very encouraging that in his state of the nation address earlier
this year, President Mbeki stated that government had decided to completely
eradicate the bucket system by the end of 2007 in the established
settlements.

It is clear that the direct and indirect impact that the department has on
improving the lives of many people and freeing them from the poverty trap
they are currently stuck in is great. We in the IFP therefore believe that
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s eagerness to provide basic
water services and improve sanitation for the majority of South Africans
will lift the standards of our people and play a leading role in the
alleviation of poverty and the fight for food security.

The IFP realises that the budget is reasonably good and that the areas
highlighted by President Mbeki in his state of the nation address and the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry’s ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.
Will you please just continue.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: ... strategic plans are realistic and attainable. We in
the IFP anticipate that, unlike in the past, service delivery ...
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, sorry but I am afraid
your time has expired. You have to conclude.

Mr M W SIBUYANA: Thank you. We support the budget. [Applause.]

Mr I D MOGASE: Madam Chairperson, when Cuba became independent in 1959,
under President Dr Fidel Castro, little did we know that in future his
country Cuba would train and give skills to our people in South Africa.
[Applause.] In the then South Africa, blacks were denied quality education
and skills training. Blacks were not allowed to enter technikons. But I’m
surprised today that the DA wants to come to the forefront and say ``give
them the skills’’ when in the past they refused our people entry.
[Interjections.]

I was there. As we celebrate the anniversary of our Constitution, we must
not forget where we come from. This Constitution was not merely negotiated,
but it comes from the blood and the sweat of the black people of South
Africa under the leadership of the ANC. Therefore, it is appropriate to
show its relevance to legislation that regulates how the three spheres of
Parliament could co-operate.

Section 41 of our Constitution makes important but very general provisions
in terms of which the allocation of this national budget is transferred and
implemented to ensure that services are delivered to the people.

In subsection 2, it makes reference to the Act of Parliament that must
establish or provide structures and institutions to promote and facilitate
intergovernmental relations and provides the appropriate mechanisms and
procedures to facilitate settlements of intergovernmental disputes.

This ANC-led government proposed the Intergovernmental Relations Framework
Act that now does what section 41(2)(a) and (b) says it should do. And in
doing so, the Act regulates a national relationship between national,
provincial and local government spheres as we manage and spend the funds
that have been allocated to ensure that people have some clean running
water in their houses and that we eradicate the bucket system as we work
towards ensuring that schools and clinics have water and sanitation.

I’ve lived in South Africa for a very long time, and it was distressing to
see black children being denied water. But if you bring in water, you would
see those little girls running and washing those tiny little hands –
smiling at the water and splashing each other with water and giggling.

Following principles of co-operative government, the department is actively
engaged in programmes such as Project Consolidate to improve the sector
management capacity and the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Programme and urban renewal to support the economic growth and development.
With specific attention to the government’s plan of action in the state of
the nation address, the department is assisting with the improvement of
access to basic water supply and sanitation services, and meeting
government’s target. Challenges include funding, better implementation
capacity and sustainable management by water service authorities.

The direct responsibility for infrastructure in daily operations has moved
from the national department to the water service authorities at local
level. Funding in future will come from the Municipal Infrastructure Grant,
the local government CTII equitable share and capacity building grants.

According to the department’s strategic plan and its estimated national
expenditure, the free basic water supply programme is well established and
coverage is progressively improving. The key focus now is to extend this to
the free basic sanitation. However, linked to the rolling out of the free
basic water supply is an aspect mentioned earlier of ensuring appropriate
infrastructural support. In order to supply free basic water to those who
qualify, we require properly installed and serviced water meters in all
settlements across our country.

The Departments of Water Affairs and Forestry, Local and Provincial
Government, Public Works and local government structures remain busy
strategising on how to ensure that systems are installed, implemented and
properly maintained. This means that there must be an interdepartmental
deliberation aimed at strengthening service delivery. We cannot
underestimate the importance of clean running water in the lives of people.
Many times the existence of taps, pipes and water pumps are taken for
granted.

It is shocking to realise that in many parts of the world, including the
coldest and most rural areas, there are often no such amenities. It is
therefore our duty as ordinary citizens, where these amenities exist, to
take pride in them, protect them and assist with their maintenance by
paying our accounts, be it water accounts or taxes, as these assist
government departments to ensure that they can appoint more appropriately
trained staff to ensure free basic water to those who need it as well as
maintain the system so that all of us can indeed have water for use in our
kitchens, bathrooms, toilets, gardens, farms and industries.

In the year that we are reflecting on, there were several things that set
us back. We have a drought that seems set to be continuing into the coming
years. The ANC is fully aware of the challenges that this brings to local
government structures, water boards, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry and provincial governments. These challenges mean that public
servants across all departments as well as in all three spheres of
government must follow the principle of “People First”, Batho Pele as they
deal with such challenges.

Of course it also means that the provisions of the Intergovernmental
Relations Framework Act and other public service regulations must be
appropriately implemented; and where necessary amended as years go by to
ensure that they deliver better services to all people, especially in such
drought-stricken areas. Hand in hand with the drought, a number of fires
caused havoc during the season.

The ANC urges the departments involved and local government structures to
prepare for the next fire season and use the lessons that were learnt from
the past years to ensure that people see to it that infrastructure,
agricultural land and livestock remain protected. We note that some of the
lessons learnt from the past fire season are being implemented as some
areas of temporary unplanted areas are being reduced in some provinces, and
fire readiness on the plantations has been significantly improved.

The ANC has a policy for the creation of jobs for all who live on the land.
We have over time amended some of our policies to be more realistic so that
we can ensure that where there are possibilities of job creation,
programmes are put in place to create jobs for those who need it. [Time
expired.] We support this budget. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Ms N C NKABINDE: Chairperson, hon members, allow me to congratulate the
Minister on her new appointment, and welcome the soon-to-be appointed new
Minister.
The Budget before us represents government’s responsibility for one of the
most basic human needs, namely, the provision of water; so important that
it is specially identified as a basic human right in our Constitution.

The department is steadily moving away from its role as policy implementer
to that of policy developer, regulator and sector leader. This in itself is
not a negative thing. The UDM welcomes the devolution of powers and
responsibility to a level where the actual service delivery occurs.

There is nonetheless a danger in the overdevolution of powers and
responsibilities. After all, this House still needs to hold somebody
accountable for what is the delivery of a guaranteed constitutional right.
It is especially disconcerting that among those who are receiving greater
responsibility for water delivery is local government, which regrettably
has a poor track record in general and in particular, when it comes to
major infrastructure and reticulation.

The various agencies - both regional and local - that the department is
devolving responsibilities to, must be provided with extensive skills and
assistance before they take control of our water resources. And once these
agencies and local government assume their responsibilities, they must be
subjected to continuous and intensive scrutiny and monitoring.
The UDM appeals to the Minister and the department to make absolutely
certain that vital services and infrastructure will not be devolved to
other agencies or tiers of government until there’s a 100% confidence in
their ability to deal with such responsibilities.

We also appeal to the department to allocate a greater portion of their
budget towards capacity-building within the agencies and institutions,
which are and will be taking over water-related responsibilities. The UDM
supports the budget. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, water is one of the most precious commodities
of any nation. A nation can survive without oil and all other minerals like
diamonds and gold, but without water, a nation cannot survive for a single
day. Therefore South Africa must set a very high standard of availability
of usable water that is pure and acceptable for home use, and that is in
line with international standards.

This I don’t doubt: South Africa is one of the few countries where water
can be accessed directly from taps. But the recent rumours regarding
infestation of our water have diminished the confidence that the public has
in the quality of our water. This is a matter that needs to be addressed
urgently.

The ACDP is pleased that the Minister and her department have taken new
initiatives to ensure that there is pure water for the public. The ACDP is
also encouraged by job creation initiatives that have been put into place
by Water Affairs and Forestry. The visible cleaning of rivers and streams
has made a significant contribution to addressing the unemployment crisis
in our country, but still needs more attention.

Forestry initiatives among the rural poor have also led to increased job
creation and benefits for the rural poor and the unemployed. I am sure that
congratulations are in order for those communities who have so diligently
adhered to the campaigns for saving water during the recent water
restrictions in the country. Because of the rain that the country has been
blessed with, it sometimes seems as if we have forgotten the droughts that
we had just recently.

However, the ACDP’s major concern in this regard is that we still need more
awareness campaigns on conserving water in our communities. [Time expired.]

Ms T E LISHIVHA: Ndo livhuwa Mudzulatshidulo, Dziminisita dzothe na mirado
yothe ya Buthano la Lushaka. Khamusi ndi saathu u sumbedzela uri zwine ra
do vha ri tshi khou amba ngazwo hafha ndi zwifhio, ndi tea u thoma nda vha
talutshedza zwauri hu tou vha u lugisa zwo tshinyadzwaho nga vhanwe vhathu.

Kha ndi sumbedzele uri a zwi leluwi uri zwithu zwo tshinyadzwaho nga munwe
muthu zwi vhuelele ngonani.  Ndi ngazwo musi ri tshi sedza ra wana mushumo
u tshe mulapfu kha uri vhathu vha mahayani vha wane madi na mabunga nga u
tavhanya. Ngauri vho zwi itaho kha minwaha ila yo fhiraho, vho vha vha sa
sedzi vhathu vha mahayani sa vhadzulapo vha Afurika Tshipembe. Ndi ngazwo
vho vha vha tshi sokou vhea milindi ya madi hunwe na hunwe, naho hu nga vha
hu dakani, vha sa sedzi uri hu na thodea naa.

Vhudzuloni ha uri vhathu vha wane madi ho vha hu tshi bwiwa mulindi uri
zwifuwo zwi wane madi ngauri huna vhe vha vha vho di vhudza zwauri Afurika
Tshipembe ndi lavho. A huna zwe vha itela vhathu vhashu vha mahayani ngauri
vho vha vha si na pulane yazwo hezwo zwithu. Vho vha vha sa zwi divhi
zwauri hu na vhanwe vhathu vhane vha dzula mahayani. Zwino muvhuso muswa wo
dzhenaho, u khou lwa na u lugisa, ndi ngazwo zwi tshi khou dzhia tshifhinga
uri zwithu zwi luge.

Kha ndi ri hoyu muvhuso wo rangwaho phanda nga ANC u a kona ngauri zwino wo
no netshedza vhathu vha fhiraho 60% madi o kunaho. Ndi dovha hafhu nda
takadzwa na ngauri mbalo ya vhathu vha si na madi na mabunga i a divhea,
ngauri zwihulwane ndi u shumisana. Ndi ngazwo ANC i tshi ri rothe, ri nga
zwi kona.

Vhathu vha linganaho 31,9 milioni, vha khou wana madi kha mbekanyamushumo
ya madi a vhuthogwa nga fhedzi. Ngoho ndi ya uri huna mushumo munzhi une wa
fanela u itwa nga hoyu muhasho musi ro sedza nyisedzo ya madi na mabunga
mahayani. Zwinwe zwi vhavhaho ndi zwa musi vhathu vha tshi nwa madi na
zwifuwo na phukha dza daka fhethu huthihi. Tsumbo, Limpompo kha tshitiriki
tsha Vhembe, muvhunduni wa Tswera. Nyimele ya hone i pfisa vhutungu. Musi
muthu o sedza madi a hone nga ngomu tshisimani a nga si tende zwauri a
nwiwa nga vhathu ngauri o dala matari, malelebvu na zwinwe vho zwine muthu
a nga si zwi bule.

KwaZulu-Natal na hone, hu na hune vhathu vha nwa madi na zwifuwo, zwine zwa
fhedza zwo thithisa mutakalo wavho, nahone zwa vhanga malwadze o
fhambanaho. Hezwi zwothe zwo itwa nga havhala vho fhiraho. Fhedzi ndi khou
livhuwa Muhasho wa zwa Mutakalo ngauri musi ri tshi dalela Tswera, ro wana
vhe kha fulo la u gudisa vhathu uri vha vhilise madi phanda musi vha tshi a
shumisa.

Kha ndi dovhe hafhu ndi sumbedze zwauri hafha fhethu hune vhathu vha nwa
madi a tshikha, hu na milindi heila yo bwiwaho nga houla muvhuso wo
fhiraho, ine ya sa tsha shumiswa. Zwi nga vha hani arali muhasho wa ita uri
milindi heyi i vusuludzwe u itela uri vhathu vha kone u wana madi avhudi
nahone o kunaho.

Ofisi dza dzingu kha dzi lingedze uri dzi wane muvhigo nwedzi munwe na
munwe u itela uri vha divhe uri hu khou itea mini malugana na madi. Sa
tsumbo, kha muvhuso wapo wa Makhado hu khou wanala uri mitshini ya u bommba
madi na dzi phaiphi, zwi khou tshinyadzwa na u tswiwa nga vhathu vha sa
divhei. Kha milindi ya 19 ho sala milindi mina fhedzi ine ya khou shuma zwa
zwino. Zwinwe ndi zwa uri heyi milindi i vha i songo tsireledziwa nga ndila
ine mafobvu vha sa kone u i vhona. Zwavhudi ndi zwauri ndo pfa Vho Minisita
vha tshi ri zwi khou dzudzanyiwa uri milindi i tsireledzwe u itela uri
mitshini i sa tsha tswiwa.

Muhasho kha u dovhe u lavhelese uri madi ane wa khou a netshedza vhathu o
kunakiswa, nahone o tea mutakalo wa vhathu. Hu na madi ane vhathu vha
balelwa u a nwa nga mulandu wa uri a na muno. Hunwe fhethu mano a vhathu o
sina nga muno; vha tshi vhudziswa vha ri ndi madi. Hoyu muhasho wo tangana
na mivhuso yapo, u fanela u sedza uri havha vhathu vhatuku vhane vha kona u
di bwela milindi ya madi dzi dzharatani dzavho, vha a thusiwa nga vhutanzi
ha uri vha tea u bwa mulindi wa vhukule vhungafhani na bunga. Hezwi ndi
ngauri hayo madi a vha a tshi khou shumiswa na nga vhanwe vhathu vha tsini,
ngauri madi a a fhela vhege mbili u ya kha tharu. Zwenezwo zwi vha
kombetshedza uri vha renge madi kha havho vho dibwelaho milindini yavho.

Fhedzi nga uri heyi mbekanyamushumo ya Asgisa yo vhetshela masheleni a
linganaho R370 bilioni ya mveledziso ya zwifhatwa, ya dovha ya netshedza
R5,2 bilioni kha zwifhatwa zwa madi, ndi na ngoho ya uri zwithu zwi do
khwinisea. Hangei Limpopo hu na thandela yo thomiwaho nga Asgisa ya u fhata
damu la De Hoop, line la do thusa vhoramabindu na vhathu vhothe vha henefho
tsini; u fana na kha tshitiriki tsha ha Sekhukhune.

Kha sia la mabunga na hone zwi pfisa vhutungu ngauri mahayani vhathu
vhanzhi vha kha di shumisa u ya dakani musi vha tshi toda u di thusa. Hu
kha di vha na mushumo wa u ita uri vhathu vha mahayani vha vhe na mabunga a
vhukuma. Hunwe ri wana uri musi vhathu vha tshi netshedzwa mabunga hu na
mazennge ane a rengwa o fhatwa mavhengeleni. Ngoho a si one. Zwine zwa amba
uri ha ngo lugela u shumiswa nga vhathu. Zwi a wa nga muya nahone zwinwe a
zwi fhedzi na nwedzi.

Ngauri mabunga a nea muthu tshirunzi, kha ri vha fhe hetsho tshirunzi
vhathu vha Afurika Tshipembe. Hafha ndi khou humbela muhasho uri kha u ambe
na minwe mihasho uri hune vha vha na zwifhato kha vha vhone uri mabunga a
hone, nahone a khou shuma. Mahayani ri na vhuleme zwikoloni na dzikiliniki
ngauri a hu na mabunga.

Ro zwi vhona musi ri tshi khou dalela mavundu u ya nga u fhambanana hao. Hu
na mihasho minzhi hangei hune nda bva hone, ine arali muthu o ya u toda
thuso, a pfa o farekanea, a tea u tou kondelela u swikela musi a tshi
fhedzi. Zwino kha ri sedze uri hu nga bvelela mini, ngauri hoyo muthu u vha
e kha mutsiko, zwine a si zwavhudi ngomu ha muvhili wa muthu.

Zwifhato zwinwe ri wana uri ndi zwa kale. A si muvhuso hoyu wo zwi itaho;
zwi na minwaha ya 30 u ya kha 40. Zwino muhasho hoyu na muvhuso muswa, kha
vha sokou zwi vusuludza ngauri a hu na zwine vha nga ita. Kha ri dovhe ri
sedze uri afha mahayani vhathu vha na ndivho naa ya u vhulunga madi, ngauri
hu na madi ane ra wana a si na mushumo; khamusi a tshi khou sokou elela.
Tsumbo, madi a mvula.

Hezwi ri tshi khou sedza u shayea ha madi, kha ri sedze na u vhulunga o no
shumaho ngauri a ri thusa kha u sheledza ngade dzashu. Zwino muhasho kha u
sedze na tsireledzo ya milambo. Kha i kunakiswe. Milambo a si ya u latela
mashika. Tsini ha milambo kha ri vhone na hone ho kuna. Zwinwe ndi zwauri
musi hu tshi vha na midalo, ri wana uri midi ine ya vha tsini na milambo
ire na mabunga a songo teaho, zwi a tanganana, zwa vho fhedza zwi tshi vho
vhangela vhathu malwadze o fhambananaho.

Zwa zwino milambo minzhi i khou tshinyadzwa nga vhadzia vhutali ngauri vha
khou bwa mitavha vha tshi hwala nga matiraka vha tshi ya u rengisa, lune
zwa vho sia mulambo u sa tsha kona u fara madi. Arali muhasho u tshi zwi
kona, kha u ye u tolela milambo ine wa divha uri i tsini na vhathu, uri u
vhone nyimele yayo. Zwa zwino milambo minzhi hangei mahayani yo
tshinyadzwa.

Ndi dovha hafhu nda pfa ndi na fulufhelo kha hoyu muhasho ngauri u na
mbekanyamushumo ine vha khou tshimbila na zwikolo vha tshi gudisa vhaswa
nga ha madi, ine ya vhidzwa u pfi Baswa le Metsi; ngauri holu ndi lwone
lushaka lwa matshelo. Hezwi swi sumbedza uri kha madi zwithu zwi do
tshimbila zwavhudi. Khamusi vha do imisa na hedzi dzi soredzhi dzine dza
shululela madi a mashika milamboni ine madi a hone a shumiswa nga vhathu.

Vhanwe vhane muhasho wa nga fanela u vha sedza ndi avho vhane vha isa
tshumelo ya madi kha vhathu ngauri vhunzhi havho a vha ngo tsha sedza u
isela vhathu madi; fhedzi vho sedza u dipfumisa vhone vhane. Zwino rine sa
muhasho hoyu, ri khou sedza na u tutuwedza uri vhathu vha hashu, kha vha
sedze nyimele ya hunwe na hunwe hune vha vha vhe hone. Ndo livhuwa. Ndi
khou tikedza mugaganyagwama uyu. [Tshifhinga tsho fhela.] [U Vhanda
Zwanda.] (Translation of Tshivenda speech follows.)

[Ms T E LISHIVHA: Thank you, Chairperson, all Ministers and members present
in the National Assembly. Before I make my presentation, I wish to indicate
that what we are doing is to control the damage caused by others.

Let me point out that it is not easy to fix the damage done by others. It
is for this reason that we still have a long way to go in ensuring that
people from the rural areas get water and sanitation as soon as possible.
The previous regime did not have the welfare of the rural residents at
heart. All they did was to make boreholes everywhere, without proper
surveys.

This did not contribute anything good regarding the supply of water. There
are those who declared South Africa their private property. They did
nothing for our rural residents, for they never had any plan for them. It
seems as if they did not know that there were people living in the rural
areas. The new government is doing damage control, so no wonder this is
taking so long.

Let me state that the ANC-led government is capable, as it has supplied
more than 60% of the people with clean water. It is pleasing to note that
the number of people without clean water and sanitation is known. It is
good to work hand in hand. That is why the ANC says, “Together we can make
it”.

Close to 31,9 million people are getting water for free. This department
still has a lot to do regarding the water supply and sanitation in rural
areas. Another thorny issue is when people and wild animals drink from the
same source. Tswera village in Limpopo province is one such example. The
situation there is pathetic. They are drinking filthy and contaminated
water.

In KwaZulu-Natal there is a place where people and wild animals drink from
the same source. This puts their health at risk. All these things are
legacies of the past. I wish to thank the Department of Health for teaching
the people of Tswera to boil the water before drinking it.
Let me repeat that these people do not have access to clean water as they
only have useless boreholes which the previous regime provided. I think the
department should revitalise these boreholes to ensure that people have
access to clean water.

Regional offices must get monthly reports regarding the state of affairs in
the water supply programme. For example, in the Makhado local municipality,
water pumps have either been damaged or stolen by anonymous people. Out of
nineteen boreholes, only four are functional. The other problem is that
these boreholes are not secure.

Let the department also see to it that it supplies clean and healthy water.
In some areas there is brackish water that people also find hard to drink
for fear of the bad effect on their teeth. The department, in conjunction
with the local governments, must ensure that borehole companies are advised
against making boreholes near toilet pits. This is in view of the fact that
many households rely on neighbours with boreholes for water.

Since Asgisa has set aside R370 billion for infrastructural development and
R5,2 billion for water supply, things will get better. We have in Limpopo
the De Hoop dam-building project, an Asgisa initiative that will assist
business people and everyone in the vicinity, especially those in the
Sekhukhune area.

We still have a situation in rural areas where people go to the bushes to
answer the call of nature, as they do not have toilets. We still have to
supply those people with proper toilets. In some cases people are supplied
with poorly built zinc toilets from some of the shops. Such structures are
poor and do not last. Let us restore our people’s dignity by providing them
with good toilets. In some departments in my constituency people do not
have toilets and are forced to wait until they get home to relieve
themselves. This situation puts one’s health at risk.

Some buildings are dilapidated and need to be renovated as they have been
in use for more than thirty years. Let us also assist our people with a way
of saving water to avoid unnecessary water loss.

Used water must be recycled for watering our gardens. The department must
also look after our rivers to ensure that the water and the surrounding
areas are clean. People must refrain from answering the call of nature near
our rivers as this causes some diseases.

There are those who get building sand from the banks of our rivers in order
to sell it privately. This affects our rivers badly in that they cannot
retain water. I think the department should inspect all our rivers to see
in what condition they are. Many river banks are badly damaged.
I have confidence in this department, since they have a Baswa le Metsi
programme aimed at teaching our youth more about water. This will bring
everything to order. Maybe this will also help prevent sewage from spilling
into the rivers, which are our sources of water.

Other people who need to be regulated are those private water suppliers who
concentrate more on self-enrichment than on service delivery. As the
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, we need to motivate people to
work on their particular situations. Thank you. I support this Bill. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chair, a lot has been said about the inheritances of the
past, and surely many of these legacies may not have been pleasant to deal
with, and still pose major challenges to South Africa’s leadership.

When it comes to South Africa’s water storage and conservation systems,
however, it needs to be said that the system that was inherited in 1994
knows no equal in Africa or even in the world and, of course, the efforts
that have been made since then to make these resources accessible to all
should be commended.

It is indeed true that South Africa is a country suffering from a severe
scarcity of water, but the country has done a great deal in the past 70
years to maintain and develop its water resources through the construction
of dams, reservoirs and advanced water- purification systems.

Given the scarcity, the need for water has become one of the most emotional
and even potentially explosive issues in our country’s past. One need only
look at the huge amount of court action that has been instituted in respect
of disputes surrounding water to realise the position in this regard.

Given this background, the FF Plus was shocked by the remarks made by the
hon Minister’s personal adviser, Professor Dennis Goldberg, at a summit in
Gauteng in March this year, stating that white South Africans are the
scapegoats when it comes to the wasting of water. In our view, the remarks
by Professor Goldberg were irresponsible and malicious and they are just
not acceptable, given our history.

We have requested the Minister to clarify this matter but, to date, we have
only received an acknowledgement of receipt. For South Africa to move
forward, we need to leave the stereotyping and senseless remarks, such as
Professor Goldberg’s, outside the national debate. I thank you.

Mr P H K DITSHETELO: Congratulations, Minister. In order to examine the
budget of the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, it is imperative to
bear in mind the policy shifts to decentralise functions and finance to
local governments in order to accommodate capital funds for basic services
to municipalities, under the municipal infrastructure grant. Therefore the
Dwaf will be responsible for compliance with water and sanitation
conditions, ensuring that municipalities maintain focus on ending the water
and sanitation backlog.

As at 1 April 2005, the current backlog in water supply is 3,7 million
people who have no access to any form of water-supply infrastructure, in
addition to the 5,4 million people who have some access but have to be
brought up to a basic level of service.

The water supply target for 2006-07 is for 1,5 million people to be
provided with a basic water supply, that a further 4 million have
infrastructure, and although they do not yet have a formalised free basic
water administrative system in place, that they are getting free water.
This brings the total to 19,2 million of 22,4 million people. The Dwaf
plays a very important role in monitoring water purification and waste-
water treatment works operations, as well as in the facilitation of project
selection. It also trains councillors and officials in water services and
water-demand management. The ACDP will support the Vote. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr J D ARENDSE: Chairperson, South Africa is one of the few countries in
the world that formally recognises having water as a human right. Its
national water and sanitation programme, which is one of the largest
national programmes in Africa, aims to deliver sustainably in terms of this
right. Both the recognition of water as a human right and the development
of the national water and sanitation programme derive from the advent in
1994 of South Africa’s democratic era.

The right to have access to water can be seen to place two interrelated but
distinct obligations on the state. Firstly, it must ensure that all people
have physical access to water. This means that the facilities that give
access to water must be within safe physical reach for everyone, especially
the vulnerable and the marginalised. Concerning the distance of a tap from
home, a uniform standard of a maximum distance of 200m away from any
household has been set and implemented as policy.

Secondly, the state must ensure that all people have economic access to
water. This implies that the cost of accessing water should be pegged at a
level that will ensure that all people are able to gain access to water
without having to forego access to other basic needs. It is a violation of
this right if the state allows people to continue living in terrible and
intolerable conditions without access to water, as provided for under
section 27 of the Constitution. Such conditions are harmful to the health
and wellbeing of individuals.

The success of the national water and sanitation programme was derived from
the political context in which it was developed. The 1994 democratically
elected government had a vision for South African society. This was
encapsulated in an aim of the Reconstruction and Development Programme,
which argued that an improvement in the quality of life of the majority of
South Africans was needed to enable economic growth, and that economic
growth was needed to sustain an improved quality of life.

The aims of the RDP were underpinned by the adoption in 1996 of the new
Constitution, which entrenched the Bill of Rights that included extensive
social, economic and environmental rights. The community water supply and
sanitation programme thus became not just a short-term activity by Dwaf
under the RDP, but an integral element of the nation’s human rights
programme.

In a relatively short period the national capital works programme has
constructed an extremely large number of water-supply schemes designed to
serve about 7 million people. However, it is uncertain whether all the
numbers cited actually benefit, since the user numbers were calculated on
the basis of assumed rather than actual use. Many of the schemes use
comparatively high engineering-driven standards, and these may be difficult
for local authorities to maintain. It is therefore important to ensure that
the schemes remain functional and continue to serve those numbers of
people.

An independent field survey could verify these large achievements and could
generate useful lessons for the local authorities responsible for these
services. The policy of free basic water is a recent innovation in South
Africa. It will take some years to assess whether it is financially viable.
Its viability will largely depend on the country’s ability to generate
sufficient revenue either directly through differential tariffs, or
indirectly through the taxation system and national Budget.

The Constitution mandates local government to receive an equitable share of
the national revenue for delivering basic services, and the present
government is firmly committed to ensuring that this is a reliable source
of income.

Sanitation is a critical area. The cholera epidemic in 2000 provided a huge
stimulus to address the country’s slow rate of progress in sanitation. The
slow progress was partly due to the following factors: firstly, most
communities have always strongly prioritised water supply; secondly, the
absence of a good system for promoting improved sanitation at community
level; and, thirdly, while the system used for water is community-based,
that for sanitation should be household-focused, which previously has not
been the government’s strength.

The Cabinet, however, recognised the importance of this issue and has given
Dwaf the mandate to co-ordinate the work of all other role-players in
sanitation. Dwaf, in turn, has created a dedicated sanitation programme to
undertake this aspect of the work.
All the policies of government mentioned by me thus far, as well as those
mentioned by my ANC colleagues who have addressed this House before me,
were ANC policies first and were developed to create a better life for all.
ANC policy did not just appear from some mysterious place; it emanated,
grew and was sculptured out of struggle, battle, war and ordinary life.
That is something that cannot be denied.

The contract that was developed during the last national elections has a
direct link with the manner in which many of the ordinary citizens of the
country - which of course includes Ministers, Members of this Parliament,
workers, prominent leaders in business and the judiciary - struggled to
free this country.

In case we forget, many of us remained linked to the very first armed
rebellion when, on 10 June 1906, Inkosi Bambatha and his warriors were
cheated into defeat by the colonialists. In case we forget, many of us
still cry in the silence of the night for comrades lost in Sharpeville.
Many of us still mourn those lost in 1976 and the continued student
uprisings deep into the 1980s and the armed revolution that was waged on
the borders and in our neighbouring states.

However, we did not stagnate into war and battle. The ANC initiated and led
the negotiations and took charge of transforming the multiple departments
per sector to create unified departments, and that is not where this ended.
The ANC-led Ministries drove the manner in which policies were fleshed out
into programmes.

The ANC is acutely aware of how important water is for development. That is
why we remain, during this deliberation on Vote 34, rooted in the need to
recognise where our policies emanate from. We treat a budget as a tool
through which funds are appropriately allocated to departments that then
assign them to programmes based on ANC policy.

The ANC in this portfolio committee remains firmly committed to overseeing
that such funds are spent appropriately. We do so by engaging the
department on what, how and why funds were allocated in particular ways. We
further ensure that the department, water boards, local government
structures and other entities report to us so that we can make sure that
all sectors of our developing country receive clean running water and
sanitation services. We do this because we remain the people who struggled.
We remain the cadres of the movement that has been entrusted, through our
contract with the people, to transform this country.

In quoting from an African elegy by the poet Ben Okri, the President of the
ANC stated that to transform our country, we must remember the dead -

   ... the martyrs of the African struggles, who were calling on the living
   not to lose the fire in their souls to bring about change,to avoid
   violence in their continuing struggle, and to continue to sustain the
   hope informed by the knowledge that one day our suffering will turn into
   sweet things, which all humanity would, in the end, consider one of the
   wonders of the earth.


Comrades, we support this budget that we believe stresses the direction
which our past political struggle maps out for us, as its principles and
values are enshrined in the Constitution of this country. They form part of
the fibre of each piece of legislation that we pass in this House. If they
do not, it is the fire in our souls that burns there - through the acts of
struggle of Bambatha, Lembede, Luthuli, Hani, Fischer, Fransch, Slovo,
Tambo and Sisulu - that guides us to actually redraft them.

When we then redraft, we do so following the direction guided by the same
aim - that is to free our people even more, to ensure that they have better
access to something they each take for granted: clean water running out of
a tap into a glass, and a flushing toilet. We have specific targets for
these.

As this Budget Vote 34 and the Dwaf’s strategic plan are aligned to achieve
the eradication of the bucket system in the 2006-07 financial year and to
have clean running water by 2010 in every household, the ANC supports this
Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Madam Chair, hon Minister, the PAC supports the Budget Vote
on the Water Affairs and Forestry department. Obviously, I cannot say much
on this important subject in two minutes. What I can emphasise is that
competition over scarcity of water supplies is bound to be the cause of
both global and regional conflicts in the future.

Water has already caused violent conflicts in some countries like Kenya.
South Africa, with only one third of the region’s population consumes 80%
of the water. This imbalance is amplified when one looks at who is using
more water within the country. The apartheid legacy underlies the fact that
irrigation farmers who represent a very small population in South Africa
use 50% of South Africa’s water.

The building of large dams seems to be one of the major ways to preserve
water. South Africa ranks among the top 13 countries of the world in terms
of building large dams. This is to be encouraged. Countries, like Congo,
which have a large supply of water must be developed so that it’s waters
can benefit the African continent. This is why the Pan-African vision is so
essential for Africa’s prosperity and recovery.

What is clear is that underdeveloped areas of this country need clean water
for drinking and for emerging farmers to be successful, therefore, more
money must be spent on water. Water is an essential commodity of life.
Everything must be done to ensure that it is not in short supply. Water is
equivalent to food security. Skills-related water and forestry are
imperative and urgent. This training must be made available in our
institutions of learning in order to avoid perpetual dependency on foreign
skills. As far as forestry is concerned, I can simply say that there must
be increased forestation, especially in the rural areas so that
environmental damage and soil erosion may be stopped. I thank you. The
country is ours! [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, when we consider the following facts that 71%
of the earth is covered with water; that 72% of the fat-free mass of a
human body is water; and that the quality and quantity of the water we
consume have a dramatic impact on our health, we seriously question the
survival of people. How are many of our people surviving without access to
clean running water and sanitation?

I will compliment the department on their well-diversified plan of action
to deliver. The MF acknowledges that this delivery is dependent upon co-
operative governance between the department, municipalities and the
Department of Provincial and Local Government. However, concern is
expressed when over the last year 63% of municipalities were uncertain
about whether they complied with the drinking-water quality standards.

In the light of this, the MF requested that the intense monitoring,
auditing and support, as convened in the Free State, be extended to all
provinces to improve the quality of service delivery of municipalities and
to address issues that hinder service delivery. In line with the free basic
water programme, much progress has been reported but many still have to be
brought in line with basic levels. As for eliminating the bucket system,
the MF seeks its complete eradication by 2007 with the 23 100 bucket
toilets in informal settlements to be replaced by adequate sanitary
facilities.

Attaining these goals is also dependent on public-private partnership and
capacitating local government. While the National Water Resource Strategy,
NWRS, has been adopted to give municipalities and local government a
strategy in managing water resources, our concern is how many of these are
actually adhering to the NWRS? The MF, in the light of this and to improve
municipal infrastructure to facilitate delivery, believes a greater
awareness of the importance of water and the reality of the South African
situation must be intensely initiated, such as at the National Water Summit
where the hon Minister stated that: “Water is the catalyst for growth and
development and, therefore, is central to all aspects of our lives”.

We need to note the department’s efforts to recruit people at large to
assist them in their plight to deliver to our people ... [Time expired.]
The MF supports the Budget Vote. [Applause.]
Ms M N S MANANA: Madam Deputy Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
hon members, officials of the department, stakeholders, comrades, ladies
and gentlemen, thank you for affording me this opportunity. Allow me also
to take this House back to 1994 when 15,9 million people out of the
population of 39,8 million people did not have access to basic water
supply.

The ANC-led government through its policies realised that water is the
basic necessity for our people. By April 2005, government had provided
clean, safe water to a total of 15 million people, taking into account the
population growth of 1,89% per annum, which amounts to 48,1 million of the
total population. As we acknowledge this great effort of government, we
must also not ignore the challenges that lie ahead.

Water has remained the first priority of the ANC-led government and without
water we can neither cultivate our land, nor can we develop industries in
order to manufacture goods and do proper business. It is the ANC policy to
ensure that people who do not have enough resources should receive free
basic water. We do this so that people who struggle to make ends meet are
supported to have at least some water that they need free.

The President in his state of the nation address of 2006 highlighted the
target to attain water and sanitation provision within the underlying
intention of the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa,
Asgisa. Indeed, this country has a slight backlog in as far as
infrastructure is concerned. In order to calculate the quota of free water
that people are entitled to, we need well-maintained water meters in place.
The department is addressing this through some of the 12 subprogrammes into
which the water resource management programme is organised.

For the purpose of this debate, it is useful to give attention to the
sustainable and equitable supply. Free basic water is supplied through the
subprogrammes of the equitable supply that deals with the policy, planning
and regulatory functions that are required to roll out the ANC policy to
protect the poor and develop them. It is through these subprogrammes that
the reliable and equitable supply of water is implemented to ensure
sustainable economic and social development, including the eradication of
poverty.

The expenditure trend for the subprogrammes on operations for water
resources shows a decrease of 52% between 2005-06 and 2006-07. This is
because the Working for Water Programme has been shifted to the sustainable
supply subprogramme. There is a reason behind the shift that the Department
of Water Affairs and Forestry is making as it moves allocations from one
programme to another. The reason is that while we are debating a budget,
water remains a scarce resource.

Given the policy aimed at eradicating poorly resourced households by
ensuring clean running water by 2010 and proper sanitation services by
2007, the department is being guided to ensure that the funds are shifted
to strategically correct programmes. Even such technical issues have much
to do with the ANC recognition that the budget is the tool for the
continued transformation and development of the previously ignored majority
of our country.

The Working for Water Programme together with the Expanded Public Works
Programme of the Department of Public Works are two examples, in which the
ANC-led government ensures that the lives of our people are made more
sustainable. Despite these backlogs, yet another target is set for 2007 to
supply and provide basic water to 1,5 million people.

In Minister Sonjica’s 2005 budget speech she referred to the national
survey, which reflected that 63% of municipalities could not confirm
whether they comply with the drinking water quality standards. Following
the outbreak of typhoid in Delmas, the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry followed this up with a more detailed survey and the development
of a monthly reporting system.

The department’s regional offices will, thereof, audit this information. In
the cases where drinking water does not meet the standards, the department
will provide the necessary support. A successful programme is already
running in the Free State where this programme of monitoring, auditing and
support has rectified many backlogs and compliance has risen remarkably.

Again, let me take the House back with regards to sanitation services. In
1994, 24 million people out of the population of 39,8 million were without
adequate sanitation services. By April 2005, for the estimated population
of 48,1 million, the backlog is estimated at only 16 million people. The
target of 2007 is to provide 300 000 toilets serving an estimated 1,2
million people. By 2007, the bucket system will be eliminated in the formal
settlements in the country. This amounts to at least 231 000 bucket toilets
that need to be replaced with proper sanitation. The sanitation job
creation programme was officially launched in Limpopo in December last
year.

As required by the Freedom Charter of 1955, I quote:

  The state shall help the peasants with implements, seeds, tractors and
  dams to save the soil and assist tillers.

I wish to reiterate that the ANC has a policy on the creation of jobs for
all who live on the land. We have over time amended some of our policies to
be more realistic so that we can ensure that where there are possibilities
of job creation, programmes are put into place to create jobs for those who
need it.

The forestry sector holds such possibility. In addition to creating more
jobs, it will assist with rural development. In line with these recognised
possibilities, the Dwaf developed the Forest Sector Charter announced by
the Minister Sonjica in 2005. This charter is being further developed. The
Minister has just alluded to it in her budget speech.

Sengigcina, ngithanda ukuhalalisela uNgqongqoshe Sonjica ngokuya kwelinye
ikomidi. Sithi, “Hamba kahle, besisebenza kamnandi nawe”. Angisho
kuNgqongqoshe ongenayo eMnyangweni wezaManzi naMahlathi ukuthi ngethemba
ukuthi sizosebenzisana kahle naye njengoba besisebenzisana noNgqongqoshe
uSonjica. Ngithanda ukusho kusihlalo wethu, uNksz Connie September, ukuthi
ngingomunye ozothatha eminye yemifula yaseMpumalanga ebizwa ngokuthi
iMpuluzi River ngiyenze ibe eyami njengoba ecelile. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Minister Sonjica for joining
the other committee. We say, “Go well, we worked well with you.” Let me say
to the Minister who is joining the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry, we hope that we are going to work as well with you as we did with
Minister Sonjica. Chairperson, Miss Connie September, I would like to say
that I am one of those who is going to take one of the rivers in Mpumalanga
called Mpumuzi River and make it mine as she requested.]

The ANC supports this budget. [Applause.]
Mr S SIMMONS: Voorsitter, ek wens graag die agb Minister geluk met haar
aanstelling as Minister van Minerale en Energie. [Chairperson, I wish to
congratulate the hon Minister on her appointment as Minister of Minerals
and Energy.]

I rise in support of the Budget Vote for Water Affairs and Forestry. It is
no secret that water is the oil of the 21st Century. It is the resource
that is set to become the scarcest, yet water is the one resource needed to
service all life on earth.

The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry has received international
acclaim for its efforts to reduce enormous water and sanitation backlogs
inherited after 1994. But all of these efforts will be meaningless in the
long run if the existing infrastructure is not properly operated and
maintained.

Research has shown that insufficient attention is being given by the
majority of water service authorities and municipalities, to manage the
infrastructure. In addition, many authorities have built up backlogs due to
years of neglect in respect of maintenance, refurbishment, renewal and
replacement. This has serious consequences for the health of communities,
as well as for the environment.

An example of this is the self-assessment survey undertaken last year of
local and metropolitan municipalities, of which only 37% indicated they
were compliant with drinking water quality regulations. Of this amount a
total of 61% perceived the water quality to be good, while 58% stated that
they do regular monitoring and 49% stated that they comply with the
national drinking water standards.

Dwaf conducted a nationwide sanitation sustainability audit in 2004-05, to
ascertain the functionality of sanitation projects completed during 1994-
2003. The survey revealed that up to 28% of household sanitation facilities
have failed or are in the process of failing.

Only 53% of municipalities have adequate operations and maintenance
capacity. A total of 78% of municipalities have no operations and
maintenance plan for VIPs and 66% of municipalities indicated that they did
not have a sanitation health and hygiene education programme. In 2003,
1 544 departmental schemes valued at        R9,95 billion were surveyed and
are being transferred to local governance.

Although the vast majority of the schemes were working, some needed
rehabilitation, 40% because of normal ageing, 19% due to vandalism and 18%
because normal maintenance had not been done. I am glad to hear from the
Hon Minister that the Cabinet has approved the establishment of an
infrastructure agency to assist municipalities and water service agencies
with the problem of managing the infrastructure. I thank you.
Mev D VAN DER WALT: Voorsitter, Minister en kollegas, metsi ke bophelo.
[Water is lewe.] Bowenal het water nie kleur nie. Dit is kleurloos en tog
is dit vroeër vanjaar deur ’n professor in die departement in ’n
rasverwante uitspraak gebruik toe hy bekendgemaak het dat wittes die
grootste vermorsers van water is. Hoe laag wil ’n mens daal om in ’n strewe
na ’n nie-rassige Suid-Afrika water, ‘n  lewensnoodsaaklike bron, in ’n
raskwessie te verander! Ek is egter van mening dat die grootste vermorsing
deur lekkende krane en stukkende pype veroorsaak word.

Die doelwitte om teen 2008 toegang tot lopende water en teen 2010 basiese
sanitasiegeriewe aan almal te voorsien, en teen 2010 alle
emmertoiletstelsels af te skaf, is steeds die department se prioriteite, en
alhoewel erkenning gegee kan word aan die Minister, sommige amptenare en
lede van die portefeuljekomitee wat vasbeslote is om die doelwitte te
bereik, is daar gedurig probleme wat opduik wat die haalbaarheid van die
doelwitte verhinder.

Afgesien van faktore buite ons beheer soos droogtes en klimaatveranderings,
lê die grootste probleem by die onvermoë van munisipaliteite om eerstens
hul begrotings te prioritiseer en dan die finansies reg te bestuur; die
onvermoë om byvoorbeeld die billikheids- sowel as die munisipale
infrastruktuurtoekennings korrek aan te wend; en natuurlik die totale
onvermoë van projekbestuur om enige projek tot by voltooiing suksesvol af
te handel, wat natuurlik die gevolg is van die oorhaastige transformasie
van personeel waar aanstellings gedoen is weens politieke dienstigheid in
plaas daarvan dat die nodige meriete ook erkenning gekry het.

Die instandhouding van die huidige infrastruktuur bestaan in meeste areas
byna glad nie meer nie. Die verwaarlosing hiervan gaan uiteindelik miljarde
rande kos indien dit ooit weer ’n prioriteit sal wees. Die infrastruktuur
in vele landelike gebiede is van uiters swak kwaliteit en is ’n klap in die
gesig van die verbruikers aan wie dit moet voorsien en wat daarvoor moet
betaal.

Natuurlik is die Minister van Provinsiale en Plaaslike Regering hiervoor
verantwoordelik. Dit op sigself spreek boekdele. Aan die agb Mufamadi wil
ek in sy afwesigheid sê, water en sanitasie is nie ’n “second-hand
business” nie! U speel met die lewens van mense”.

Die DA stel voor dat daar ernstig gekyk word na beter samewerking tussen
die twee departemente en ander rolspelers om die doelwitte soos uiteengesit
te bereik.

Die wanbetaling vir dienste gelewer moet ernstig aangespreek word. Dit het
’n geweldige negatiewe impak op die uitbreiding van dienslewering na ander
areas.

Dit was ontstellend om tydens ’n voorlegging aan die komitee op 22 Maart
2006 van Lepelle Northern Water te hoor dat die kredietkontrolemaatreëls
deur die ANC-distriksburgemeester in Mopani, Limpopo opsygeskuif is omdat
dit vir die ANC tydens die verkiesing nadelig sou wees. Dit het bygedra dat
die Ba-Phalaborwa-munisipaliteit se uitstaande skuld aan Lepelle Northern
Water R90 miljoen beloop.

Dit is egter nie die enigste waterraad met probleme nie; daar is verskeie.
Onlangs het ek u, Minister, gevra wat die toekoms van die Bushbuckridge-
waterraad is. Ek moet sê, die Bushbuckridge-waterraad is ’n voorbeeld van
uiters swak finansiële en tegniese bestuur.

Onlangs verskyn ’n berig in verband met die Umzimvubu-skema wat geruime tyd
terug reeds goedgekeur is. Wat is die werklike besonderhede hiervan? Dit is
een van die grootste riviere in Suid-Afrika en tans loop al die water in
die see – meer as dié van die Oranje- en amper soveel soos dié van die
Tugelarivier.

Dit blyk dat hidroëlektrisiteit van bykans 1 200MW hieruit opgewek kan
word. Die grond hier is uiters geskik vir besproeiing en kan vir die
verbouing van verskeie produkte aangewend word, onder andere ook vir
sojabone wat verwerk kan word tot nuwe-generasie brandstof.

Dit is onaanvaarbaar dat juis die area wat bykans die helfte van ons
hoëpotensiaal grond beslaan, onbenut lê in ’n area waar die meeste van die
land se armes woon.

Oor Bosbou, wat tans die mees afgeskeepte eenheid in die departement is,
het die DA groot kommer. Hoekom is daar aantygings dat die tenderproses van
losmaat dennesaaghout van Komatiland in Mpumalanga en Limpopo nie
deursigtig is nie? Hoekom word inligting op navraag oor wie die suksesvolle
tenderaars was en teen watter pryse die tenders toegeken is ná die
afhandeling van die tenderproses weerhou?

Hoekom word klein en/of private saagmeulens in plattelandse gebiede, wat
voldoen aan die voorgeskrewe bemagtigingsvereistes, en wat werkgeleenthede
aan plaaslike gemeenskappe voorsien, benadeel, soos beweer word, tot
voordeel van groot internasionale konglomerate soos Global Forest Products,
’n Kanadese maatskappy?

Die prosesse het die onaanvaarbare gevolg dat honderde mense werkloos
gelaat word. Gaan die departement die verantwoordelikheid hiervoor neem of
word die blaam maar net weer eens op die eienaars van die saagmeulens
geplaas?

My tyd is om en ek sluit af. Ek bedank graag die Minister vir haar leiding
en voorbeeld wat sy gestel het, en wens haar sterkte toe in haar nuwe
portefeulje, en ek hoop die nuwe Minister in hierdie portefeulje gaan haar
voorbeeld volg om die span bymekaar te hou en regtig hard te werk. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mrs D VAN DER WALT: Hon Chairperson, Minister and colleagues, metsi ke
bophelo [Water is life.] Above all, water is not colour. It is colourless
and yet it was used by a professor in the department earlier this year in a
race-related statement when he announced that whites wasted more water than
anyone else. How low does one want to sink, in striving for a nonracial
South Africa, to turn water, an essential source of life, into a racial
issue! However, I am of the opinion that the greatest wastage is caused by
leaking taps and broken pipes.

The goals of providing everyone with running water by 2008 and with basic
sanitation facilities by 2010, and of having all bucket toilet systems
abolished by 2010, remain the department’s priorities; and although
recognition can be given to the Minister, certain officials and members of
the portfolio committee who are determined to achieve these goals, problems
are forever occurring that hinder the feasibility of achieving the goals.

Apart from factors beyond our control such as droughts and climatic
changes, the greatest problem lies in the inability of municipalities
firstly to prioritise their budgets and then to manage their finances
correctly; the inability, for example, to make the correct use of the
equitable share as well as the municipal infrastructure grants; and of
course the total inability of project management to complete any project
successfully which is of course the result of the too hasty transformation
of staff, where appointments were made on the basis of political expediency
instead of giving recognition also to the necessary merits.

The maintenance of the present infrastructure has become almost non-
existent in most areas. This neglect will eventually cost billions of rands
should maintenance ever become a priority again. The infrastructure in many
rural areas is of a very poor quality and is an insult to the consumers to
whom it must be provided and who have to pay for it.

Of course the Minister for Provincial and Local Government is responsible
for this. That in itself says a lot. To the hon Mufamadi I want to say in
his absence, water and sanitation are not a “second-hand business”! You are
playing with the lives of people.

The DA proposes that serious consideration should be given to better co-
operation between the two departments and other role-players in order to
achieve the goals as set out.

The nonpayment for services delivered should be seriously addressed. This
has a tremendously negative impact on the extension of service delivery to
other areas.

During a submission to the committee on 22 March 2006 it was alarming to
hear from Lepelle Northern Water that the credit control measures were set
aside by the ANC district mayor in Mopani, Limpopo, because that would have
been detrimental to the ANC during the election. This contributed to the
fact that the Ba-Phalaborwa municipality’s outstanding debt to Lepelle
Northern Water amounts to R90 million.

However, this is not the only water board with problems; there are many.
Recently I asked you, Minister, what the future of the Bushbuckridge water
board was. I must say, the Bushbuckridge water board is an example of very
poor financial and technical management.

Recently an article appeared in connection with the Umzimvubu scheme which
was approved a while ago. What are the actual details of this? It is one of
the largest rivers in South Africa and at present all it’s water is running
into the sea – more than that of the Orange River and almost as much as
that of the Tugela River.

It appears that hydro-electricity of almost 1 200MW can be generated from
this. The soil here is extremely suitable for irrigation and can be
utilised for the cultivation of various products, inter alia, soya beans
that can be processed into new-generation fuel. It is unacceptable that the
very area which comprises almost half of our high-potential land should lie
fallow in an area where most of the country’s poorest people live.

The DA is very concerned about Forestry, which is at present the most
neglected unit in the department. Why are there allegations that the tender
process of the pine saw-timber of Komatiland in Mpumalanga and Limpopo is
not transparent? Why is information that is requested about who the
successful tenderers were and at what prices the tenders were granted being
withheld after the completion of the tender process?

Why are small and/or private sawmills in rural areas, which meet the
prescribed empowerment requirements and which provide job opportunities to
local communities, being disadvantaged, according to allegations, to the
advantage of large international conglomerates such as Global Forest
Products, a Canadian company?

The processes have the unacceptable result of leaving hundreds of people
unemployed. Is the department going to accept the responsibility for this
or are the owners of the sawmills just being blamed again? My time has
almost expired and I want to conclude.

I would like to thank the Minister for her guidance and the example she has
set, and I wish her all the best in her new portfolio, and I hope that the
new Minister in this portfolio will follow her example by keeping the team
together and really working hard. Thank you.]

Mrs M S MAINE: Chairperson ... agbare Van der Walt, ek moet sê, ek het nie
gedink jy sal so onverantwoordelik wees om sulke dinge te sê soos wat jy
hier gesê het nie. Dit klink of jy net oor transformasie gepraat het. Jy is
teen transformasie en dit het niks te doen met vandag se werk nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[ ... hon Van der Walt, I must say that I did not think you would be so
irresponsible as to say the things you have said here. It sounds as if you
talked only about transformation. You are against transformation and it has
nothing to do with today’s work.]

The department, as members have noted, is unafraid of confronting and
addressing challenges, hon Van der Walt. The department has taken on these
challenges and shown its commitment to locate all of its programmes within
a development framework. It has taken the responsibility, difficult as it
is, of grounding all its work within a political, social and economic
framework of South Africa. In all of the work, the department has been
underpinned by the tenets of the Constitution, the RDP, the ANC manifesto
and all major programmes and policies of South Africa.

With regard to the state of the nation address, an example of a renewed
effort is the manner in which Dwaf has focused its work within the evolving
shape of global developments. In response to the hon Sibuyana, the role of
traditional leaders, culture and respect for diverse groups in South Africa
and inclusivity, which is strongly entrenched in the Constitution, are some
of the founding principles of the Constitution.

However, the department, in working is unafraid of dealing with issues such
as sustainable development, capacity of local government to deliver
services, water and HIV/Aids, race and gender and its impact on the
citizens’ access to water.

With regard to water allocation reform, inclusivity, a member of UDM, does
not only mean for the citizens of South Africa, but also means ensuring
shared water resources between South Africa and the rest of Africa.

Hon Minister Sonjica, we thank you for your leadership. While the
Constitution underpins rights to water explicitly, and to sanitation
implicitly, other mechanisms have been used by the ANC-led government to
give urgency to improving the lives of South African citizens.

Prior to 1994, statistics on access to water and sanitation for the
majority of black people was not given importance. There was no single
national department responsible for water supply and sanitation in South
Africa.

Responsibility was fragmented and allocated to local governments in the
previous four provinces, and to ten nominally autonomous homelands,
resulting in very different levels of service. Most of the then white local
governments offered standards equal to those in industrialised countries.
In the rural areas there were often no services, while in urban black areas
the situation was mixed.

Both urban and rural services for black people were often in a state of
disrepair. This situation was exacerbated by the absence of any coherent
national policies, guidelines or support structures. The Department of
Water Affairs and Forestry focused on water resources and forestry
management.

In 1994, the ANC-led government made Dwaf responsible for ensuring that
South Africans had equitable access to water supply and sanitation. To this
end, Dwaf initiated programmes and projects to fast-track services to the
disadvantaged populace of South Africa.

The ANC-led government has, by April 2005, provided clean, safe water to a
total of 15 million people. In transforming departments, the ANC policy
documents, its manifesto and the state of the nation address placed
emphasis on all citizens’ rights to safe water.

To this end, the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry began
systematically focusing on effective tools to give effect to the right to
water of all citizens. This has entailed shifts in the department, but more
specifically, this has ensured that mechanisms, strategic plans and budgets
are in place to meet government targets for attaining access to safe water
for all citizens.

Quality of water is an important component of the department’s work. The
programme, Water Resource Management, also places focus on water quality,
and an approach is used to systematically monitor and ensure quality of
water.

In line with the ANC-led government’s commitment to reach targets of clean,
safe water and sanitation for all citizens, I, Makatse Sophia Morule-Maine,
as part of my oversight functions and responsibilities to the citizens of
South Africa, hereby undertake to adopt a river, called Kolong in the North
West to ensure that I carry out my duties to the citizens by monitoring,
evaluating and complying with my oversight functions as an elected
representative. [Applause.]

The emphasis on water quality management in South Africa is a crucial
component of its social, economic and political history. Water quality
management needs sound and institutional mechanisms to ensure that citizens
receive the right to safe water, as enshrined in the Constitution.

While water quality is changed and affected by both natural processes and
human activities it was necessary, after 1994, for the new government to
ensure equitable access for all in the country to quality water.

Linked to the policy reforms to ensure equitable access and quality water,
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry also had to ensure that it
prioritised a budget for water quality management, incorporating
scientific, technical and human considerations.

South Africa historically focused on controlling the natural water system
in order to address the lack of water for agricultural and industrial
development. However, after 1994, and with South Africa becoming a
signatory to a number of international environmental conventions, there was
recognition for sound water governance and a need to reform water policies
and water institutions in order to implement sustainable water development.

There was a realisation that there was a need to manage water quality. Some
of the effects of polluted water, summarised below, necessitated the urgent
focus on water quality. The impact on human health, on the aquatic
ecosystem, and on various sectors of the economy, including agriculture,
industry and recreation, can be disastrous. Deteriorating water quality
leads to increased treatment costs of potable and industrially processed
water, and decreased agricultural yields due to increased salinity of
irrigation water.

Being the public trustee of the nation’s water resources, the Minister of
Water Affairs and Forestry and the her department, have to manage South
Africa’s water resources to ensure continued adequate water supplies of
acceptable quality to all recognised users.

The ANC-led government has promulgated a number of water environmental
policies and the legislation to manage its scarce water resources. These
policies require excellent water quality information to report on the state
of the nation’s water resources.

In becoming a signatory to a number of international environmental
conventions, South Africa began a process to reform policies in order to
implement sustainable water development.

Modulasetilo fa o tsena mo lebenkeleng la ditlhako ... [Chairperson, when
you enter a shoe shop ...]

... and buy yourself a pair of takkies, you must never expect that you will
change those takkies into Florsham shoes. [Laughter.] As much polish as you
may buy and use, the takkies will remain takkies. Some people are like
that. You can do whatever, and change Ministers, as our new Minister will
realise, you can try to change them, but they don’t change. You may cook
them with a stone, and the stone will get soft and you will eat it, they
will remain as they are. [Laughter.]

You may use all the meat tenderisers that you have, they don’t change. You
see, instead of takkies changing into a shoe, they would rather smell, and
when smell, they come here and talk “vrot”[rot], and that is part of
democracy. If it was not for democracy, we could have chosen Florsham
shoes, instead of being given takkies. [Laughter.] The ANC supports the
Budget Vote.

The MINISTER OF WATER AFFAIRS AND FORESTRY: Chairperson, I want to say
thank you very much to all the participants. Although I am tempted to
respond to all the issues, it’s very difficult and it’s just not possible
for one to do that in detail within eight minutes. But I would really
encourage members to pursue some of these things through questions. It
would really help because a lot is happening in the department and we may
have answers for everything that has been raised here. It’s all work in
progress but it is very difficult to put it together and present it during
the time allocated to us for budget debates.

I want to respond to a few things. Firstly, I want to congratulate Ms
Semple. You are very courageous to adopt the Jukskei in particular,
especially given the problems of the Jukskei. [Applause.] But on behalf of
the Minister - I know she will appreciate this – I want to extend a hand of
support to you. Whenever you need support from the department, they will be
happy to assist you.

I also have to follow your good example and adopt a river around Humansdorp
– I see Lesley is smiling. The Seekoei River is the river that I am
adopting. [Applause.] I think this is the spirit that we need in these
campaigns regarding this very important commodity. We need the spirit of
working together as South Africans.

I do not think that it will be necessary for me to respond on behalf of
Prof Goldberg. I think he said that in a particular context and,
fortunately, he also belongs in that community. So if he is pointing a
finger at somebody else, he is also part of that community. But we really
want to deracialise the debate on water. The racialisation and
politicisation of this debate has happened over time in this country and we
are busy deracialising it. So we will encourage all South Africans to unite
around the water conservation campaign and the water quality campaign, and
so on.

If there is a problem around water, we have a toll-free number which is:
0800 200 200. If there is a problem or you want to know more about the
quality of water in our country, there is a website that will help you. I
can’t give its name to you now, you will get it at the exhibition. Once
that hon member has the name of the website, he will just click on a button
and get to know what the problem is with water in his local municipality.
He can then tell them that there is a lot of fluoride and ask what they are
doing about it. Such steps would help us to intervene. We are quite serious
about monitoring the quality of water because it is in our interest to
ensure that we improve on what we have in the country, as far as quality is
concerned.

The issue raised by hon Pheko regarding conflict is very important. I think
Africa leads in terms of ensuring that we co-operate around water. We have
the SADC protocol that helps us to co-ordinate all our initiatives. Even on
the continent we have what we call “the river basin organisation system,”
which also helps to bring us together. I can quote the Nile River
Initiative, which brings together 10 countries that co-operate around the
development and the protection of water resources in the Nile River for
mutual benefit of all those countries. This is done to avoid the conflict
that you referred to.

Coming closer to home, we do co-operate with our neighbours. We have
already entered into a number of agreements with a number of countries. We
have signed a memorandum of understanding with Lesotho Highlands Water
Project for the second phase. I was in Namibia last week where we signed
another memorandum of understanding. There is quite a number of them. We
are doing a lot about that.

Regarding the hon Sibuyana, I want to say that we have an agreement between
the department and traditional leaders. We have collaborated with Ingonyama
Trust. The ownership and management of plantations will be handed over to
the communities very soon. So you should be a happy man today.

There was an issue that was raised regarding the transfer of forestry into
private hands. That must be understood in the context of broad-based black
empowerment. But there is an ongoing evaluation of these processes because
a question has arisen as to whether you will be able to pursue broad-based
black empowerment if these assets are in private hands. We are looking at
what would be advantageous for government to be able to implement its own
policies so that, as we transfer things in the context of black economic
empowerment, we will not also frustrate our own processes.

As I said earlier, we are putting together a book, which captures what we
have done between 1994 and 2004. A copy of this book can be found outside
on the exhibition. It is the contribution of the Department of Water
Affairs and Forestry.

I want to take this opportunity to present to you some very important
people who are the international prizewinners of the Stockholm water
competition. They beat 27 countries and we were in Sweden together. They
are from the Free State and they are sitting over there. [Applause.] What
is important is that two of them were in Grade 12, Matric, and they passed
with distinctions. They are presently studying in KwaZulu-Natal because we,
as the department, paid a full bursary for them.

This is an ongoing programme in the department and it is still going to
benefit more children in South Africa. It is all in the context of
contributing to the development of more skills so that we can have the
engineers and technicians that we need in the country.
Lastly, I want to talk about the programme of refurbishing the schemes.
Without wanting to end on a negative note, I just want to say there is a
serious problem of vandalism and theft. We need support from all of you in
this House so that we can ensure that government assets are not vandalised
and are taken care of by all our people. We appeal to you to help us with
this campaign so that we do not do things and at the end of the day find
out that ...

... ayisekho laa nto ubuyenzile. Siyabulela kakhulu ngenkxaso yenu. Amanzi
ngawethu sonke. Phambili ngamanzi! Phambili ngamahlathi! [... it has been a
futile exercise. We thank you very much for your support. Water belongs to
all of us. Forward with water! Forward with forestry!]

Thank you very much. You are all invited to the cocktail party. All of us
will dance a bit, including the hon Mlangeni.

Debate concluded.

Business suspended at 12:30 and resumed at 14:03.

                              Afternoon Sitting


QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY


The SPEAKER: We come to questions addressed to Ministers in the economics
cluster. I wish to remind members that questions will be taken for one hour
today, in accordance with the resolution adopted by the House on 31 March
2006. Members are reminded that they may press the “To Talk” button at
their desks if they wish to ask supplementary questions.

The first question has been put by the hon Blose to the outgoing Minister
of Minerals and Energy.

MINISTERS:

      Establishment of National regional electricity distributor (RED)

3.    Ms H M Blose (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:

      (1)   What progress has been made with establishing a national
          regional electricity distributor (RED);


      (2)   whether there are any challenges in establishing a RED; if so,
          what challenges?                                          N493E

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, hon Speaker. I thank the
hon member for the question. The answer is that, following the Cabinet’s
recommendations on 14 September 2005, my department was tasked to formulate
a model in order to determine the viability and sustainability of a
national regional electricity distributor.

The modelling exercise has been completed, and preliminary indications are
that the national RED is viable, provided certain mitigation strategies are
put in place relating to, amongst other things, the cross-subsidy
framework. The regulator has approved funding arrangements for the cost of
the restructuring process, and mechanisms are in place for the disbursement
of these funds.

Information sessions have been held to keep stakeholders up to date and to
enhance consensus among the stakeholders, for example, the recent Gauteng
electricity summit, where representatives from national and local
government, municipalities, as well as state-owned enterprises, all came
together.

The RED 1, which comprises of the City of Cape Town metro, was the first
distributor to be established, and it’s been operational for just over 10
months. Without having any previous experience, this RED, and its coming
into operation, became a learning area for all of us.

In answer to Question 2, there are indeed several challenges in the
establishment of a RED. I think the biggest challenge facing the
establishment of a RED relates to the voluntary process of the electricity
distribution industry reform that we are embarking on. A transitional
process has been proposed, as envisaged in the energy White Paper, where we
would offer incentives from municipalities to participate in a Metro RED,
or a national RED if appropriate. Thank you.

Ms H M BLOSE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Minister, thank you very
much for your answers, but when are you anticipating coming to brief
Parliament on the recommended proposal of the national RED? Thank you very
much.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: What I didn’t mention is that this was
a mandate of Cabinet on 14 September 2005. Now that the modelling is done,
we have to go back to Cabinet to indicate that our modelling indicates the
viability of the national RED, as well as the funding requirements that
will be required.

There are a few other legislative measures that will follow from there,
because we envisage the formulation of this national RED not to be a once-
off occasion, but to take place in phases. After the Cabinet has approved
the model that we are going to present to Cabinet, then we will obviously
come and brief Parliament on that, as well as bringing the necessary
legislation to Parliament. Thank you.

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, the implementation of the policy regarding
the REDs got stuck after the failed attempt at establishing RED 1 for Cape
Town. It was a failure, as RED 1 was formed only with the Cape Town metro
council, without the surrounding towns in the Western Cape region. They
deliberately did not join RED 1.

The exorbitant and shocking salaries of officials of RED should also
urgently be revisited, and the whole policy relating to RED be
reformulated. The question is, what is the final date for the
implementation of this disastrous policy? Will the municipal councils, in
future, have a choice and not be forced to join the RED? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The
government adopted the policy regarding the REDs and it is being
implemented as adopted. The Cabinet decided that we should form six metro
REDs, and that is going ahead. I will give a report on that. The only
investigation, and the modelling process that was taking place, was to look
at the viability of the national RED.

Investigation indicates that it can be done with some mitigation, in terms
of making sure that the RED is viable; but also making sure that what we
set out to achieve for ourselves is that there is equity in the access to
electricity, and also that the cost and the delivery of electricity to the
people across the provinces is equal. No rich province should provide
electrification more cheaply than a poor province or a poor rural area.
That is the aim and the sustainability question around the national RED,
including the fact that we should make sure that it is financially viable.

I am saying that we will be taking a memo to Cabinet indicating what our
modelling exercise has done. RED 1 was established in time as it was
supposed to be established on 1 July 2005. It is the first project I
launched after I was appointed at the end of June last year. We were very
much on track with that.

RED 1 continues to function as a normal municipal entity of the city of
Cape Town, and our electricity distribution industry, EDI, continues to
provide assistance to RED 1, to finalise the establishment process.

Significant progress has been made with regard to other metros,
particularly Ekurhuleni, Nelson Mandela, Johannesburg, Ethekwini, and
Tshwane, to comply with the necessary requirements in establishing the
REDs. The EDI is also assisting with negotiations, facilitation and
structures, as you can imagine that there is a whole lot of negotiations
and transfer of assets that have to take place.

In line with the presidential deadline that was pronounced in the state of
the nation address, hon Schmidt, it is envisaged that REDs 2, 3 and 4 will
be established this year, and the balance will be done by the end of March
2006. Thank you.
Mr E J LUCAS: Cape Town was the first municipality that established a RED.
We are all looking forward to seeing what’s going to happen there.
Unfortunately we had the problem of the breakdown at Koeberg. Are there any
lessons that can be learned from this whole exercise?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Thank you, hon Speaker. We should not
link the problems that are experienced by the Western Cape to the
establishment of the national RED. I think both the Minister for Public
Enterprises and I have attempted really to explain what the cause of that
problem was. Obviously the problems have indicated problems with our
transmission lines, problems with maintenance of existing resources even
within the city of Cape Town itself.

I don’t think it will be fair to say because RED 1 was launched, it took
over and then we had problems. Those weaknesses have been there, have been
identified, they need to be dealt with. That’s why in moving forward it is
imperative that as we put aside money for electrification in the future, we
also put parallel to that, money for maintenance of infrastructure.

As far as that is concerned, I think those problems were very well
explained to the hon members of this House around Koeberg. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Minister, the ACDP shares the
concerns around the allegations of exorbitant salaries for the first RED.
We would also ask the hon Minister, is it envisaged that the establishment
of RED 2, 3, 4 and the national RED will result in an increase in costs?
Obviously there will be costs of infrastructure, salaries, offices, etc.
Will this result in an increase in the cost of electricity to the consumer?

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: The restructuring of the electricity
distribution industry is aimed at ensuring that the cost to the end user is
not exorbitant. It is ensuring that we do not have different tariffs as far
as electricity for households is concerned.

As far as the exorbitant salaries of RED 1 managers are concerned, it must
be remembered that we are getting experienced managers, who have a certain
standard of service delivery, transferred to RED 1. This has been a
learning process. As we move forward, all those mistakes have to be
corrected in the form of guidelines, in terms of norms and standards. I
said earlier on that this has been one RED that was established and we have
learned a whole lot of things from that, including the issue that you are
raising.

I am hoping that the incoming Minister, who is here, and is really going to
be the implementer of the roll-out of all the REDs, will look into the
issue that you have raised. Thank you.
  Obligations of municipalities regarding hosting of 2010 Soccer World Cup
                                 tournament

21.   Mr T D Lee (DA) asked the Minister of Finance:

      (1)   Whether, in order for municipalities to meet the obligations
            contained in city agreements signed with Fifa regarding the
            hosting of the 2010 Soccer World Cup tournament, any provisions
            of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, Act
            56 of 2003, will be waived with regard to (a) entering into
            contracts with longer term expenditure implications and (b)
            approving tenders outside of the normal supply chain management
            policy of the municipality; if not, how will municipalities be
            able to meet the Fifa requirements; if so, what are the
            relevant details;


      (2)   whether any municipalities have approached him seeking clarity
            on such matters; if not, in respect of which date is this
            information given; if so, (a) which municipalities and (b) what
            was his response;


      (3)   whether he has held discussions with any of his provincial
            counterparts in this regard; if not, why not; if so, what are
            the relevant details?                             N513E

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The position
is that each host city enters into a host city agreement with the local
organising committee, which is that representative body of government, the
sports organisations and some private-sector interests in this country; and
it would be the same in every country. The contracts ensure that there’s a
long-term commitment to entering into the contract and, clearly, the Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Act is applicable.

Now we are pretty sure that the Fifa requirements can be met by any host
city in terms of the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act. So
there shouldn’t really be any need to look at tender issues outside of the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act.

I’ve not received any requests from municipalities to waive the tender
procedures in the Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,
though the City of Cape Town has requested information about their rights
and obligations in terms of the agreement. That has been supplied, but
that’s not the same as a request for a waiver.

In respect of ongoing education, we did this through the provinces on 6
April. A detailed presentation was made available to the provinces by the
Treasury. We also have a deputy director-general responsible for all
matters relating to finances within the local organising committee. The
Deputy Minister of Finance is one of members of the local organising
committee, and he also chairs procurement and finances for the LOC. So, we
maintain an oversight, but at the end of the day we want to empower local
government to take the decisions that impact directly on them. Thank you.

Mr T D LEE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, thank you for the
answer. But, Mr Minister, on a recent visit to Germany by the sports
committee we found that there was a tremendous strain on the finances of
hosting cities, and I’m sure you wouldn’t want cities to overcommit
themselves, thereby creating a financial problem for themselves. What
mechanisms will the department put in place to assist host cities to
resolve problems relating to meeting Fifa’s stringent requirements with
regard to World Cup preparations? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: I want to caution the hon Lee not to equate the
situation in South Africa with what he observed, or was advised, in
Germany. What we have is an intergovernmental fiscal relations system that
will probably stand master, and so whilst there might be exuberance on the
part of local government about the arrangements, I think that we can ensure
moderation thereof.

We were quite firm in our negotiations with Fifa about the exemptions that
they sought. Very importantly for us, we want to ensure that the Local
Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, which is still a young piece
of legislation, will be tested in the fairness of these very tough
negotiations.

In respect of financial commitments, I think that as a national government
we would continue to engage with municipalities to ensure that they are in
a position to be able to deal with requirements, because not all
municipalities volunteer for host city agreements. At the same time, we
won’t take these purely as national obligations.

There has to be a burden-sharing, and I think that then, between ourselves
as national government and host cities, there would be some negotiation
about these issues as well. But I don’t think we can ever afford to see the
hosting of the 2010 World Cup – privileged as we are to be able to host it
- as the end of the road. It must facilitate an improvement in the quality
of life of people, and therefore municipalities must be empowered to be
able to advance. We will assist because some of these are clearly national
obligations, but we can’t carry the full burden. Thank you.


               Issues regarding the pebble bed modular reactor


5.    Mr Y Wang (ANC) asked the Minister for Public Enterprises:

      In view of the pebble bed modular reactor now falling within his area
      of responsibility, (a) what strategic advantages flow from using
      nuclear technology in order to generate energy, (b) what steps have
      been taken to address safety concerns with regard to nuclear energy
      and (c) what measures have been taken or are envisaged to deal with
      nuclear waste disposal?           N495E

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Yes, I believe there are a number of
strategic advantages to nuclear technology, as an energy source. And around
the world today, I think this realisation is becoming increasingly
prevalent with reviews of policy having taken place recently in many major
economies.

The key advantage that has reignited massive interest in this technology,
is its low impact on the environment in the form of no carbohydrate
emissions into the system or the greenhouse gas effect. With changes in
technology, I believe the methodology and technology is as safe as any
other form of generating energy. And in the case of the pebble bed modular
reactor that South Africa is pioneering, there are additional safety
features to the technology that now rank as, what is called, a generation-4
reactor;  there is inherent safety in the process.

Quite clearly, also in relation to fossil fuels on which our energy system
is still heavily dependent and will be for some time, there are a number of
advantages. If we were, for example, to deal with the Western Cape
situation that has just come up to build a new base-load plant, if it were
to be coal fire, it would be a massive exercise of transporting large
quantities of coal over long distances. A nuclear plant would have clear
advantages for a situation such as the one we face in South Africa and the
imbalance of energy sources between north and south.

With changes in technology, the competitiveness of this energy source is
now very competitive indeed.

With regard to safety, this is an area of massive focus and attention in
all nuclear regulatory agencies including South Africa’s National Nuclear
Regulator.

In regard to the management of waste products, the Department of Minerals
and Energy recently released its Radioactive Waste Management Policy and
Strategy. And I believe that, fully set out, we are going in that regard.
With regard to the pebble bed in particular, there are major advantages in
waste management from a pebble bed reactor. Thank you.

Mr Y WANG: With the safety assured, now I can go home and tell my
neighbour’s child that she won’t mutate and become an alien. I hope this is
your way of showing that we are not playing with fire and that our
scientists are in control of technology. As we go further with the project,
how is your office going to ensure that the top skills that we have stay
strategic to our country and also benefit us, especially the new and young
generation? Thank you.
The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I think this is a very interesting
dimension of this project. One of the strategic reasons why government
chose to support the project to the extent we now do, was precisely because
we have nearly 400 technicians and scientists involved in this project. It
is very science-intensive and has very skilled scientists, physicists,
engineers and technicians involved.

For these safety reasons, I have discussed that the standards and
specifications we set for these projects are exceptionally high. We have
entered, with the Ministry of Science and Technology and the Department of
Science and Technology, into a major training programme. Recently we
brought senior officers from the Department of Science and Technology on to
the board of PBMR. This is seen as a coherent package, both the development
of the first plant of the reactor bed and the associated training programme
for our engineers and scientists accompanying it. It is, I believe, a major
opportunity for young South African engineers and scientists to enter a
very, very advanced realm of scientific and technological endeavour.

Mr M STEPHENS: Given the fact that South Africa’s electricity power-
generation capacity is barely adequate at present and that we must reach
the international 15% spare-capacity benchmark by 2009 or 2010, it is
essential that additional generating capacity be created by the most
resource-efficient and environmentally efficient means possible. And
further, given that a great many coal-fired power stations are planned by
Eskom in the near term, as against one pebble bed reactor, can the Minister
inform the House whether any study has been done comparing the long-term
environmental impact of a pebble bed reactor against that of a coal-fired
power generator?

Secondly, if so, what were the results and specifically, where does the
comparative long-term environmental advantage lie? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: There are a number of components to
that statement cum question. Let me start at the back. The comparative
advantages, in the long term, quite clearly relate to the lack of
greenhouse gas emissions and also relate to the question of the volume of
waste matter. If you were to compare the waste matter for a pebble bed to a
coal-fired power station of the same equivalence, you are looking at a
difference of nearly 200 million tons of just pure waste matter for the
life of a station.

Anyone who is familiar with Mpumalanga province will know that,
increasingly, the size of waste of a coal-fired power station is very big.
The size of waste of a nuclear station is very small indeed and of a pebble
bed even smaller. There is the safety factor, which the Radioactive Waste
Management Policy and Strategy deals with. I think the long-term strategic
advantages are manifest and this is why there is such a resurgence of
interest in this technology.

With regard to the studies about competitiveness, yes, obviously we have
done the initial studies. These studies get refined as we go along. The
process we are now involved in is with the customer, Eskom, and PBMR are in
the process of finalising the contractual intention to purchase. We would
then keep refining the studies and quite clearly, at the point that we
build the first plant, we will be much more accurate in our costing.

All the indicative signs at this point, point to the pebble bed coming into
the right cost range for energy round about 2012. And from then on, our
objective is to build 24 modules for the South African system giving us
round about 4 800MW from 2012 on. This also meets our diversification
objective. That is quite a significant contribution to energy from an
environmentally more preferable method than the current stations. Even
though current coal-fired power stations are improving tremendously in
their remission factors with new technology, the long-range advantage of
nuclear energy I think is manifest.

Mr H J BEKKER: I fully agree with the hon Minister that the pebble bed
reactor would probably be the most efficient and competitive source of
energy in the Cape Town region. Similarly, it would indeed be ridiculous to
try and supply the Western Cape and Eastern Cape with coal-fired energy
generation.

The industrial development in the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape to us
is of top priority and as such, all possible alternative sources of energy
must be investigated. Did the hon Minister also look into the possibility
of other sources of energy, particularly gas-fired electricity generation,
in other areas of the Western Cape and the Eastern Cape with particular
reference to the Saldanha and Mosgas areas and in this regard looking at
the gas aspect in terms of future generation? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Let me make a point about the pebble
bed in the context of your question, Western Cape. One of its great
advantages is that the footprint of the reactor and its associated
equipment is small, roughly the size of a football field. This also allows
tremendous flexibility and deployment and I think it will have
exceptionally advantageous consequences for Africa, because you can put
these in without the need for gigantic grids that have to be balanced.

For those of us who did not understand the balancing of a grid before, you
just had to be in Cape Town for the last few months to understand what
“balanced grid” means. It is a very, very technical operation and sometimes
darkness descends if you don’t get it right. The lightening and the bolts
we won’t get into now, we will get into that at another stage.

Yes, we have, of course, examined other methods of generating a wide range.
This is in the main covered by the policy directives of the Department of
Mineral and Energy, but as you know we are currently well into the
construction phase of two open-cycle gas turbine plants, one in Atlantis
and one at Mossel Bay. Both those plants can be converted to liquefied
natural gas plants, LNG, in the future should we begin building such
terminals. Now we are contemplating that it would be something we very
seriously consider, which is LNG terminals, where we could import that.
Should we proceed on those lines, yes, you are correct, the two obvious
sites would be Coega and Saldanha.

But these are still projects in the pipeline; you will have to wait a few
months before we make more detailed announcements on those. We are
definitely exploring a range of options already as we are building the two
open cycle gas turbine plants, and as you know this first of the
independent power producers in the South African system will also be gas-
fired turbine plants.

The SPEAKER: We now come to Question 5, asked by the hon Wang to the
Minister for Public Enterprises. [Interjections.] Have we finished that
one?

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: I want to say more about the pebble
bed modular reactor, so thank you for this opportunity.

The SPEAKER: I am trying to be generous to the hon Wang.

The MINISTER FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you. Not me?

The SPEAKER: We now come to Question 9, asked by Rev Meshoe to the Minister
of Transport.


                   Maintenance of roads and infrastructure


9.    Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Minister of Transport:

      (1)   Whether the problem of the poor maintenance of our roads and
            infrastructure is receiving urgent attention; if not, why not;
            if so, what are the relevant details;


        2) whether there are any time-frames to complete repairs to our
           roads and infrastructure; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           time-frames;


      (3)   whether the Government will co-ordinate the programme; if so,
           how; if not,


      (4)   whether each province will be responsible for its own repairs
           and maintenance; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                   N500E

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: The answer to question one is yes. The hon
member will be aware that funding for road maintenance and infrastructure
maintenance has increased steadily in recent years, and is marked for
further improvement for the duration of the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period.

Road maintenance has also been identified as a key programme of the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. The Department
of Transport is also working very closely with the SA National Roads Agency
Ltd, Sanral, on the development of an action plan to implement this
requirement. The Department of Public Works and the Department of Transport
are also finalising the road sector of the Expanded Public Works Programme
that includes the question of road maintenance and capital works.

The answer to question 2 is that road maintenances is an ongoing process
that requires constant attention. The Department of Transport has not yet
completed its assessment of the impact of the new funding we will have on
the timeframes to deal with these backlogs.

In response to question three, yes, the Department of Transport works very
closely with all provincial transport departments and all relevant
agencies. At the apex, the Minister of Transport co-ordinates initiatives
through the transport Minmecs and the roads co-ordinating body.
In response to question four, yes, provinces are statutorily responsible
for the maintenance of the roads that currently fall under their
jurisdiction. In this regard, provinces will use equitable share
allocations and provincial infrastructure grants to maintain these roads.
In certain cases, Sanral has assumed responsibility for some roads at the
request of provinces.

Rev K R J MESHOE: I appreciate the answer, hon Minister. The executive
director of the SA Road Federation was quoted in today’s newspapers as
having said that the poor state of our national roads is a result of
underfunding of road maintenance. He said that in order to transform our
national road network into an acceptable condition, about R10 billion will
be required over and above existing expenditure.

Does the Minister agree with this estimated amount, and if yes and taking
into consideration that R4,5 billion for road maintenance was recommended
by Asgisa for channelling through the expanded road works programme, I
would like to know whether any provision will be made to allocate an
additional amount of R5,5 billion to the repair and maintenance of our
roads to make up the estimated R10 billion?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Just to touch on the first question, the roads
agency in South Africa is regarded as one of the top in the world. This is
even agreed upon by the Road Federation of the United States of America.
To answer your question directly, I think we are a little bit satisfied
with the allocations for roads in South Africa. If you look at the roads
allocation for the next three years in South Africa amongst the three
spheres of government - national, provincial and the municipalities – they
will be spending about R63 billion on the road sector. Also, at a national
level as well, we are seeing a dramatic increase in the funding allocation
for roads.

We can do with more, but what I am trying to say is that there is a
consciousness within government that the issue of roads is very critical
for the social and economic development of South Africa.

Therefore we will be able to spend this money that is allocated to us, and
as our spending increases, we believe government will give more money for
this road sector.

The SPEAKER: The hon Sparrow? [Laughter.] Hon Farrow.

Mr S B FARROW: Speaker I have been called other things before. Do not worry
about it. Hon Minister, I was going to ask a very similar question and I
have been pre-empted.

In that same report which the executive director of the SA Road Federation
brought up recently in the press, they talked about this R43 billion coming
in for road users in forms of taxation, of which only R13 billion is
reaching the actual road network so to speak.
You mentioned that a lot of the money that has been put through to the
provincial governments, which seem to be handing over more and more roads
to Sanral on the national network, is in conditional grants.

My question to you, hon Minister, is: Is there not a way to start thinking
out this process of having a dedicated fund, which will effectively ensure
that money that is going from your department to the provinces is
conditional to the extent that it is used specifically for the purpose of
road-networking in the provinces? I will leave it there.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: The money that is allocated specifically for
roads is spent on roads. Some of those roads from the provinces have been
transferred to the national level, as they are regarded as being strategic
to the national economy. So we provide funding at a national level, and we
are going to continue doing so.

As I have indicated, with this co-ordinating structure of Minmec, there is
more co-ordination that is being exacted onto the road sector because of
the importance that it plays in the national economy.

So going forward, we believe we are going to see a lot of spending on the
road sector in South Africa, including the private sector, because it is
very clear that there are many competing claims on the national fiscus.
Therefore, as government, we cannot claim to be able to deliver all the
road networks that are required by our economy. So where we are unable to
fund that, we will use public-private partnerships in order to ensure that
we deliver these road services to our people.

Mr J P CRONIN: Rev Meshoe is absolutely right to raise concerns about the
repair and maintenance of our road infrastructure. Minister, you are also
right to underline the very significant increase in budget allocations to
road spending.

I think what we also need to be aware of is that, in our country, there are
two very powerful lobbies in the transport sector. The one lobby group is
the car users; the other is the civil engineering sector.

I think we need to bear in mind that only some 30% of households in South
Africa have access whatsoever to any kind of car. In approaching this
challenge, I think we need to bear that in mind, so that we are not pushed
off our objectives by powerful lobbies, which are in fact often lobbying
minority interests.

How, hon Minister, in approaching the maintenance and repair and
development of road infrastructure, do we also ensure that we build better
roads; roads that are safer for pedestrians and cyclists; roads that access
poor township communities; roads that work better for public transport, and
not just the repairing of the same road system, which has worked very well
for a minority, but actually does not work very well for a large majority
of our people?

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: The hon Cronin will be aware that we are not
only talking about roads in the urban areas. There are also very aggressive
programmes that we are running in the rural areas of South Africa. In
KwaZulu-Natal, for example, there is a very good rural access programme,
which includes maintenance, where African women are the ones who construct
and maintain those roads. There is another programme in Limpopo, the
Gandulashu Road’s Programme.

All these are indicative of the seriousness with which government looks at
the issue of road networks in South Africa, and to empower our people,
especially African women in the rural areas of South Africa. Therefore it
is a balanced approach.

Mr M DIKO: We would like to find out from the Minister of Transport whether
there is any method that is being used by the National Department of
Transport to monitor road maintenance, especially in rural areas?

In most of these areas, the roads are completely dilapidated. When you try
to enquire from the municipalities, you get thrown from the local
municipality to the district municipality. We would like to know whether
there is any advice that you have as to how those communities could
actually make sure that they approach the relevant people to get these
access roads maintained and fixed.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: As I indicated in my earlier answer to the hon
Cronin, we have these National Public Works Programmes that are focused
specifically on roads in the rural areas of South Africa. Also, with the
new Minister of Public Works, we are going to have a tête à tête to discuss
our Expanded Public Works Programme that is going to be reinforcing some of
those programmes like the Zibambele that I have mentioned, which is in
KwaZulu-Natal and in Limpopo. Regarding the other provinces as well, there
are very exciting programmes on roads in Eastern Cape, and in Mpumalanga,
just to mention a few.

I want to ensure the hon Member of Parliament here that the Expanded Public
Works Programme road sector will be there for our communities to ensure
that those rural access roads are maintained so that our people can have
access to markets, recreation facilities, and also to improve the quality
of life of our people.

 Code of conduct for good practice in respect of black economic empowerment
                                    (BEE)

  24. Mr W D Spies (FF) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:


      (1)   Whether his department has conducted bilateral talks with the
            USA’s department of trade before the formulation of the
            concessions for foreign multinational companies in the code of
            conduct for good practice in respect of black economic
            empowerment, BEE; if so, when;


      (2)   whether the USA made specific proposals, which were not accepted
            by his department, to exempt foreign multinational companies
            from the compulsory sale of shares to black companies; if so,
            what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether he is of the opinion that the statement contained in the
            USA’s trade document, that BEE constitutes the main risk to
            foreign companies who want to trade in South Africa, could have
            been avoided by making more concessions to foreign
            multinational companies in the BEE code of conduct for good
            practice; if not why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             N517E

THE SPEAKER: We now come to Question 24 asked by the hon Spies to the
Minister of Trade and Industry. As the Minister of Trade and Industry is
not available, the hon Minister for Minerals and Energy will give the first
answer. Hon Spies has agreed to get that main answer and for us not to have
follow-up questions, as the Minister wouldn’t be able to handle follow-up
questions.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY (for the Minister of Trade and
Industry): Thank you, hon Speaker. The reply to the first question is as
follows: When the Department of Trade and Industry, the DTI, embarked on
the process of drafting the Codes of Good Practice on Triple BEE in 2004,
we realised the importance of providing a special dispensation for those
multinational entities that aren’t going to be able to comply with all the
requirements of triple BEE.

In this regard, we took it upon ourselves to conduct a consultative process
with the parties concerned. To this end, we went through a public
commentary period on the first phase of the codes, and we received written
submissions on how multinational entities should be treated when it comes
to triple BEE compliance, particularly with regard to the issue of equity
ownership.

It was evident that this particular requirement on the scorecard would
prove difficult for some multinationals to comply with. Taking cognisance
of the need to create a business climate that is conducive for foreign
investors, we took into account the concerns that were raised as well as
the suggestions that were made. These submissions did not only come from
the USA constituency, but also from other foreign chambers of commerce.

In December 2005, we released a draft document dealing with the treatment
of multinationals for equity requirement purposes. Again, this document was
open for public comment until the end of March 2006 where all affected
parties were meant to have provided relevant commentary.

During the public commentary period, the Department of Trade and Industry
engaged with various foreign chambers of commerce as well as foreign
embassies on this draft document. Over and above that, we received
extensive commentary from these bodies. Whilst the DTI did not specifically
target bilateral talks with the USA Department of Trade, we believe that
the process of drafting the codes dealing with multinationals has been
sufficiently consultative and did provide an opportunity for all parties
concerned to make their input into it.

The reply to the second question is as follows: The USA trade department
has not made any specific proposals that the Department of Trade and
Industry is aware of. We have however received submissions from the
American Chamber of Commerce in South Africa as well as in the USA, whose
recommendations have been taken into consideration.

As this policy is intended to apply to all multinationals operating in the
South African economy and not only those from the USA, it is imperative
that the DTI listens to all views presented by the different foreign
multinationals. This means that we have to adopt a balanced view based on
the various recommendations that we receive from different interested
parties. These interested parties would necessarily also include South
African companies that are, in one way or another, impacted by the way
foreign multinationals are treated within the context of triple BEE in our
economy.

It is however important to know that nowhere in the policy on broad-based
economic empowerment is it stated that the sale of shares to black
companies is compulsory, both for local entities as well as foreign
multinationals.

Furthermore, the provisions of the code dealing with multinationals provide
alternative methods of complying with the sale of equity requirements
without the actual sale taking place. Government is merely providing
guidance to the economy in terms of targets to be achieved over a specific
period of time in order to attain transformation.

It does not in any way compel anyone to give away equity, other than state
entities that are required to meet the requirements of the policy. However,
the private sector has embraced the guidance provided by government in the
form of the triple BEE policy. The question of whether to comply or not and
what element of the scorecard to comply with has become a business decision
for the private sector.

With regard to the third question, the reply is as follows: The statement
that said BEE constitutes the main risk to foreign companies that want to
trade in South Africa reflects the whole misunderstanding surrounding the
BEE policy and its implications for foreign multinationals, and not
necessarily the lack of concessions made to multinationals.

The triple BEE policy affects all enterprises that are trading in the South
African economy and we believe that it is a risk to the extent that it is
misunderstood, as this can result in the wrong approach towards its
implementation being adopted.

The challenge is for government to ensure effective and efficient
communication to all parties that are affected. A number of the
multinationals that we are engaged with realise that in fact triple BEE is
opportunity and not necessarily a risk. The implementation of triple BEE
does not necessarily have to be something that is done in addition to
normal business operations.

It is a policy that is to be implemented by businesses as part of their
supply value chain. Therefore, while conducting their normal everyday
business, they could also simultaneously ensure that transformation takes
place as part of that normal process. I thank you.


              Impact of establishment of beneficiation industry


7.    Mr S S Vundisa (ANC) asked the Minister of Minerals and Energy:
      What will be the impact of the establishment of the beneficiation
      industry on the economy of the country?      N497E

The SPEAKER: We now come to Question 7 from the hon Vundisa to the Minister
of Minerals and Energy. The Minister is having a hard time indeed.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, let me say that overall
the establishment of the beneficiation industry will have very positive
benefits for the economy of the country.

Beneficiation, as we all know, involves the transformation of raw materials
to a finished higher-value product, using local factors such as labour and
capital. In addition to increasing revenues and employment levels, this
will also contribute to the GDP, and reduce exposure of South Africa’s
produced commodities to the fluctuating world primary commodity prices,
thus building a sustainable and vibrant economy. South Africa, as we all
know, is a world leader in a number of mineral resources as a percentage of
world reserves and production. Thank you.

Mr S S VUNDISA: Somlomo, ndiyabulela. Uyitye yonke. [Thank you, Speaker,
but she has answered all the questions I had in mind.]

The SPEAKER: The member does not have a follow-up question.

Mr H C SCHMIDT: Madam Speaker, the DA is in favour of sensible measures in
respect of beneficiation of minerals. However, the beneficiation industry
is effectively the responsibility of the Department of Trade and Industry.
The beneficiation of metals beyond the smelting process currently conducted
by the mining industry is a macroeconomic issue that requires foreign
direct investment and local investment in the industry and the economy as a
whole.

The question is, and subject to what I have just stated: Which steps have
been taken and initiated by this department, besides initiating legislation
in respect of diamonds and precious metals last year, to facilitate
investment in the beneficiation industry? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF MINERALS AND ENERGY: Madam Speaker, when hon Schmidt is the
head of some government somewhere, he will take that decision on
beneficiation. At the moment it is led by the Department of Minerals and
Energy.

Having said that, and the member being a very active member of this
portfolio committee, great strides were made last year when we passed two
pieces of legislation that will ensure that our mineral resources, diamonds
and precious metals are beneficiated at home. We went about restructuring
the institutions that are responsible for trading in diamonds in
particular, as well as setting up a joint body for both precious metals.
And really the aim of all that is to ensure that we do not continuously
export our raw materials, creating jobs in other countries, exporting
skills and expertise, as well as exporting investment.

What steps have we taken? We are working very closely with the Department
of Trade and Industry, amongst others, and Mintek, to see what incentives
can be put in place for more beneficiation to take place here at home.

Besides the legislation we are working with the stakeholders. There are
three groups of platinum producers in the country and they have sat in a
workshop with us looking at the strategy to make sure that beneficiation of
platinum happens at home. We must not forget that beneficiation of raw
materials happens in stages. Some of it takes place here at home, but the
majority of our resources are exported without any value addition.

So there are several of those, including identifying hubs where we are
going to see beneficiation of diamonds as well as other materials taking
place. We will, in due course, come back to Parliament to indicate this is
what we want Parliament to support in addition to the incentives.

But I must say that since our legislation was passed, there is a lot of
interest from foreign investors who are coming here saying, previously
their major problem and the reason factories closed down, was the fact that
they could not get access to the raw material, not only diamonds, but
several other raw materials, because of long-term contracts to which the
producers thereof had bound themselves. We are currently ensuring that
through regulation and other ways more value-add happens here at home.
Thank you.


                  Extension of closing date for land claims


2.    Dr S E M Pheko (PAC) asked the Minister for Agriculture and Land
      Affairs:

      Whether the Government will amend section 25(7) of the Constitution to
      extend the closing date of 31 December 1998 for land claims; if not,
      why not; if so, how soon?               N414E

The SPEAKER: We now come to Question 2 from the hon Pheko to the Minister
for Agriculture and Land Affairs, that is the outgoing Minister.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
Speaker. As the hon Pheko would recall from the Land Summit last year, the
matter did arise from a number of constituencies, even though it didn’t
come up as a need for the amendment of the Constitution.

There was a call made by the majority of stakeholders, some of whom were
part of the betterment schemes like in Middledrift in the Eastern Cape, who
felt that there was not enough time given to people to claim their land;
others didn’t hear the call; others also felt that betterment schemes were
not provided for in the land claims process and that therefore some people
fell off.

Indeed, our response as government in that summit was that, in our own
view, there wouldn’t be a necessity to open up the end date of claims -
which was on 31 December 1998 - because our view was that there were other
mechanisms to address the issue of land inequity in our country in terms of
our land redistribution programme and tenure reform.

Therefore our view was that if we were going to open up the land claims
process, there were two things – there may be others – which we were of the
view would create problems. One of these is the fiscal burden in terms of
the state paying compensation; while another is the uncertainty that would
arise when you opened up and people did not know for how +long and when the
matter would be finally concluded.

We also felt that our intention for land reform was actually based on
addressing the issues of land inequity in our country more than financial
compensation, but financial compensation was made in law as an award to
cater for those cases in which it was difficult to restore the land.

Therefore the answer to the question is - I’m sorry I had to give this long
background, but I thought it was necessary to give the context – we do
indeed still feel the same way as a government: that currently, the issues
of land need can be addressed by the land redistribution programme as well
as by land tenure legislation. We don’t think it would be advisable to
amend the Constitution in order to deal with this matter, because the very
nature of the land reform programmes, particularly that of land
redistribution, seeks to address these concerns. Thank you.

Dr S E M PHEKO: I thank you, Minister. Maybe this is to say goodbye to you
and then, of course, congratulate you on the new post.

We don’t think that the position of not amending the Constitution will
resolve the land question in this country. I’m sure the Minister and the
government are aware that if only land can be claimed after what was left
after June 1913 – what was left after the Native Land Act of 1913 - that
absolutely nothing was left.

There really has been no logic as to why, in the first place, we should say
land must be claimed after 1913. There was nothing left.
Communities come to us and ask whether they can claim land before 1913
because they were dispossessed in 1913, and apparently there is nothing we
can say, but they would like that land be claimed before 1913.

The date of 31 December has also created problems because many people did
not know that they could claim land. I don’t want to go into the question
of willing seller, willing buyer, which really has also failed after 12
years. Then we hear that there is going to be expropriation.

Now, does the Minister think that when we expropriate land from 1913, we’ll
achieve any results, because there is nothing to expropriate? I think that
this nation must sit down, the government too. I am saying these things not
out of malice. The land question is an explosive thing, and it has to be
handled in time so that it does not get out of control. We know today it’s
very cold ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, you now have had two minutes and I haven’t heard a
question. [Laughter.]

Dr S E M PHEKO: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Thank you very much, hon
member Pheko, and hon Speaker. Just to deal with the issue of
expropriation, clearly, hon Pheko, you would know that as government we
have committed ourselves to expropriating in the public interest. That is
in the Constitution, section 25, as you rightly put it in your question.

We have also agreed that in order to ensure that we can effect
expropriation even for land redistribution, we will have to amend the
Expropriation Act of 1975, which lies in Public Works, the portfolio I will
be holding now.

So between ourselves and Land Affairs, we will have to fast-track that
legislation, because what we have now is expropriation catered for in the
restitution Act, but you still have to use the principal Act to effect that
expropriation.

Our view is that expropriation in the public interest will actually assist
us to move more quickly the process where negotiations have failed.
Secondly, with regard to the issue of 1913 as a deadline, hon Pheko, you
know that this is a matter that was negotiated amongst parties during the
negotiation period. Indeed, there might not have been consensus, but the
majority had their day and wisdom to come to that deadline of 1913.

Again, I would like to take hon members to the Land summit last year. When
we raised the issue of 1913 as a cut-off date and asked members of the
summit who were calling for moving the deadline beyond 1913, the question
was: When do you start? Do you start in 1652? Do you start in 1820? What do
you do with the Mfecane in the process? What do you do with some of the
negotiations and deals amongst communities when they either fought on the
side of the Afrikaner or on the side of the British at some stage? Where do
you end?

That is why we all agreed that it was maybe wisdom from those who were
negotiators to come up with the cut-off date of 1913, rather than going
before that because you will have counterclaims over counterclaims not just
in terms of racial dispossession but also amongst tribes. [Time expired.]

Adv S P HOLOMISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We can only agree with Mr Pheko
that there will be no lasting peace in the country as long as there are
inequities in land ownership. We can also agree with the Minister that in
addition to the restitution of land claims rights, there is restitution of
land rights claims in that there is a provision in the law for those who do
not qualify to make application for more land in terms of the other
programmes.

Now, what I would like to know from the Minister is whether she knows the
number of people who have been excluded because they couldn’t qualify in
terms of the Act, and whether those people have been given any assistance
in terms of the other programmes. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker and hon member
Holomisa, indeed the quantum of how many people were affected we do not
have as yet, because time and again when you meet with particularly those
who were affected by the betterment scheme in the Eastern Cape, you get the
number today, but tomorrow they tell you that they are going on with the
campaign and they are getting more people, so we don’t really have the
exact number.

There is the Gauteng committee that has also been mobilising people around
Gauteng who were left out of the claims. Again, the numbers are fluid; we
don’t have the exact number. We have had meetings with both groupings and
indicated the alternatives that are there. But I must say to this House
that in terms of the majority in the urban areas, what we have found has
not been a willingness to get land as restoration but rather to get
financial compensation.

In the case of the Middledrift group and others who were affected by a
betterment scheme, there are proposals that we are working on with that
committee which looks at land for development if it were possible for the
state to assist. But they would still want to have 50% of whatever
compensation that could have been due to them to come in financial form;
but, as I said, this is a matter on which we are engaging with the
committee.

Mr A H NEL: Thank you, Chair. May I say at the beginning, Minister, that we
are sorry to see you go, but wish you everything of the best in your new
portfolio. In relation to the hon Pheko’s original question and your answer
to him, we know that that is your view and we are supportive of it.
My question is whether your view on this issue is also that of the Cabinet
and, if so, whether you will inform your successor of this, because, as you
know, she likes to shoot from the hip. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I didn’t hear the bit of
what the view is. Could the hon Nel ...

Mnr A H NEL: Ja, dis omdat die Minister van Finansies met u gepraat het!
[Mr A H NEL: Yes, it is because the Minister of Finance was talking to
you!]

Minister, we are supportive of your view on this issue. But my question is:
Will you please inform the new Minister – the incoming Minister – as she
likes to shoot from the hip? [Laughter.]

THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: I don’t think that that’s a
good goodbye, hon Nel.

The SPEAKER: The question is whether you will inform the new Minister. I
think the rest can be ignored. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND LAND AFFAIRS: Well, the new Minister is
aware of the view that I’ve just expressed, because indeed it was Cabinet
that took the decision about the cut-off date.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES
   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

      The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Speaker, I move:

    That the report be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly noted.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 20 – Correctional Services:

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi! Ewe!
[Yes! Let the name of women be praised!]

Chairperson, hon members, senior management and staff of the Department of
Correctional Services, those on this side, those on that side, and those on
the gallery over there, Ministers in the House and colleagues in the House
...

... Bantu basekhaya abamamele besemakhaya, abasezidolophini, abasezilalini,
abasezibhedlele, nabasezintolongweni – baninzi ke bendike ndeva umntwana
ekhala phaya phezulu Ngumzukulwana wam wasentolongweni ke lowa ebekhala
phaya. Nabaya bebaninzi. Molweni! Molo! Ninjani? (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[To our people who are listening from home, to those in the cities, in
rural areas, in hospitals, and to those who are in prisons - there are many
of them ... I did hear a child crying up there in the gallery. That is my
grandchild from prison who was crying. There they are in their numbers.
Greetings! How are you?]

Colleagues, partners and the public viewing the speech on big screens in
all our correctional centres and in all our regions around the country, I
know they are listening to this speech today. [Interjections.] What about
you yourselves? I have addressed you as colleagues.

Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, a word of welcome first to our
special guest. We have a special guest, Bongiwe Ronoti, from Immaculata
High School in Wynberg, who will be working with us today and tomorrow as
part of our contribution to the “Take a Girl Child to Work” campaign.

Nankuya ehleli phaya. Molo, Bongiwe! [There she is, sitting right there.
Hallo Bongiwe!]
She is a Grade 10 student at Immaculata High School in Wynberg. I must also
acknowledge the former Deputy Minister of Correctional Services ...

... uMama uCheryl Gillwald. Nankuya phezulu. [... hon Cheryl Gillwald.
There she is up there.]

She is over there. Thanks, Cheryl, for coming to support us. [Applause.]

The dawn of freedom in South Africa in 1994 ushered in a new beginning in
the lives of the majority of our people. It ushered in a life of hope, high
expectations, excitement and enthusiasm for the previously oppressed, while
for some of the privileged minority it also ushered in a life of fear,
discontent, disenchantment and loss of hope, because the ascendance to
power by the African majority to some signalled the worst.

We have now just entered the second decade of our democracy and freedom,
during which time, despite the challenges that still confront us, the
overwhelming majority of South Africans, black and white, have witnessed
significant changes in the quality of their lives and are full of hope and
expectations about the future. The local government elections held in March
this year have demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt that the majority
of South Africans have confidence in the leadership of their vanguard
movement, the ANC.
Therefore, as we celebrate the 10th anniversary of our Constitution and the
50th anniversary of the women’s march, and as we also commemorate the 30th
anniversary of the 1976 student uprisings and the Bambata Centenary, let us
reflect on the successes we have achieved and the challenges we are facing
in fulfilling the wishes for which these martyrs and other veterans of our
struggle and wars of resistance died.

It is now exactly two years and three days since I joined the Department of
Correctional Services. I must say it seems like 20 years that I’ve been in
this department. I also must say that it has been a richly rewarding
experience because it has afforded me the opportunity to test and implement
the noble intentions of our visionary founding documents, the Freedom
Charter and the Constitution of the Republic.

As I stand here today, having gained insights into the challenges of our
correctional system, I am more convinced than ever before that our
forebears were correct when, 51 years ago, they declared in the Freedom
Charter that “Imprisonment shall be only for serious crimes against the
people and shall aim at re-education, not vengeance.”

Similarly, as we celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Constitution of
South Africa, I am proud to say that our country has systematically ensured
that the pervasive principles of equality before the law and access to
basic human rights also incorporate inmates, who in many societies,
including the advanced democracies, are among the most vulnerable members
of society. If indeed it is true that one of the real tests of the
democratic values of any country is the manner in which it treats its most
vulnerable members, then we are making very good progress.

The management of the department and I believe, however, that it would be
grossly patronising and irresponsible to talk about the importance of human
rights without emphasising the need to balance them with responsibilities.
This, we believe, is the essence of the correctional system: to treat
inmates with dignity while at the same time providing them with life skills
and inculcating a sense of responsibility that would make them realise the
folly of their ways and commit themselves to becoming responsible members
of society upon their release.

My submission to this House today will attempt to demonstrate how,
notwithstanding operational constraints, we shall continue to strive for
this balance through, inter alia, the amendment of the Correctional
Services Act, Act 111 of 1998, the implementation of the government
programme of action, the implementation of new and existing policies,
efficient management of the 2006-07 budget and compliance with internal
control measures in our day-to-day activities.

As we have stated previously, the delivery of correctional services is a
mammoth task that requires the mobilisation of the biggest pool of social
partners imaginable. It gives me great pleasure to announce that some of
those partners that we work with in Correctional Services are with us
today. They include Judge Seraj Desai, who is on the gallery together with
his wife, and who is the chairperson of the National Council on
Correctional Services. There is also Judge Hannes Fagan, the head of the
Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons. I do not see him anywhere; he might still
be coming.

There are also colleagues from the NGO sector who work with us,
departmental officials, inmates and colleagues from the Shuttleworth
Foundation. I think they are sitting over there – just wave! They are the
colleagues from the Shuttleworth Foundation, who have generously agreed to
partner us in the development of information technology skilling among
inmates.

Thanks to the support of the Shuttleworth Foundation, the eradication of
the boundaries and barriers created as a result of the digital divide will
soon become a thing of the past at correctional centres, as we embark on a
drastic digital and IT skills revolution for offenders. We need to skill
them as well. This IT revolution will usher in a new era in the learning
and education programmes of offenders with the establishment of computer-
based learning centres in all our centres of excellence.

Tomorrow, Wednesday, 24 May, I will be launching the first phase of this IT
skills revolution pilot project for offenders, at Pollsmoor Prison. The
launch of these Open Source Learning Centres will result in the
introduction of e-learning options to offenders and their general
capacitation in IT and computer skills. The second phase of this pilot
project will be announced in due course.

It is with deep sadness that we note that, as we are building partnerships
for corrections, we have in the past three weeks alone lost some of our
most dedicated cadres in the late Minister Stella Sigcau and Siyabulela
Mtutu Mlombile, our former regional commissioner for Gauteng.

Siyabulela passed away after a long illness and was laid to rest in Qumbu
in the Eastern Cape on 13 May. Siyabulela, a former cadre of uMkhonto
weSizwe and committed cadre of Correctional Services, dedicated his life to
the transformation of both correctional and intelligence services in South
Africa. He was a selfless individual who made a profound impact on the
successes of the department. Siyabulela is of one of the martyrs and unsung
heroes of our struggle who sacrificed his life for democracy. Today we are
celebrating his life as we reflect on these successes, to which he
contributed so much.

His heroism and the values for which he fought, lived and died will always
be cherished as we pick up his spear and soldier on to build a new
correctional system in the country of his dreams and that of many others
who have traversed this road to pave the way for our freedom and
development. We say to him, rest in peace, as we did last Saturday.

Indeed, through great efforts of many committed past and present cadres of
our country, the Correctional Services of today is no longer that of
yesterday. I want to repeat that: the Correctional Services of today is no
longer the Correctional Services of yesterday. [Interjections.] It is a
real pity, you are quite right. We should have locked you up first, before
you say “what a pity”.
We have advanced, and continue to progressively advance, the transformation
and development of the country’s correctional system, with unprecedented
levels of collaboration with various role-players and the public. We had
said Correctional Services was like a huge ship sailing in rocky and murky
waters. It was indeed a ship floating with no compass, Oom Ben Skosana, but
I am delighted to say that years of sweat are paying dividends as we are
now steering and guiding this huge ship in the right direction and out of
the danger zone; and you were one of the people who managed to assist us in
doing that. But I will come back to something, Oom Ben.

Today we can indeed say that our ship is turning, is clear in its direction
and is avoiding major dangers along these rocky coastlines. However,
steering a correctional services ship in any part of the world has inherent
“ice bergs” that continue to pose dangers, even to the most well-built and
well-resourced ship, and those challenges emanate from the sheer nature of
human beings in a given society, as the system is just a microcosm of
society. There are huge “ice bergs”, hon Seaton, when you steer this kind
of ship. Make sure you get around them. If you bump into them is jy in die
pekel. [You will be in trouble.]

I am proud to say we are through the rapids, with clear achievements in the
long and arduous journey we have travelled that give us renewed energy when
facing the yet-to-be-traversed new hills, valleys, rivers and mountains, as
we march to one of the best correctional systems in the world that will
deliver with absolute commitment to integrity and excellence. We can indeed
identify with the President’s intervention that we are in an “age of hope”.

Without the history that informed the perceptions of ordinary citizens and
shaped their minds about Correctional Services in the past and in the
present, we perhaps may not have been able to appreciate this “age of
hope”. In the past, in the minds of many of our people the mere mention of
the word “prison” was undoubtedly associated with a dark dungeon run by
arrogant and corrupt black warders and verkrampte boere, whose job was to
“fix” “unrepentant murderers” and “savage rapists” from the townships.

Those perceptions are changing now, as reflected by both our public
perceptions survey commissioned by us in collaboration with the Government
Communications and Information System, as well as the Markinor public
perceptions survey. Our research found that public perceptions are largely
more positive about Correctional Services, especially among those who had
come into contact with the new department over the past few years. We
strongly believe also that Correctional Services contributed fairly to the
growing public confidence in the criminal justice system that has marked
sustained improvements over the past three years.

Again, I am making a call to members of this House, members of the NCOP and
members of the public in general to visit correctional centres. It is only
when you visit those areas that you can have a clear understanding. Merely
to say “I was a former detainee” is not going to help, because we don’t
have any political detainees at the moment. We have people who have wronged
society. So go and visit them, then you can have a feeling for what we are
talking about.

We are therefore saying together we have to erase completely that tainted
past from the minds of our people and replace it with new experiences and
knowledge that empowers them to be victors, champions and drivers of
transformation, instead of victims, losers and passive followers of efforts
to make South Africa a safer, secure and better place for all our people.
This is a chapter we have introduced during the first decade of freedom and
we have intensified this over the past three to four years of Correctional
Services delivery.

This is a chapter where people began to internalise our purpose and to
assist in contributing to maintaining and protecting a just, peaceful and
safe society by: firstly, enforcing sentences of the courts in the manner
prescribed by the Act; secondly, detaining all offenders in safe custody
whilst ensuring their human dignity; and thirdly, promoting the social
responsibility and human development of all offenders and persons subject
to community corrections.

The enthusiasm and confidence that our people are beginning to display
towards Correctional Services was evident during the government Imbizo in
KwaZulu–Natal from 7 to 13 March 2006. Here we came across many former
offenders with qualifications that they obtained whilst serving in our
correctional centres; as well as student interns who wanted to become
correctional officers so that they could set an example of how
rehabilitation and experience in correctional centres had changed their
lives for the better.

A classic example of this is that of the 28-year-old Siyabonga Zulu of
KwaNongoma in the Natal Midlands ... Umamele Gatyeni? [Are you listening,
Gatyeni?] ... who served as a student intern at Ncome, and is today a BA
graduate in correctional studies. Siyabonga has pleaded with the Department
of Correctional Services to help him find a job as an officer at any
correctional centre, and we are determined, as this department, to assist
him as we are trying to assist others as well. [Applause.]

This is a new generation of prisoners: offenders who are willing to
contribute to the transformation of prisons into correctional centres from
former universities of crime into universities of information, skilling and
knowledge accumulation.

This is a drastic contrast to the substantial but dwindling number of
hardened criminals who want to make prisons their “universities of crime”.

We are, however, cognisant of the fact that not all offenders can be
rehabilitated, and it is for this reason that we profile and categorise
offenders, so that we are able to determine who has the capacity and
potential to be rehabilitated or not. Whilst we wholeheartedly care for
inmates, we also show no mercy to hardened criminals.

Bakhona abo ezitolongweni zethu ... [We have those in our prison ...] ...
who don’t want to change, who just refuse to change. Those are the ones who
take some of our members hostage, and I have given orders that those are
the ones that we do not negotiate with. If they take my members hostage,
they phone the Minister, and within five minutes I give an order to use
maximum force. End of story! [Applause.]

I am fed up with that. Phone the Minister and tell the Minister, ``He or
she is holding us hostage.’’ We will use maximum force to them you stop
that nonsense. So, we are quite clear about that.

It is against this backdrop that we have introduced a strategy that
advances a philosophy that every correctional official becomes a
rehabilitator, and every offender a rehabilitated inmate. That is the call
that we are making to our inmates.

Naba bahleli apha, nabamamele kuzo zonke zi ndawo. [Those who are sitting
here, and those who are listening from everywhere.]

They should strive to become rehabilitated. We are giving them a second
chance in life.

This is a new beginning in the history of correctional services in South
Africa, which has earned us admiration and accolades from many of our
counterparts around the world, and from the continent. Tata uSkosana, you
contributed to that. You did. [Applause.] The person before you did not. I
am very clear about that. Your predecessor did not. [Interjections.]

Yayi nguMzimela owayevela kwi-Nkatha Freedom party. [It was Mzimela from
the IFP.]

We can say confidently that we are celebrating an age of hope. What are
these highlights that we are celebrating?

We borrowed from our first President and officials, stakeholders and
partners in the delivery of corrections indeed seized the ``time to define
for ourselves what we want to make of our shared destiny’’ in spite of our
numerous challenges. There are numerous challenges in this department, but
some people ...

... Bacinga ukuba... [... think that ...]

... think it is a piece of cake.

During the policy pronouncements phase that was led by the President’s
state of the nation address, government announced a programme of action for
building the criminal justice system so that greater confidence exuded from
members of the public, on whom we rely for partnerships against crime.

On most of those targets we have delivered; in some instances, it was
beyond our expectations. In giving highlights of the financial year that
was, the following cannot be omitted: We launched 36 centres of excellence
in all correctional service regions as landing strips for the
implementation of the ideals enunciated in the White Paper. We have also
adopted a national curriculum programme that is paying dividends for us. We
have also done a lot of work in the Durban-Westville Correctional Centre,
which has had a 100% matriculation pass rate. Based on that, my department
is in the process of registering all its current youth centres as full-time
schools.

We have also employed over 3 000 entry-level personnel to phase out the
implementation of what we used to have, overtime pay. Right now, we are
busy with professionals, trying to employ them. These are professionals
such as social workers.

Regarding the filling of critical vacancies, we are in the process of doing
that. It’s not easy, because it cuts across departments. It’s not only our
decision on that. We have settled a long-standing labour dispute, Tata
uGomomo, in a manner that affirms the department as an essential service
institution.

On 25 and 26 May, from Thursday, we have what we call a Minister’s labour
consultative forum, which was established to engage unions beyond the basic
bread-and-butter issues. We have expanded and institutionalised public
participation through the appointment of chairpersons of 52 correctional
supervision parole boards, and we have begun the process, as well, of
establishing the National Council for Correctional Services under the
leadership of Judge Desai, who is sitting up there.

We have looked at the management of special remission, which was one of the
best in the country, and we have made savings from that. Although the rate
of re-offending was very low, we remained extremely concerned about some
serious crimes committed by some offenders who benefited from that. They
will face the full might of the law.

We have now established a parole review board, which will review parole
decisions made by those community parole boards, so that there is some work
being done every day.

My Deputy Minister will address the issue of awaiting-trial prisoners,
particularly children, when she speaks. The partnership with Social
Development and Education is reaching new heights. My Deputy Minister,
again, will address those issues in her budget speech.

We have increased security in our correctional centres to make sure that
there are no escapes as have happened, and that there are no hostage-
takings. We do acknowledge that a lot more needs to be done, as smuggling
and collusion with offenders still continue. I want to give a message to
the public: When you go and visit them, assist us to assist them. Assist
us, as the department, to assist them. Don’t bring them things that they
should not have. Don’t smuggle things in. Help us to help them as well.

The issue of HIV/Aids in our correctional centres will be addressed
extensively by my deputy. All I can say about all these things is that we
are very serious in saying that there will be no offender who does not get
health care. All offenders will be looked after. We do have intervention
methods when there are problems.

For 2006-07, the issue that is uppermost in our minds is halving
overcrowding in our prisons. We can do this in many ways. One of them is to
make sure that the cluster works together to deal with awaiting-trial
detainees. The Cabinet lekgotla has expressed itself on that, and we have
to come back with a report. A task team has been put together, led by my
department, to come back and report to the Cabinet lekgotla on how we are
going to deal with awaiting-trial detainees.

The building of institutional capacity for the implementation of the White
Paper is an ongoing process within my department. We are engaging a number
of stakeholders. We have recruited new recruits again. This is an
additional 2 600 above the 3 000 that we have already recruited.

We are intensifying our campaign to harness organisational culture for
effective implementation of the White Paper. We have done quite a lot of
good work with community organisations, in partnership with them, to make
sure that our work is understood by the public at large.
As a result of our engagement with faith-based communities, nongovernmental
organisations, the councils of Churches, Colesa and the National Institute
for Crime Prevention and the Reintegration of Offenders, all of them are
working with us to make sure that our work is successful.

Very soon the department will be commencing with a very intensive community
outreach campaign, which is called Operation Masibambisane, ``Let’s help
each other to make this work as a community’’. We will interact with
provincial government structures, with municipalities, civics, and
traditional structures. I must say, with regard to the work that we have
done through imbizos, that one of our imbizos was attended by King
Zwelithini. Traditional leaders are very, very central to the work that we
do. So, we do really offer a hand to them to say that they must work with
us please.

On the issue of infrastructure development, there are new centres, which
are being built now. The first were four prisons, which resulted in such a
hullabaloo in the media. I would like to assure this august House that the
construction of those new-generation centres that was announced by the
President during Minister Skosana’s time will be built. Those prisons are
underway. One of them, Leeukop, will be completed a bit later but the other
three are underway.

The President announced another four, which will be built this year. With
regard to the first four, the multiplicity of departments working on that
made life very, very difficult. Those are the prisons I call ``Skosana’s
prisons’’. Right now, I am busy with Skosana’s prisons and Balfour’s
prisons. [Interjections.] Of the four Skosana prisons, three will be done,
and the one will be late. The four Balfour one’s will be done. Polokwane is
a little bit late, but it will get there.

So, to actually go and make a hullabaloo about absolutely nothing -
absolutely nothing - must come to an end. It must come to and end. It has
to come to an end. We can’t be expending our energies on something that’s
not going to help us to move things forward. So, with the energy that you
have, hon Seaton, help me to help the department to move things forward.

Mr A MLANGENI: On a point of order, Chair.

Ndifuna ukuqonda ukuba kutheni uMphathiswa equmbe kangaka namhlanje. [I
want to know why the Minister is so cross today.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Ntate Mlangeni is asking why I am
cross. I am not cross, Ntate Mlangeni. I am not. I don’t get cross very
easily. I am thick-skinned sometimes, very thick-skinned, but there are
times when some things get under my skin.

I am not angry at all. I am just putting things as they should be put.
Things are going as well as they should be going.

The last thing is that I want to thank all those who work with us. I want
to thank the commissioner who is leading this department, along with all
the CDCs, the area commissioners, the management that works with us, but
also, I want to thank the staff members who look after those offenders, day
in and day out. Thank you to the guys out there, wherever you are. Your
Minister applauds you for the work that you do. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

I know that you say to me, time and again, to look at the police. They are
getting more money in terms of their salaries.

Ndixolele ukuphuma iliso ndisilwela into yokuba nani imivuzo yenu inyuswe
ngoba nisebenza nzima. Ndixole ukuphuma iliso, ndisilwela loo nto. [I will
fight until the bitter end so that you can also get a salary increase,
because you work very hard. I am prepared to suffer in order to achieve
that.]

Please keep up the good work.

To the offenders, ... sincedeni sinincedise. [... help us to help you.]

Don’t do things ... eziza kubangela ukuba singakwazi ukunincedisa. [...
that will make it impossible for us to help you.] That’s the plea I am
making. To the families: help us.

Ngabantwana benu aba, asingobam. UNgconde akanaye nomnye ngalomzuzu
osetolongweni. Kwaye akasoze aphinde abenaye nangoku sele etshatile ngoba
mdala uNgconde asoze aphinde abe nomnye umntwana. Asoze aphinde abe naye
uMkwayi banele aba anabo. [These are your children, not mine. Ngconde
neither has a child who is in prison right now, nor will he ever have
another one. Although he is married, Mkwayi is too old to have more
children. Those that he has are enough.]

All I am saying is ...

Sincediseni bantu bakuthi. Xa niye kubabona ngemigqibelo naphakathi evekini
baphatheleni ukutya, icuba, nayo yonke into, kodwa ningabaphatheli imipu,
iimela, okanye intsangu ngoba siza kubamba nina sisifake kunye nabo. [You,
our people, should help us. When you go and pay them visits on Saturdays
and during the week, take them food, cigarettes, and other things, but not
guns, knives or dagga, because we are going to arrest you and put you in
prison with them.]
That is the message.

Kodwa eli sebe libheka phambili Tat’uSkhosana ... [Because this department
is moving forward, hon Skhosana ...]

People are beginning to notice that this department is really moving
forward. To the portfolio committee led by uTata uBloem, thank you very
much, Comrade Bloem. The members of the portfolio committee, starting from
the study group of the ANC, are the people who are my backbone.

I also thank my colleagues; because whenever I am crying, I phone my
colleagues and say, ``I don’t know what’s going on here.’’

I want to thank everybody, from my former Deputy up there to my current
Deputy down here. Thank you very much for the support that you are giving.
Let’s take this department forward. We should never go backwards.
[Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Die Minister is baie warm vandag. Ek is nie warm nie. Ek is
nie warm nie; ek is baie koel. Ntate Mlangeni het gevra waarom is die
Minister kwaad? Ek weet nie. Ek sal dit later beantwoord. [The Minister is
very hot under the collar today. I am not hot under the collar. I am not
hot under the collar; I am very cool. Ntate Mlangeni asked why the Minister
was angry. I do not know. I shall answer that question later on.]

Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister, Members of Parliament, Commissioner
Mti, regional commissioners, top management of the department, Judge Fagan,
Judge Desai and his wife, Ms Cheryl Gillwald, ladies and gentlemen and the
inmates and our staff.   [Interjections.]

Wag net so ’n bietjie, ek gaan nou by jou kom. Later. [Just wait a minute,
I am coming to you shortly. Later.]

The Freedom Charter adopted at the Congress of the People in Kliptown on 26
June 1955 says:


  No one shall be imprisoned, deported or restricted without a fair trial.
  No one shall be condemned by the order of any government official.
  Imprisonment shall only be for serious crimes against the people and shall
  aim at re-education and not vengeance.


Chairperson, let me from the outset say that the ANC will support the
Budget Vote before the House today. We will continue to monitor the
effectiveness of the department in realising its mandate. The department
faces a number of challenges and one of these challenges is to provide
adequate accommodation to prisoners. In an effort to address this problem,
it was agreed that four new prisons accommodating 12 000 prisoners be
built. The committee was also informed that a further four prisons,
accommodating 12 000 prisoners will be built. In total, this will then
provide additional accommodation for 24 000 prisoners.

This will not be a solution to overcrowding. The department informs us that
they are considering taking the project finance model. This will allow the
operations to be excluded, as the department stays accountable for
operations, although it may be contracted out. The department will rent
these facilities for a period of 15 years. At the moment South Africa has
two private operated prisons.

It is common knowledge that the committee and the department are not
satisfied with the financial implications of the contracts governing these
two prisons. The budget for these two prisons alone this financial year is
R599 million. The committee did express discomfort with the construction of
these seven new prisons. We say that the department must come back to the
committee and brief us fully on the comparative cost implications in both
the short and long term. We support the decision by the department to
review the contracts of the existing public prisons.

We also believe that these prisons may be better utilised for juvenile and
minimum offenders. I have noted a serious involvement of the private sector
in the department; for instance, the provisioning of food in at least seven
of the larger prisons has been privatised.

Human resource recruitment functions have also been subcontracted to the
private sector. The level of proposed private sector involvement also
raises concerns about skills and capacity development within the
department. If private sector involvement is an admission of lack of skills
and capacity, then it is a challenge for the department to develop these
skills in its own ranks.

The committee raised the issue of staff morale with the department. Last
year the committee visited a number of prisons and had meetings with staff
in all these prisons. The main concerns raised by our staff were about
promotions. It remains a very big problem. I want to welcome the recent
promotion of officials. At all these prisons that we visited, we found men
and women, loyal, dedicated and determined to serve their department and
their country; men and women who want to see that our correctional services
are being counted amongst the best in the world. If you listen to the
problems that these people raise, it is not a joke. A person works in a
department for 20 years without any promotion to a higher level. Can we
really expect this person to be positive? I don’t think it is correct.

I will fail in my duty once more if I did not raise the painful issue of
salaries in this debate. We feel that all people must be treated equally.
Should the department need the committee’s support in this regard, we will
always be ready to assist. All of us in this House know that the most
dangerous criminals, rapists, murderers, bank robbers will be sent to one
of our prisons.  I am asking again: Who will take care of these dangerous
criminals? The answer is obvious, that it will be these loyal, dedicated
men and women in uniform. We expect them to rehabilitate these offenders.
Is it fair of us to pay them the salaries that they are presently earning?
No, it is not fair. I will strongly recommend to the Minister that we must
improve the salaries of these people. Every minute, every hour, and every
day their lives are in danger.

Let me address the issue that the Minister raised about people who take our
members hostage. I have said in Zonderwater that we will never ever
tolerate that type of thing. People out there think that we are soft on
crime and that prisons are hotels. It is not true. I have said that we must
also look at the privileges of prisoners. We can’t treat these people as if
nothing has happened. We must take some of the privileges away from them so
that they feel that we are serious in addressing these problems of the
perception that prisons are hotels. We are going to look into the Act this
year, at the regulations as a portfolio committee, together with the
department, to address that. People that rape our mothers and fathers must
really think twice about doing it again. They must know that C-Max is
there. Kokstad is there. They will really face harsh treatment.

Ek wil gebruik maak van hierdie geleentheid om, namens die komitee, regter
Johannes Fagan te bedank. Die regter het aangekondig dat hy nou gaan
uittree en die leisels aan ’n jonger persoon gaan oorgee. Regter, ons sê
baie dankie vir wat u vir hierdie land gedoen het. [Applous.] U het
geskiedenis gemaak om die euwel van oorbevolking in ons tronke aan almal
bekend te maak. Almal weet hoe vol ons tronke is. Baie, baie dankie, regter
Fagan.

Mnr Lee, laat ek na jou toe kom, want jy krap aan my en krap aan my en krap
aan my. [Gelag.] Jy moet saam met my tronk toe gaan. Ons gaan jou net in
een van die selle in C-Max sit. Jy sal nie weer so aangaan nie. Net ’n
rukkie in een van die selle in Kokstad en jy sal koelkop daar uitkom en nie
weer hierdie soort dinge kwytraak nie. Ek het netnou gehoor jy sê dat jy in
Duitsland was. Jy moet vir die ANC dankie sê wat gesorg het dat jy ook
Duitsland toe kon gaan. [Gelag.]

Jy was nog nooit uit die land uit toe ons nie in die regering was nie. Jy
het soos ’n kuiken hier binne die land rondgehardloop. Dit is hoekom die
mense jou nou betaal met spreekbeurte en als. Die ANC is die organisasie
wat gesorg het dat jy vandag ook kan praat en langs ’n wit man kan sit. Jy
het nooit langs ’n wit man gesit nie. [Tyd verstreke.][Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to make use of this opportunity to thank Judge Johannes Fagan
on behalf of the committee. The judge has announced that he is going to
retire now, and will be handing over his responsibilities to a younger
person. Judge, we say thank you very much for what you have done for this
country. [Applause.] You made history by making known to all of us the
scourge of overcrowding in our prisons. Everyone knows how full our prisons
are. Thank you very, very much, Judge Fagan.

Mr Lee, let me come to you, because you are bothering and bothering and
bothering me. [Laughter.] You must go to prison with me. We are simply
going to put you in one of the cells in C-Max. You will not put up such a
performance again. Just a little while in one of the cells in Kokstad and
you will return level-headed and not do this kind of thing again. I heard
you saying just now that you were in Germany. You must say thank you to the
ANC who saw to it that you could also go to Germany. [Laughter.]

You never once left the country while we were not in power. You ran around
like a chicken in this country. That is why people are now paying you with
turns to speak and so on. The ANC is the organisation which ensured that
you can also speak today and can sit next to a white man. You had never sat
next to a white man before. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr J SELFE: Chairperson, it was nice to hear the Minister again today. In
his ordinary style, he talked about the ship of the department – this huge
ship that had to navigate around icebergs and through shallows. I recollect
that last year it was a “moerse” [very big] truck that he was driving.
[Laughter.]

He also talked about the Skosana prisons and the Balfour prisons. It’s no
wonder that the Minister sometimes gets confused about which department he
is in charge of. But it is also nice to have had the opportunity to welcome
Cheryl Gillwald. She and I came to Parliament together and we were in the
old Senate. One day I think we will probably find out why the hon Deputy
Minister really left the department and public life.

Over the past few years, the Department of Correctional Services has
reorientated itself away from incarceration for its own sake towards the
rehabilitation of offenders. The department boasts an organisation-wide
approach to rehabilitation in which every correctional official is seen as
a rehabilitator. In line with this, the Cabinet approved the White Paper on
Corrections, which gives expression to this particular orientation.

The Department has made some progress towards such reorientation, but much
more needs to be done. There is not enough professional staff to properly
assess offenders and provide rehabilitative services. Thus a social worker
will typically have a caseload of over 700 clients while that of a
psychologist is much higher.

Many volunteers and organisations, commendably, provide a wide variety of
educational and rehabilitative programmes. But at the heart of it, there
are simply not enough people or room in the correctional centres to offer
the sort of rehabilitative services that need to be provided. This is
because the prisons are too full. They are bursting at the seams.

The correctional centres in or near our major urban areas – Pollsmoor,
Durban-Westville and Johannesburg, accommodate about three times as many
inmates as they were designed to. Just about every other correctional
facility is overcrowded to a lesser or greater extent. This presents a huge
challenge to the department because, under these circumstances, it is
impossible to implement the White Paper effectively.

To understand this challenge, it is important to know where the department
fits into the criminal justice system. The SA Police Service, with greater
or lesser success, investigates crimes and arrests criminals. The justice
department, with greater or lesser success, prosecutes the alleged
perpetrators of crime.

The Department of Correctional Services receives those criminals whom the
police arrest or the judges and magistrates convict and sentence to
imprisonment. No success is required or expected. The Department of
Correctional Services must try to accommodate, feed and rehabilitate
everybody they get, even if there is no space or staff or sufficient
resources to do so. The Department of Correctional Services is, if you
like, the garbage bin of the criminal justice system.

Because of this overcrowding, inmates are seldom successfully
rehabilitated. The staff are overworked, demotivated and underpaid, as the
hon Bloem said. The rate of reoffending is depressingly high. It is a fact
that overcrowding leads to stress and aggressive behaviour on the part of
inmates. This, in turn, leads to the staff being stressed. It is therefore
hardly surprising that the stress levels of the Department of Correctional
Services staff are the highest in the public sector – higher than that of
police officers, members of the SANDF and firemen.

There are many members of the department – too many to mention individually
– who struggle against all odds to make a difference, despite the
circumstances in which they have to work. And we take our hats off to those
individuals. One individual does need to be recognised albeit posthumously.
We too, would like to pay tribute to the late Commissioner Mlombile, who
made a huge contribution to the department.

To turn the situation around, however, will require more than the efforts
of these dedicated officials. It requires systematic change to our approach
to imprisonment and rehabilitation. Moreover, while the Minister and the
department must take the lead in effecting this change, it must not be
confined to the Department of Correctional Services alone. Let us therefore
start with what others must do.

It was once said to me by a Correctional Services official, that the best
way to rehabilitate an inmate is never to send him or her to prison. The
department is fond of saying that correction is a societal responsibility,
and so it is. If we raise our children to be honest, our schools equip
learners to earn a living, and if civil society rejects criminal activity
there would be less crime and, therefore, fewer offenders.

But the fact is that crime is a reality. Society needs to be protected from
criminals and expects them to pay a price for their crimes. What we don’t
always get right is distinguishing between the petty criminals and those
who commit crime to stay alive, on the one hand, and the violent sociopaths
and serious criminals who make a living from the suffering of others, on
the other hand. Not every person who commits a crime belongs in prison.
Those who do belong in prison sometimes avoid it altogether or enjoy their
stay, thanks to their gang connections - as the hon Bloem pointed. Yet our
criminal justice system usually sends most offenders, both serious and
petty, directly to jail. It does so because there are far too few viable
alternative sentencing options.

We have had countless discussions in this House and in the committees on
diversion, alternative sentencing and restorative justice. It appears to
me, however, that the more we talk, the less happens. In part, this is
because there are insufficient places of safety, probation officers and
rehabilitative programmes to make diversion and alternative sentencing
attractive to the judges and magistrates before whom these offenders come.

The responsibility for making it possible to divert offenders away from the
prisons lies, in the first instance, with the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development and the Department of Social Development. But
the Department of Correctional Services and the Minister must take the lead
in making diversion a reality.

In this respect, it is encouraging that the department is considering a
position paper on social reintegration; but even within the department,
there are not enough resources at this stage being allocated to these
programmes. If the Minister is serious about alternatives to imprisonment,
this programme will also have to be properly staffed and resourced.

The other way in which prison overcrowding can be eased is by the
construction of new correctional facilities. This need, as the Minister
pointed out, was recognised as long ago as 2002, when the planning of four
new-generation prisons was starting. Money was allocated to the Department
of Correctional Services budget for these prisons. The sites in Kimberley,
Klerksdorp, Leeuwkop and Nigel were identified, and in three cases the
earthworks began.

However, because of the delays, the costs started to escalate and when
construction of these new prisons was due to begin, the money allocated to
them in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, was insufficient. In
the case of Leeuwkop, the identified site was subsequently found to be
unsatisfactory. Even the successful tenders for the prisons that were to be
built have now lapsed, and the tender process has to start all over again.

So here we sit, four years later, without one brick having been laid.
Indeed, it’s even worse because the state has paid out some R86 million on
earthworks, some of which will now have to be redone because of erosion and
other problems. This is obviously fruitless expenditure. Also, more than
R100 million was paid in consultancy fees. It is not known how much of this
amount is wasted and how much will have to be reallocated. These are the
facts.

The department came to the portfolio committee. I am sorry that it gives
the Minister a headache and makes him feel sad, so that he has to call all
his Cabinet colleagues and cry on their shoulders. But the department came
to the portfolio committee and explained how this situation had arisen. The
explanations were plausible but nonetheless unsatisfactory, more so because
this situation appears to have caught them completely by surprise.

Between June of last year, when we were told documents concerning
construction of the Kimberley prison were due to be signed and construction
would begin, and February this year, when Public Works told us that there
was a problem, the Department of Correctional Services suddenly realised
that the construction programme was unaffordable.

What was even more disturbing at that particular meeting was the behaviour
of the Minister before the portfolio committee. He delivered a little
lecture to us on our duties as MPs. He accused the media of having ulterior
motives. He said that the media was promoting the agendas of the security
industry. He sounded like a postapartheid P W Botha shaking his finger and
railing against the total onslaught being waged against him, the
commissioner and the department. It was, with respect Minister, an
unedifying display.

He also went on to attack the public-private partnership prisons, which, he
said, did not implement the White Paper, and were unaffordable. He said
these prisons were, and I quote: “... not addressing critical problems such
as overcrowding and rehabilitation.”

These statements are more than a little disingenuous, since the Minister
knows that, by contract, the public-private partnership prisons cannot be
overcrowded. What is more so, Minister, you know that the rehabilitation
programmes that take place in those public-private partnership prisons, on
the whole, are much better than many that are provided elsewhere.

Yet in the same breath, the Minister said that the only way that new-
generation prisons – was it the Skosana or Balfour prisons, I have
forgotten which - would be able to be built was through a partnership with
the private sector. The new buzzword is what is called “the public finance
model,” the details of which are not yet known or certainly not known to
the portfolio committee.

And so we, as MPs, are being asked to approve a budget, which contains
money for the construction of correctional facilities, without knowing how
that money will be spent. This is obviously a situation of which no
responsible MP can approve. It is equivalent to signing a hire purchase
contract without knowing exactly what you are buying and how much it would
cost. That’s effectively what we are being asked to do.

I think that the portfolio committee acted entirely responsibly when it
drew attention to these problems that were contained in the public finance
model contracts. We expect to get a full and detailed briefing on how that
is going to work because it would have been grossly irresponsible of the
portfolio committee to approve those contracts without having the necessary
details. Unless we are satisfied that the public finance model is the right
way to go, we, from these benches, will not be supporting this budget. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S A SEATON: Chairperson, hon Minister and hon members, may I commence
by firstly paying tribute to the committee chairperson, hon Dennis Bloom,
who has led the committee in an exemplary manner, ensuring that the
committee is really engaging with the department and interrogating the
issues.

I would also like to thank the many dedicated, good men and women,
including our Deputy Minister, the previous and existing Deputy Ministers,
and the many people who are committed to achieving the aims of the
department.

There have been many, many wonderful changes for the better over the past
10 to 12 years, there is no doubt about that. But, Mr Minister, you have
indicated that you are piloting the ship, and you have accepted that there
are problematic aspects. Now where would you be if your crew did not, from
time to time, point out where those aspects were? So, Minister, you may not
always like what we say, but you need to listen to what we say at times.

Having said that, I must however raise certain concerns. Mr Selfe has
alluded to some of these and I am just going to say that I believe that
there is complacency within the department on a number of issues and there
appears to be a tendency to treat the portfolio committee with contempt
when it comes to some issues, and I have a problem with that.

We need to look at the aims of the department. Firstly, enforcing court-
imposed sentences: The Minister indicated during his media briefing session
this morning that we have just recorded the lowest number of escapes.
Congratulations, well done! I think you deserve the accolades on that.

Secondly, detaining inmates in safe custody: This is achieved to some
extent. The obstacles faced by the department make it impossible to achieve
totally.

The third is the maintenance of the human dignity of inmates; and fourthly,
developing inmates' sense of social responsibility; and lastly, promoting
the general development of all inmates and persons subject to community
corrections.

With the current overcrowding situation in our country, it is extremely
unlikely that the department can adequately maintain human dignity, develop
inmates' sense of social responsibility or promote the development of all
inmates and persons. That certainly creates ongoing challenges for the
departmental officials who deal with these issues.

One appreciates that the programme for remission of sentences has reduced
the prison population, but the numbers are still far too high. And despite
the comments by the hon Minister that new prisons don't deal with
overcrowding, and we agree with you, new prisons don’t deal with
overcrowding either. But some 24 000 new beds would make the world of
difference.

There is a desperate need for these eight new proposed prisons, and I just
want to say to you, Minister, yes, you put the blame on former Minister
Mzimela and the IFP; let me remind you, the Cabinet agreed to those prisons
at the time, so did this portfolio committee and we learnt from our
mistakes. It was a mistake and we are saying to you: Let’s not make any
further mistakes, let’s know what we are doing before we go ahead. I
believe that there is a desperate need to speed up the process of these
prisons and I would hope that the committee is going to be hearing a lot
more about the process in the very near future.

We need to be fully informed about this new project finance model and we
need to know how these prisons are going to work. I would like to see them
set up as centres of excellence, that they become working prisons that are
going to provide the kind of facilities that would enable us to really
achieve the aims of the department.

We need also to look at a major overhaul of the justice delivery system;
and Mr Selfe has already alluded to the problems that we see. We are at the
receiving end of the justice delivery system and it is high time the
Departments of Safety and Security and Justice took responsibility for
their shortcomings in the system, to assist in alleviating seriously
overcrowded prisons. They need to consider improved policing methods and
alternative sentencing to ease the burden that falls on the Department of
Correctional Services.

Together we need to agree that community corrections or community service
should be applied instead of prison sentences for minor crimes. We need to
agree that minimum sentence legislation needs to be reviewed. We need to
agree that time spent by awaiting-trial prisoners needs to be deducted from
their sentences.

The time spent by persons convicted in regional courts awaiting to be
sentenced in high courts needs to be dramatically shortened. We need to see
rehabilitation and to maintain that human dignity, and ensure that our
people are really developing skills.

We need to do this through work prisons and through attending to the issues
that really need to be concerned. We need to learn, as I said, from the
mistakes of our past.

Now, we talk about the concerns that we have and Mr Selfe has addressed a
number of these. We do not believe that we have been adequately addressed
on the issues that the department is facing with regard to these new
prisons. It is a mistake that the development of these prisons has taken so
long. It is a mistake on our part, a failure on the part of the department
to actually ensure that these prisons were built in time.

It is said that success is failure turned inside out. I am saying to you,
let us look at the failures of the past, including the PPP Prisons. Let us
look at those and ensure that that is turned into success. We are saying,
as a portfolio committee, that it is unacceptable for us to pass a budget
where we don’t know what we are spending money on.

We might find ourselves, in 10 years time, looking back and the Minister of
the day saying: You, know it was in Balfour’s time. It was Minister Balfour
who built those eight prisons that were a disaster. It will be this
committee’s fault, as much as yours, for allowing it to happen.

So we are saying, and we are cautioning you, Minister, that there are
issues that need to be addressed. We, as a party, will pass this budget
today. We will agree to support this budget today, to the extent that we
have given the department till 12 June to come forward with the full
details.

I hope that those details will be spelt out so that we are in a position to
pass the budget on 15 June when it comes before us. Because, failing that,
Minister, we would find it very difficult to do so. I like you, Minister,
and I am not fighting with you as an individual or your colleagues in the
department individually; but I am saying that collectively we have got to
do the right thing by the people of South Africa, and that is to be
cautious. [Applause.]
Mme M W MAKGATE: Ke a leboga Modulasetilo, Matona a Mafapha a a leng fa,
Maloko a palamente, baeng ba rona ba tlotlego. Ditirelo tsa Kgopololo
jaanong di tlhaloswa e bile di tlhaloganngwa ka mokgwa o o gololosegileng
wa temokerasi. Lefapha la Kgopololo le na le tshepo ya gore le theile
motheo o o tsepameng jaaka le bontsha ka maitemogelo le go tsenya mo
tirisong ga ditirelo, go itlhaganetse ka go itsetsepela mo motheong o o
setseng o theilwe. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[Ms M W MAKGATE: Thank you, Chairperson, Ministers present, members of
Parliament, hon guests present. The work of the Department of Correctional
Services has now been explained and is understood in a free and democratic
way. The Department of Correctional Services believes that it has laid a
firm foundation, as it shows its experience in the implementation of
services being accelerated, from the foundation that is already laid.]

The introduction of the White Paper on Correctional Services in South
Africa demonstrates the strides that the department has taken to locate
corrections within a free and democratic dispensation. This indeed is a
shared objective by all democratic formations, heeding the call by all
visionaries of our nation and our country, to define for us what we want to
make of our shared destiny.

As stated by the Minister, hon Balfour, in the foreword of the White Paper:
  It took the political metamorphosis of 1994 to introduce the first steps
  along the path of respect for women, life and human dignity. The
  transformation programme of this country’s first democratic government
  necessitated that prisons shift from institutions of derision to places
  of new beginnings.

The White Paper on Correctional Services in South Africa represents the
final fundamental break with a past archaic penal system and ushers in a
start to our second decade of freedom where prisons become correctional
centres of rehabilitation and offenders are given new hope and
encouragement to adopt a lifestyle that would result in a second chance
towards becoming an ideal South African citizen.

This is in line with the objectives as articulated and posed by the cause
and a continuous struggle for the national democratic revolution. It is a
cause for a democratic South Africa whereby all shall be constrained and
yet, regardless of the accumulated effects of historical burdens, seize the
time to define for them what they want of our shared destiny.

A destiny which our forebears and predecessors, former President Nelson
Mandela and the current President Thabo Mbeki, have undoubtedly shaped and
steered into a direction where we can now proudly pronounce that, as my
President in his state of the nation address this year has proudly
pronounced, that as we march with speed to this destiny we shall go out
with joy and be led out in peace. The mountains and the hills shall break
forth in singing before us, and all the trees of the fields shall clap
their hands.

The construction of the first four new-generation prisons in Leeukop,
Klerksdorp, Kimberly and Nigel will necessitate that as agreed, the
challenges associated with the escalation of costs be bridged. The delay
needs a collaborated effort to overcome challenges.

The allocation of R10,63 billion to the Department of Correctional Services
for the 2006-07 financial year, as compared to the           R9,88 billion
last year, indicates the government’s commitment to ensure that the
objectives of the department are realised.

Surely, we will realise the improvement in the revision of the Correctional
Services Act of 1998 to ensure that it is in line with the White Paper on
Correctional Services. We will improve and develop new and revised policies
in line with the White Paper. We will consolidate plans to give effect to
the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa.

We will implement the aspects of the White Paper in the 36 centres of
excellence across the country. We will hire more staff to implement the
seven-day working system. A total of 3 057 recruits were hired in the 2005-
06 financial year, and 2 627 appointments are planned for the 2006-07 and
2007-08 MTEF periods.

Security in prisons will be improved, including biometric access and
movement control systems for inmate tracking; the vetting of correctional
officials and the minimum-security standard policy will be implemented.
However, nonperformance of security systems, necessitates that the service-
level agreement with private partners be reviewed, eg the Durban-Westville
system.

As we move with speed to reconstruct our society there is a need for
understanding, but not vengeance; a need for reparation and not
retaliation, a need for ubuntu and not victimisation.

The spirit underpinning the dawn of the second decade of our constitutional
democracy, as outlined in the address by the President on the celebration
of a decade of our Constitution, is the guiding principle for the
Department of Correctional Services budgetary policy framework.

As inmates leave our centres they must be ready to be reintegrated into the
South African society whose attributes and values must place humanism above
greed and individual self-interest to this effect.

The Department of Correctional Services allocation makes provision for the
implementation of the recommendation of the Jali report. This is our
commitment to pay attention to curbing corruption among our ranks, not only
to fight corruption where it exists but also to be seen to be paying
attention and investigating allegations of corruption and taking concrete
action in cases where corruption is proved to exist.

In the midst of the pessimism of our critics and prophets of doom, Africa
shall be at peace. However improbable it may sound to sceptics, Africa will
prosper wherever we may be, whatever our immediate interests, however much
we carry the baggage of our past, however much we have been caught by the
fashion of cynicism and loss of faith in the capacity of the people, let us
indeed not err today and say as the President has stated, that nothing can
stop now.

The view that because our government is in the hands of black people, it
therefore is inherently corrupt, will belong to the dustbin of history
together with its proponents. The number of escapes in prison will be a
thing of the past, the number of unnatural deaths in our prisons will be
reduced and assaults in our prisons will be a thing of the past.

A research study shows that more than 84% of our country’s population
believes that tomorrow will be a happy future. This overwhelming majority
of our people are saying that the dawn of the second decade of democracy is
the age of hope. They are saying that yesterday was another country, where
a large number of its youth swells the prisons. As we redress this ugly
imbalance of the past, the Child Bill is soon to be passed, which will
provide a legislative support in reducing the number of children who enter
the justice system. However, I can boldly state that the number of children
in prison was reduced in the provinces during the period from July to
November 2005. This indeed is a milestone.

In order to implement the Offender Rehabilitation Path, 36 centres of
excellence were launched and these centres will be replicated across the
country. The centres prioritise key service deliveries and the development
of programmes targeting the correction of offending behaviour. Linked to
this approach is the establishment of correctional supervision parole
boards.

Significant features of these parole boards are the involvement of
community members to ensure the involvement of victims of crime and their
relatives to make presentation and to attend sessions on the parole board.
This will go a long way to facilitate reintegration of offenders to
society.

Modulasetilo ke batla go itirela boikuelo mo bobegakgang. Bobegakgang bo ka
tswela Lefapha la Dikgopololo mosola thata fa bo ka leka go tlhagisa ditiro
tse di siameng tse di dirwang ke bagolegwa ba rona. Bagolegwa le fa ba le
phoso,ke batho ba tlhoka tšhono go bontsha setšhaba fa ba sokologile e bile
ba ikotlhaela dilo tse ba di dirileng. Bobegakgang fa bo ka lesa go
phasalatsa fela tse di sa siamang ka Lefapha la Dikgolegelo, fa bo ka leka
gore bo seka ba tsaya letlhakore, bagolegwa ba ka nna le tšhono ya go
amogelwa ke setšhaba ka kakaretso. (Translation of Setswana paragraph
follows.)

[Chairperson, I want to make an appeal to the media. The media can be of
great help to the department if it would show the positive things that our
prisoners do. Prisoners, although they made mistakes, need the opportunity
to show the nation that they are remorseful for the crimes they have
committed. If the media could stop publishing negative things about the
department, and take no sides, prisoners may have the opportunity to be
welcomed back into society.]

The ANC supports the Budget Vote.

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson and hon Minister, the ACDP shares concerns
regarding the delays in the building of certain facilities, some of which
are supposed to be completed by April next year. Whilst we appreciate the
enormity of the projects involved, we are concerned at the escalation in
projected costs and the retendering process.

In view also of exorbitant costs incurred in the public-private partnership
programme, the ACDP shares the grave concerns expressed in the portfolio
committee regarding the public finance model to be adopted. There is still
a huge degree of lack of detail regarding this proposed financial model, as
pointed out by previous speakers. Until such clarity has been provided, the
question arises whether this budget should be approved. We, as the ACDP,
think not.

Whilst the situation regarding prison overcrowding has improved somewhat,
overcrowding nevertheless remains a problem and is the root cause of health
problems and the spread of disease, and must be addressed.

But the ACDP must agree with the hon Bloem, who pointed out that certain
privileges should be reconsidered and, in his words “be taken away”. The
public perception that prisons are hotels must be addressed, failing which
the prime consideration that prisons are a deterrent to crime will not
suffice, so we would support hon Bloem in that regard.

We must, however, continue to highlight the plight of awaiting-trial
prisoners who are not a danger to society, but cannot afford bail ranging
from R50 to R100. We therefore welcome the fact that the awaiting-trial
offender population has reduced from about 49 000 to 44 000. Well done,
Minister, in that regard. This is as a result of the ongoing intersectoral
focus on integrated case-load management, and this issue needs to be
continually addressed to further reduce these figures.
One of the key departmental priorities is to combat corruption, with the
help of the departmental investigating unit established in 2004 to deal
with corruption, assaults and other related cases, and to manage the
whistle-blowing policy.

Now, hon Minister, I have asked members whether they were aware of this
policy and I was somewhat surprised by the lack of general knowledge about
the whistle-blowing policy. I would advise you that the guidelines are soon
to be considered; we consider them today in the Portfolio Committee on
Justice and Constitutional Development and once those guidelines have been
accepted, I trust they will be made known to every member of the department
and throughout the Public Service. So I thank you for that, hon Minister.

Children should not be kept in prisons - the previous speaker has already
alluded to that - where they may be abused and sodomised in the so-called
universities of crime. The ACDP therefore, again, repeats its annual
request to the hon Minister to follow up with the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development regarding the long-outstanding Child Justice
Bill. We were advised that we would be considering the Bill this year, but
yet again it has been a number of years that I have been imploring for this
Bill to be finalised.

As you are aware, this Bill seeks to introduce restorative justice
principles and to keep juveniles, who are not a danger to society, out of
prison. The key to such an approach is that the public feels safe, the
victim is compensated, and the criminal has a change of heart leading to a
new way of life. So, we would urge you, hon Minister, to press the Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development in that regard.

There can be no doubt that improving the community corrections programme
and thus ensuring that magistrates have greater confidence in sentencing
offenders to community corrections rather than prison, would be more cost-
effective than building more prisons. We are thus concerned about the
vacancies for supervision officials for probationers and parolees, and
would we urge you, hon Minister, to look at that.

Whilst there are thus many and varied challenges facing the Minister, the
commission and the department, I would on behalf of the ACDP like to thank
all the dedicated staff members in all prisons for their committed and hard
work in the department. Our particular thanks also to Judge Fagan who will
be retiring. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I now call the hon I S Mfundisi. Oh,
you are here now, hon Groenewald, so you can take the podium. We thought
you were no longer coming. [Interjections.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, daardie agb lid moenie bekommerd wees nie,
my sê sal ek kom sê!

Die agb Minister het netnou hier gepraat oor die oorbevolking in
gevangenisse. Een van die redes daarvoor, volgens die Minister, is die
verhoorafwagtendes wat die oorsaak is van hierdie groot probleem. Hy sê hy
gaan weer eens in ’n lekgotla en hulle gaan kyk na die probleem. Ek wil die
agb Minister vra hoeveel lekgotlas moet daar nóg plaasvind voor die
probleem opgelos word, want ons praat die hele tyd, ons sê ons gaan die
probleem oplos, maar ons kom nie verder nie.

As ons gaan kyk na die verslag, sien ons byvoorbeeld in die Kimberley-
bestuursgebied in die Noord-Kaap is die besetting van gevangenisse teen
133% basies met ’n derde oorbevolk. In Upington is die besetting teen 173%
met 73% oorbevolk. As ons gaan kyk na Durban-Westville se bestuursgebied
sit ons met ’n besettingsyfer van 181,75%, met ander woorde 81,75%
oorbeset. [Tussenwerpsels.] Dit lyk my die agb lid kan somme maak! Die
vraag is, wat doen ons daaromtrent?

Die agb Minister sê as dit gaan oor mense wat gyselaar gehou word, gaan
hulle maksimum geweld gebruik. Die ironie is net dat wetsgehoorsame
landsburgers wat misdadigers in hulle huise kry wat hulle wil aanval, en
wat dan maksimum geweld wil gebruik, in hegtenis geneem word. Ons moet een
ding onthou: gevangenisse is daar om as straf te dien vir misdadigers en om
die gemeenskap teen hulle te beskerm. Dit is die grootste taak van die
agbare Minister. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, the hon member should not be worried, I
shall state my case!

The hon Minister has just now spoken about overcrowding in prisons. One of
the reasons for this, according to the Minister, is that awaiting-trial
prisoners are the cause of this major problem. He says that they will once
again be having a lekgotla and they will look at the problem. I would like
to ask the hon Minister how many lekgotlas should there still be for this
problem to be resolved, because we are forever talking about solving the
problem, but we don’t make any progress.

If we look at the report we see, for instance, that in the management area
of Kimberley in the Northern Cape the prison occupation rate of 133%
basically represents overcrowding by a third. In Upington occupation is at
173%, which represents 73% overcrowding. If we look at the management area
of Durban-Westville, the occupation rate is 181,75%, in other words,
overcrowding by 81,75%. [Interjections.] It seems as if the hon member is
good at sums! The question is, what do we do about it?

The hon Minister says that when it comes to people being held hostage, they
are going to use maximum force. However, the irony is that law-abiding
citizens who encounter criminals in their houses who are about to attack
them, are arrested if they want to use maximum force. We have to remember
one thing: prisons are there to serve as punishment for criminals and to
protect the community against them. That is the greatest task of the hon
Minister.]

I want to say to the hon Minister: You said the huge ship was sailing
between rocks. Remember, you have a ship full of pirates. The question is:
Where are you sailing to? Your reference to icebergs creates the impression
you are sailing into the cold, so beware. Thank you.

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, the Department of
Correctional Services has the responsibility to ensure that offenders are
kept away from society. It has to ensure that they live in humane
circumstances and enjoy their rights albeit in a restricted manner.

The greatest problem facing our prisons is overcrowding. Last year
facilities intended for 113 000 inmates housed 187 000, an overcrowding of
something like 164%. The UCDP calls on all involved in the criminal justice
system to put their heads together.

The denial by the police and the prosecution at times to allow people bail
exacerbates the system. The judiciary should also set affordable bail for
suspects. It is very sad that some lives are getting wasted, because the
people concerned could not raise R50 for bail.

One wonders what the purpose is for appointing a judge as an inspector of
prisons when his recommendations are scarcely taken into regard by
Parliament. The outgoing Judge Fagan has, in almost every report, stated
that legislation is also to blame. The minimum sentences set by the
legislature, without allowing judges to adjudicate as they see fit, also
contribute to the congestion in our jails.

We take note that the intention of the legislation was for the legislators
to prove that they have zero tolerance for crime. All this was done without
due regard for the resources concomitant with incarceration.

The lethargy of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development in
coming up with a solution to the situation of those people who were
sentenced to death prior to the abolition of the death sentence has
prevented them from knowing their fate. Some of them could have been
released, thus freeing up space. There may be a few people who feel that it
is only one prisoner, but we say it is one prisoner too many, and besides,
bodies such as the SA Human Rights Commission should also be making a noise
to help with this unduly prolonged incarceration.

The state of the nation address by the President of the Republic is seen as
a compass to give direction to this huge ship, Mr Minister, and the
government and the country as a whole. It is unfortunate that four months
since that speech, very little progress has been made by the department on
the three issues the President raised on that occasion, and these were: the
building of four correctional service facilities, the reduction of the
number of children in custody and the implementation of the recommendations
of the Jali commission.

Finally, all these things have to be done; but as much as the head and the
hands are trained, as indicated by the hon Makgate, through academic and
manual studies in our efforts to rehabilitate inmates, the third “h”, the
heart, has to be trained too by making sure that these people have access
to spiritual counselling.

We all know that the revered St Paul was worse than some of them in his
earlier life. Most of the pastors we have today met their Lord from behind
bars. We argue that these people need to be exposed to an environment that
will nurture their being born again. Let us train their hearts to improve
their ethics and conscience. Sera sa motho ke pelo. [A person’s worst enemy
is the heart.]

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, it gives me
great pleasure to address this House on the occasion of the Budget Vote for
2006 of the Department of Correctional Services. It is also my first
opportunity to address this House in this capacity. I’m therefore not going
to be fighting with anybody.

As you all know by now, our White Paper was approved by Cabinet in February
2005. Since that time, the department has been gearing all its efforts
towards realising the objectives articulated therein. The White Paper says,
I quote:

    Correction is much more than just crime prevention, but should be
    approached in a holistic way through committing the department to
    broader societal challenges impacting on corrections, such as the level
    of dysfunction within South African families, the regeneration of
    positive social values, poverty alleviation and sustainable growth and
    development.


However, from the Inspecting Judge to all our centre managers and to the
portfolio committee, we are all agreed - and most members who have spoken
here have also articulated this - that the single biggest obstacle to
placing rehabilitation at the centre of our activities is the overcrowding
within our facilities.

We have an offender population of 158 032 and we are overpopulated by over
50 000. For example, a section in Johannesburg Medium B correctional
facility, also known as Sun City, is 344% overcrowded; the sentenced male
population is 4 293 and sentenced juveniles are 177. This therefore gives a
total of 4 470 whereas the capacity of that particular section is only 1
300 people. The impact of overcrowding on our ability to deliver on our
core functions, as articulated by our White Paper, is therefore severely
minimised.

In my contribution today regarding Budget Vote No 20, I will make reference
to the following areas: social reintegration; the area of HIV and Aids;
development and care for offenders; juveniles and children in the
correctional facilities; and, lastly but not least, the Department of
Correctional Services’ contribution to Asgisa.

Regarding social reintegration, restoration and restorative justice are
recognised as the cornerstones in the rehabilitation of offenders. The
White Paper seeks to overhaul our correctional centres by transforming them
from so-called “universities of crime”, into effective rehabilitation
centres.

It is common knowledge that South Africa is among the countries with the
highest incarceration rates in the world, and has a criminal justice system
that is more likely to sentence offenders to a jail term. Of the 114 000
sentenced offenders, 51 522 are people serving terms of between nought and
six months, most of whom can hardly afford bail of less than R1 000; while,
even among the awaiting-trial detainees, over 10 000 cannot afford a bail
of this same amount or less.

We strongly believe that the challenges facing community corrections and
the whole system of correctional supervision lie at the core of the current
lack of confidence in the system, amomg the judiciary and members of the
public. A new policy framework is being developed through a major
restructuring of the system in order to centralise principled participation
of various role-players including family, communities, nongovernmental
organisations, faith-based organisations and our partners in the criminal
justice system.

The programme seeks to build partner and public confidence in the system,
optimising participation of all sectors in a manner that is consistent with
restoration. I am pleased to inform you that the new financial year’s
budget allocation for social reintegration will increase by 9,15% from
R313,3 million in 2005 to R342 million in the 2006-07 period, thus
reflecting a key shift in our strategic priorities.

In terms of HIV and Aids, in its drive to improve the care services
provided to all persons in the custody of Correctional Services, we are
obliged to provide primary health care services for all offenders. This
year we are in the process of conducting a health needs assessment based on
government priority areas, and we are also conducting an HIV/Aids
prevalence survey. This would assist us in introducing a holistic approach
to addressing the impact and effects of HIV and Aids in correctional
centres and amongst our own members. This is a voluntary process, which
seeks to find an effective intervention mechanism to curb the negative
impact of the disease amongst the offender population as well as members.

The department is adhering to the implementation of the comprehensive
treatment and care plan of the national Department of Health, which
includes the provision of antiretroviral therapy to offenders who qualify
for this treatment. I want to stress this: offenders who qualify for this
treatment. Offenders who do qualify for antiretroviral therapy are referred
to the nearest accredited public health care facility to start the
treatment process.

However, the Department of Correctional Services is also engaged with the
Department of Health to assess identified correctional centres in all our
six regions, which can be accredited to provide antiretroviral therapy.
Owing to the fact that these correctional centres must adhere to the
stipulations of the Department of Health, and appropriate training for the
Department of Correctional Services staff must be completed, the
accreditation and roll-out is proceeding rather slowly.

The department was successful in having the first correctional centre
accredited at the beginning of this year for the provision of
antiretroviral therapy. Grootvlei correctional centre, in the Free State
region - hon Bloem will be happy - has been accredited by the national
Department of Health. We applaud them for having met the Department of
Health standards as a site for ARV treatment. Two additional centres in the
regions of KwaZulu-Natal will follow shortly.

The partnerships forged between the provincial department of health and the
regional office in the Free State has contributed to the successful
completion of this accreditation process. Grootvlei will indeed be utilised
as an example of best practice and will be a blueprint for the
accreditation of additional correctional centres throughout the country.

The department is also currently undertaking a survey on prevalence of HIV
infections amongst staff and offenders. An external service provider has
been appointed to undertake the survey. A sample has already been drawn
using random sampling techniques in the Gauteng region. The sample
represents 10% of the personnel population of sentenced offenders per
population respectively. The department has sought ethical approval form
the Human Sciences Research Council, HSRC, for this survey. This, we hope,
will be granted shortly.

The HSRC was also very complimentary towards us, in that the state
department would actually seek ethical approval for its research
activities. This, I think, the Department of Correctional Services must be
commended for. Is no one going to commend us? [Applause] Thank you.

Depending on the outcome of participation in Gauteng, the survey will be
rolled out to various centres across our country. Participation in the
survey is voluntary and confidentiality is guaranteed. It is expected that
the final report of the survey will be available round about October this
year. The findings of this report will also assist the Department of
Correctional Services to reallocate resources and reprioritise programmes
and policies in terms of addressing HIV/Aids in our facilities.

Regarding development and care, our emphasis on educational and social
reintegration for offenders is a key component in transforming the
Department of Correctional Services from a punitive to a rehabilitation
institution. We are pleased that the budget allocation for development and
care has increased by 29,3% for the current financial year, that is from
R393,3 million in 2005-06 to R1,2 billion in 2006-07. Central to delivery
on our mandate is the provision of humane and secure custody of offenders
in an environment that is conducive to rehabilitation of offenders.

As indicated earlier, our interventions in terms of development and care
for offenders is premised on the need to build socially responsible
individuals. To realise this mammoth task, the department is finalising a
new policy for the introduction of compulsory rehabilitation programmes
that were designed and accredited in the last financial year. These will
include a sexual offenders programme, anger management programme - which I
think some of us must attend - HIV and Aids awareness and, lastly, a
prerelease programme to prepare offenders for social reintegration.

In order to implement these objectives, the Department of Correctional
Services has made the improvement of human resource capacity development
and management a key priority. In this regard, it is, however, sad to note
that the DCS finds it extremely difficult to attract professionals to the
department, as the conditions of service do not compare favourably with
other government departments.
The recruitment and retention of teachers, social workers, and health care
professionals is of grave concern. We will continue to lobby our colleagues
in the Treasury - the Minister of Finance is not here - and the Department
of Public Service and Administration to address the salary imbalances and
incentives.

However, in the short term, the DCS must look at alternative strategies to
beef up human resources within the department. For example, we may need to
encourage and call on retired members of communities from these various
disciplines to come forward to assist the DCS in its development, care and
rehabilitation programmes.

As we approach the child protection week, it is prudent that I remind you
about our constitutional stipulation that prohibits the admission of
children into correctional facilities except as a last resort. I refer you
to Chapter 2: Bill of Rights, section 28, I quote:


   Every child has the right –
   (g) not to be detained except as a measure of last resort, in
   which case, in addition to the rights a child enjoys under sections 12
   and 35, the child may be detained only for the shortest appropriate
   period of time, and has the right to be –
      i) kept separately from detained persons over the age of 18 years;
         and


     ii) treated in a manner, and kept in conditions, that take account of
         the child's age;

Together with the Department of Social Development we have identified
several places of safety for young offenders. We have designed intervention
programmes for the development and care of offenders, correction of
offending behaviour and reintegration of offenders into society.

I am pleased to inform you that our most recent allocations for this
financial year have seen a marked shift in line with the department’s
strategic plan expressing this change of emphasis towards rehabilitation.
This reflects a key shift to aligning our strategic objectives with that of
the White Paper. The increased budgetary allocations should be seen as the
department taking clear and focussed steps towards making our White Paper a
reality.

During this financial year, the department will enhance its partnership
with the Setas, government departments and community organisations in order
to expand learnerships for parolees and computer literacy among sentenced
offenders as part of our contribution to the skills revolution espoused by
Asgisa.

To complement our community outreach projects, in terms of poverty
alleviation and as part of community service projects, we have undertaken
to engage our offenders in the maintenance of services at local government
level and also in communities where critical services are required.

In order to supplement health care delivery programmes, the department will
utilise external community caregivers and community health workers to
render primary health care services to our centres, within the context of
advancing the Asgisa objectives.

In the area of assisting with the development of youth capacity in needy
communities, the department has already granted 300 graduates an
opportunity to do their learnerships in social work, youth development,
geriatrics, disability issues and child care within our correctional
centres. This will assist in terms of ensuring that young graduates are
able to accumulate the necessary experience and expertise that is so much
required in the job market, thus paving the way for them to be employable
after the completion of their learnerships programmes.
The Department of Correctional Services strives to assist both offenders
and victims in the restoration of themselves, families and community life
in general. At this point, I want to pay a special tribute to our many
partners who include faith-based organisations, former offenders, the
regional parole boards, the recently launched Parole Review Board, and
specialist NGOs like Khulisa and Nicro, the President’s awards programme
and the many individuals who just offer their time, energy and resources to
assist the the Department of Correctional Services in executing its mandate
on corrections, rehabilitation and reintegration of offenders.

In conclusion, I would like to say I believe that much is possible if we
are prepared to confront the realities, cut our sails according to the wind
and accept that forgiveness is not divine but means restoring a sense of
security to both the individual and the community at large. Since taking
office in February, I have been supported and welcomed most warmly by the
Minister and many colleagues within the Correctional Services family.

I would like to take this opportunity to offer all my colleagues, my office
staff and my partner my heartfelt thanks and appreciation for their co-
operation and guidance in this very challenging and difficult portfolio.
Special thanks also go to the portfolio committee, which is led by hon Mr
Bloem. I thank them for their vigilance and oversight on matters affecting
Correctional Services. Continue keeping us on our toes. Member Bloem and
your committee, continue to keep us on our toes.

Last but not least, let me also add my voice to that of the Minister and
others who have thanked the department, very ably led by Commissioner Mti.
I also want to thank his management team and all staff within the
Department of Correctional Services for striving very hard to make the
White Paper a living document and trying to bring out the thread that runs
through it – that of corrections, rehabilitation, social reintegration and
indeed, new beginnings.

Mr E T XOLO: Chairperson, the hon Minister and his Deputy, Ministers
present, the National Commissioner and members of the Correctional Services
and the House at large, the Freedom Charter pronounces that “There shall be
peace and security for all”. But before I embark on this pronouncement, I
wish to tell you and your august House that we in the ANC support the
Budget Vote as a whole. I wish to emphasise that it is not correct and it
is not true, as has been widely reported in the media, that the ANC rejects
the budget as stated by the hon member of IFP Mrs Seaton in Business Day of
Friday, 19 May. We in the ANC reject this notion with the contempt it
deserves.

I want to tell you and the House that I am surprised that my colleague from
the South Coast is stating that she is rejecting the budget. She is the
very one that moved the adoption of the budget at our portfolio committee
meeting last week. I do not know what she is now talking about. To quote
from the Holy Book, St John the Evangelist says: “You shall know the truth
and the truth shall set you free”.

It is proper to begin by saying that on 8 May there was a joint sitting
here in Parliament to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the 1996
Constitution. We take pride in our 10 years of our constitutional
democracy. In the context of this debate, section 35 (2)(e) of the
Constitution guarantees the right of every detainee to conditions of
detention that are consistent with human dignity.

The conditions of human dignity create a healthy environment for inmates,
awaiting-trial detainees, including staff members and the public. The White
Paper on Correctional Services endorses this position when it points to the
task of delivering quality services to offenders and to create a favourable
working environment, conducive to officers to serve as rehabilitators. The
goal of an imprisonment sentence is the rehabilitation of the offender in
order, once again, to become a law-abiding member of the community.

For security to be improved requires the budget to expand in order to have
more resources and personnel. It must be emphasised that safety and related
matters are a priority in the department. In accordance with the
comprehensive and effective strategy for security in prisons, the
Department of Correctional Services will also make use of its budget in
order to ensure that the community would be protected against the outcry
that you always experience, even when an inmate is being released into the
community. This would help the department, as we currently do not have
structures like those that the SAPS have in terms of community policing
forums. The current facility programmes are among the advanced
technological forms of enhancing safety and security in correctional
centres. These safety projects include the following: information
technology, fencing, TV monitors and X-ray scanners at gate entrances. This
is in order to promote safety and security of the offenders, awaiting-trial
detainees and staff members.

The safety of prisoners requires a wider co-operation involving other
government departments and society. It is a fact that prisoners need to be
incarcerated in prisons that guarantee their safety as individuals. This
involves conditions that are less overcrowded, nutritious meals and
adequate medical treatment. As quoted above, section 35(2)(f) guarantees
the right of prisoners to communicate with, and the right to be visited.
Part of this approach includes the rehabilitative programmes to ensure the
reintegration of the offenders back into the community.

This involves concerted training programmes such as multiskilled-based job
training and opportunities for formal education to get recognised
certificates in various fields of work. This ensures that the skilled and
empowered prisoner is no longer a threat and a liability to his community,
but an asset as a rehabilitated and capacitated member of the community.

Part of this is to give the individual offender a responsibility in matters
involving leadership roles, to enhance communications and duties among
themselves as inmates. This is to empower offenders to be self-supportive
and efficient in order to correct the past criminal behaviour and make the
future better. This approach exists within the current practices of the
Department of Correctional Services and needs to be entrenched. In this
context the Department of Correctional Services’ Strategic Plan aims at
ensuring the reduction of deaths in prison, both natural and unnatural,
including as a result of assaults, etc. The security programme on antigang
strategies will be implemented to prevent prison gangs as they present
security threats to other fellow prisoners and staff, and I wish to appeal
to the gangsters to desist from holding staff hostage in any way, as the
law will catch up them, in one way or the other.

The White Paper aims to entrench a safe working environment for staff of
the Department of Correctional Services. The department needs to improve
safety-related matters in a co-ordinated manner. This involves the
effective use of the existing resources and calls for more money. Indeed,
there must be an increase in the personnel capacity, including recruitment
of additional staff and skills development programmes. These challenges
require healthy worker-employer relationships on the ground in order to
enhance proper security measures.

In conclusion, as mentioned above, the Department of Correctional Services’
biometric security access systems will be installed in 60 correctional
centres. The first targeted will be the larger prisons, such as Pollsmoor
and other centres of excellence. The Department of Correctional Services
has introduced a policy on minimum security standards to prevent violent
incidents and escapes. This will prevent escapes en route to courts and
hospitals, as this appears to be the case. These security measures are
great achievements and must be adhered to all times because oversight
experience reveals that in some prisons, the security at entrances inside
the prisons is not tight enough at all times. On this note, the budget
needs to be expanded to ensure the speedy implementation of the safety and
security programmes.

Before I sit down, I want to tell Mr Selfe that the ANC has responsible
members and those are the very members whom are going to pass this Budget
Vote. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, hon Ministers, while some crimes in South
Africa continue to show a decrease, crime in general in South Africa
continues to be one of our most serious problems. Last week’s violent
security strike was a clear depiction of that. In all honesty, it is felt
that there is minimal fear of the long arm of the law and that the belt
needs to be tightened to seriously deter crime.

Well, even though our prison population has decreased from 186 000 to 155
000 our prisons remain overcrowded. The prison construction programme
having lagged at least two years behind schedule, makes the President’s
undertaking to build four more prisons seem impossible and addressing
overcrowding minimal. The fact that the funding was available and the DCS
had experienced some savings leaves the setback questionable.

Our dissatisfaction with the mixing of minor and major offenders is
expressed, noting the hazards of attracting minor-crime prisoners into
committing major crime is great and seriously hampers our progress in crime
deterrence, rehabilitation and prevention.

The MF further expresses its concern about the issue of juvenile
delinquents. We need speedily to facilitate our minor-crime prisoners in
separate facilities. Our juvenile prisoners in turn need also to be
maintained in separate prison facilities. Since overcrowding does exist,
the MF calls for this urgent division of prisoners.

We are, however, pleased about the department’s serious attack on corrupt
officials and the institution of the Jali Commission, recommendations by
our hon President.

In regard to health services, the MF expresses its concern about the
Department of Correctional Services’ HIV/Aids service policy for offenders.
These prisoners have a constitutional right to sound health. We feel,
noting the seriousness of HIV/Aids, that those infected prisoners might be
carrying it back into society. Prisoners should thus be provided with
antiretrovirals.

We are, however, concerned about the safety at prisons, during the transfer
of prisoners and so forth. In the light of this we request that the
shortage of staff be addressed speedily. Liveable salaries should be
offered and made available for these correctional services employees.

The MF is confident that if the Department of Correctional Services applies
its budget allocation effectively and efficiently, it may address all the
problems it is challenged by. The construction of four more prisons and
renovations to existing prisons need to be prioritised. Further, we seek
the intense rehabilitation of prisoners to deter crime, which will make
South Africa a safe place to live in and a safer place to visit. The MF
supports the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! The hon Ngwenya; I believe
this is a maiden speech.

Nkk W NGWENYA: Somlomo, ngqongqoshe, malunga ahloniphekileyo nomphakathi
wonke, ngizokhuluma ngenhloso yobulungiswa ngiphinde ngisho futhi ukuthi I
ANC iyayisisekela lesisabelo mali. Ukujezisa kunenhloso kusukela kudala.
Umhlahlandlela wenkululeko we ANC I Freedom Charter uthi, kuyolinganwa
emthethweni. kuleyondima lapho inhloso yokujezisa ichazwa ngokuzama
ukufundisa kabusha izaphulamthetho izindlela zokuziphatha nokuba izakhamuzi
zihloniphe futhi zilandele umthetho wezwe. Kukulokho umnyango
wezokuvuselelwa kwezimilo ukuthathela kuwo ukuvuselelwa kwezimilo
ngokulandela imigomo nezinhlelo zomnyango. Umbiko wonyaka ka 2005-06 uzama
ukuqinisa ukuvuselela izimilo ngokubeka izaphulamthetho ohlelweni
lokulungisa izinhlelo nokuthuthukisa imigomo. Imiphakathi izoba nezinhlelo
zokwamukela izaphulamthetho kuleyomiphakathi yazo. Kulokho kunjalo
imiphakathi idinga imali eningi ukulungiselela iznhlelo zokwamukela abantu
babo emiphakathini. Lokhu kudinga izinsiza ukuze kufezwe izidingo
zomnyango. Izaphulamthetho eziphuma ngoshwele zidinga usizo olwanele
kwabezenhlalakahle ababhekele ukuziphatha kwezaphulamthetho eziphuma
ngaphambi kwesikhathi kanye nomphakathi.

Empeleni impumelelo ekuvuseleleni izimilo idinga ukwenziwa ngokubambisana
nomphakathi. Lomsebenzi udinga ukubandakanywa komndeni, umphakathi,
izinhlangano ezingekho ngaphansi kukahulumeni njenge Nicro, osomabhizinisi,
amasonto kanye nabanye abaholi emphakathini. Ukuvuselelwa kwezimilo
kwenzeka kahle uma umuntu amukeleka kahle emphakathini, angaphinde aphule
umthetho. Uma isimo somndeni, nomphakathi, nobuya ejele singaguquki
kubanzima ukwamukeleka emphakathini kwesaphulamthetho.

Izinhlelo zokubuyisela emphakathini: Ukuvuseleleka kwezimilo kuba
yimpumelelo uma isaphulamthetho samukeleke kahle emphakathini ngendlela
yokuthi singaphinde siphule umthetho. Imibiko eminingi yomnyango
wokuvuselelwa kwezimilo ubuka ukwamukeleka emphakathini njengento
eqhubekayo,eqala ngesikhathi umuntu engena ejele. Ukubandakanywa
komphakathi kubalulekile kakhulu. Umqondo wokubuyisela emphakathini noma
ukuziphatha kombanjwa kumele kuxazululwe emphakathini lapho kuqala khona.
Lokhu kusho ukuthi kumele kube khona izinsiza khona kuzosizakala abaphuma
ejele ukuze babe yizakhamuzi ezilandela nezihlonipha umthetho wezwe.

Usomqulu ka 2005 uqinisekisa ubudlelwane phakathi kukahulumeni, nesizwe
nobudlelwane neminye iminyango kahulumeni ekuthuthukiseni izindlela
zokuvikela ubugebengu. Lokhu kufuna ukuqinisekisa ukuthi izinhlelo
zomphakathi ezincike ezinhlelweni ezahlukene zokuthuthukisa izindlela
zokunqanda ubugebengu emphakathini ziyaphumelela. Kumele kube khona
ukubambisana emphakathini. Ukuthuthukiswa komphakathi kumele kunike ophuma
ejele indlela yokuba akwazi ukuphila impilo engcono kwezomnotho, emoyeni,
emasikweni kanye nakwezombusazwe.
Umnyango wezokuvuselelwa kwezimilo uqinisekisa izizinda zokuqeqesha
eziyisikhombisa. Lokhu kusohlelweni lwezidingo zamakhono ngaphansi kwe
National Skills Development Act. Ukumiswa kobuciko namasiko bokuvikela
ubugebengu kuthuthukisa indlela yokuvuselela izimilo kuzaphulamthetho futhi
kuyintuthuko enkulu. Indlela okusho ukuthi –centre iwusize kakhulu umnyango
wezinhlelo eziningi ezamukelekile kuhulumeni. Empeleni isikhwama samakhono
siyikhiphile imali yokufundisa abasemajele. Lokhu kusiza ekwandiseni inani
lezaphulamthetho ekufundeleni umsebenzi.

Ngaphezu kwakho konke lokhu, kusohlelweni lwentuthuko yamakhono lapho
abasemajele kuhambisana nezemfundo yabasemajele. Impumelelo yaloluhlelo
idinga izinsiza ezanele. Njengoba sigubha iminyaka eyishumi
yomthethosisekelo, isigaba samashumi amathathu nanhlanu, ikhasi2. A
somthethosisekelo wezwe sibalulekile ngoba sinika osojele isithunzi somuntu
kanye nendawo ekulungele ukuhlala umuntu. Kubalulekile kithina sonke ukuthi
sisize ekuhlangabezeni lelilungelo lomuntu.

Inqubo yokwakha amajele amasha ayisishiyagalombili iyaqhubeka. Kulamajele
ayisishiyagalombili, amane esebaliwe onyakeni wezimali odlule, azoba
sendaweni yase Kimberley, Leeukop, Nigel nase Klerksdorp kanti amanye amane
njengoba kushiwo ku sona nawo asohlelweni oluqhubekayo, azobekwa ezindaweni
ezithize. Umnyango uzokwakha amajele amane ezindaweni lapho kungekho khona
amajele. Lomqondo uhambisana nohlelo lukahulumeni lwe Accelerated Shared
Growth Initiative of South Africa okungukunikezela ngamathuba emisebenzi
ebantwini bendawo. Njengoba sekubikiwe umnyango, izimali zokwenza
lemisebenzi zikhona. Umnyango wemisebenzi yomphakathi usinikile isiqiniseko
sokuthi lomsebenzi uzoqedwa ngesikhathi esibekiwe, esiyizinyanga
ezingamashumi amabili nane. Ukwakhiwa nokuphathwa kwamajele kumele kube
sezandleni zombuso, kungabi sezandleni zabenzuzo. Lokhu kuhambisana nomgomo
kahulumeni wokuthi ukuvuseleleka kwezimilo kwenziwe umbuso. Kuliqiniso
elengangabazeki ukuthi umbuso wakha amajele  amasha ukuhlangabezana
nokugcwala kwamajele. Lokhu kuambisana nesidingo sikahulumeni sokuhlalisa
izaphulamthetho endaweni engcono futhi enobuntu. Ngizophinde ngisho futhi
somlomo ukuthi I ANC iyawuseka umthethosivivinywa. Ngiyabonga. (Translation
of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mrs W NGWENYA: Chairperson, Minister, hon members  and  the  public,  I  am
going to talk about the aim of correctional services, and I would also  like
to say that the ANC supports this budget. Punishment has  had  an  objective
since a long time ago. The ANC Freedom Charter says,  “All  shall  be  equal
before the law”. It is in  that  chapter  that  the  aim  of  punishment  is
explained as the intention to re-educate offenders with regard  to  ways  of
conducting themselves and to be responsible  and  law-abiding  citizens.  In
this regard, the Department of Correctional Services  aligns  its  aims  and
objectives with the Freedom Charter. The 2005-06  report  tries  to  enforce
correctional services by putting offenders under  correctional  supervision.
The public will have programmes to accept offenders  in  their  communities.
The public needs a lot of money to prepare  for  the  integration  of  these
people into the community. This requires facilities to achieve the  aims  of
the department. Offenders who are  released  on  parole  need  the  help  of
social workers who are in charge to monitor  their  behaviour,  as  well  as
that of the public.

The success of correctional  services  depends  on  collaboration  with  the
public. This  job  needs  the  collaboration  of  the  family,  the  public,
nongovernmental organisations like  Nicro,  business  people,  churches  and
community leaders. Correctional service has been achieved  if  the  offender
is well integrated into the community and he/she doesn’t do  crime.  If  the
situation of the family, the community and the one  who  is  coming  out  of
prison doesn’t change, the integration of the offender  into  the  community
becomes difficult.

With  regard  to  the  programme  of  reintegration  into   the   community,
correctional service has been achieved when the offender is accepted in  the
community in such a way that he/she doesn’t do crime again. The  reports  of
the Department  of  Correctional  Services  look  at  integration  into  the
community as an ongoing thing, which starts when the offender goes to  jail.
The co-operation of the public is very important. The idea of  reintegration
into the community or the conduct of the offender should be  solved  in  the
community where it began. This means that we must have  programmes  to  help
those who are coming out of jail so that they will be law-abiding citizens.
The white paper of 2005 describes the relationship  between  the  government
and the nation, and the relationships with other government  departments  in
developing  ways  of  crime  prevention.  This  is  to  ensure  that  public
programmes are aligned with ways of developing and that  the  prevention  of
crime against the public is successful. There must be co-operation with  the
public. Community development must afford  the  inmate  the  opportunity  to
live a better life wealthwise, spiritually, culturally and politically.

The Department Correctional Services has seven training  institutions.  This
is in  line  with  skills  development  in  terms  of  the  National  Skills
Development Act. The setting up of technology and the culture of  preventing
criminality promotes the rehabilitation of offenders, and this  is  a  major
developmental step. The centre has helped the  department  a  lot  with  the
programmes that are acceptable  to  the  government.  The  Skills  Fund  has
allocated the money to train inmates. This helps to increase the  number  of
offenders who receive skills training.

Besides this, it is in line with skills development to educate inmates.  The
success of this requires a lot of money. As we are celebrating ten years  of
the Constitution, clause 35 in Chapter 2 of the  Constitution  is  important
because it gives detainees dignity and a proper place as  human  beings.  It
is important for us to help with regard to human rights.

The project of building nine new prisons is still on track. Eight  of  these
prisons were started in the last financial  year.  They  are  in  Kimberley,
Leeukop, Nigel, and Klerksdorp. The other four are going to  be  located  in
certain other places. The Department is going to build  four  prisons  where
there are no prisons at present. This  idea  is  in  line  with  Asgisa,  to
create jobs for local people. As it was reported, the money to do  this  job
has already been allocated. The Department  of  Public  Works  gave  us  the
assurance that the work is going to be completed within the projected  time,
which is two years. The construction and management of prisons should be  in
the hands of the government, not financial opportunists.  This  is  in  line
with government policy that the government  should  administer  correctional
services. It is a fact that the government is building prisons in  order  to
deal with the problem of overcrowding. This is  in  line  with  government’s
duty to house prisoners in a better place that has dignity. Let  me  say  it
again, Chairperson, the ANC supports this budget. Thank you.]

Mr S SIMMONS: Madam Chair, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers and colleagues,
the last time I spoke on correctional services the situation in the
department was not what it should be. This department is renowned for what
seems to be questionable management incompetency.

The single most important shortcoming is the provision or lack thereof in
the budget for establishing an adequate infrastructure in order for the
department to achieve one of its core objectives, namely rehabilitation of
inmates. It is generally accepted that social workers and other vocational
workers play a crucial role in the process of rehabilitating offenders.
Currently the ratio between social workers and offenders is not adequate
for successful rehabilitation. There is no way that the department will
come even close to achieving the objective of rehabilitating offenders. On
the contrary, our prison system in its current state is a breeding ground
for hardened criminals.

A further problem hampering rehabilitation is overcrowding. The problem of
overcrowding is largely caused by ineffective legislation. Here I
specifically refer to the minimum sentence legislation.

Die probleem hier is dat daar blyk 'n verband te wees tussen hierdie
wetgewing en die oorbevolking in tronke. [The problem here is that there
seems to be a connection between this legislation and the overcrowding in
prisons.]

I therefore wish to support Judge Hannes Fagan in his call for a review of
this legislation and the consideration of the SA Law Commission’s report in
this regard. At the same time I wish to tell the hon Minister that I do
acknowledge that there are other contributing factors to overcrowding that
fall outside the responsibility of the Department of Correctional Services,
such as unaffordable and restrictive bail conditions, court delays and even
poor judgement when arrests are made. [Time expired.] Thank you, Madam
Chair.

Mopišopo L J TOLO: Mmagorena Mosepediši wa modiro, pele ga ge nka tšwela
pele ka polelo ya ka, a ke re go Tona mohlomphegi Ngconde Balfour le
mokomishinaremogolo wa rena mohlomphegi Mti, re kwele ka ga lehu la
mokhomišinare wa rena Mna Mlombile gomme dipelo tša rena di kwele bohloko
ka kudu. Re le ba-ANC re re a moya wa Mna Mlombile o robale ka khutšo. Ge e
ba go le diphošo tšeo a ka bego a di diretše Modimo a a mo lebalele tšona.

Re le ba-ANC re thekga ditekanyetšo tša kgoro ye ka mešogofela. Ke fo be ke
gakantšhwa ke mohlomphegi Simmons yo a sa tšwago go fa polelo mo. Go bolela
nnete, ke thoma go mmona ge a bolela fa. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs
follows.)

[Bishop L J TOLO: Madam Chairperson, before I proceed with my speech, let
me convey my heartfelt sympathy to hon Minister Ngconde Balfour and hon
Senior Commissioner Mti. We received the news of the passing away of the
Commissioner Mr Mlombile with very sad hearts. May his soul rest in peace
and may God forgive his sins.

We, as the ANC, support the budget with all respect. I am just surprised by
hon Simmons, who has just spoken. To be honest, I only just became aware of
him as he was speaking.]
Om die waarheid te sê ek was saam met hom sedert 1994 hier gewees maar dis
die eerste keer dat ek hom hoor praat. Hy daag glad nie op by ons
vergaderings nie. Ek dink hy behoort hom te skaam, want hy weet self dat as
hy praat – soos agb Lee - gaan hy nie die waarheid praat nie. [Gelag.] Jy
moet darem skaam kry, my maat! Eendag sal ek saam met jou kerk toe gaan en
as jy praat gaan ek vir die gemeente sê dat jy nie die waarheid praat nie
want by die Parlement woon jy glad nie vergaderings by nie, en ook hier
praat jy nie die waarheid nie. Jy moet nie weer so maak nie.
[Tussenwerpsels.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S BOTHA): Orde! Agb Tolo, as jy die lid
aanspreek dan moet jy nie sê “jy” nie, maar “agb lid”.

Biskop L J TOLO: Ja, dit is waar: hy is die agb Simmons. Baie Dankie Mev
die Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[To tell the truth, I have been with him here since 1994, but this is the
first time that I have heard him speak. He does not attend our meetings at
all. I think he should be ashamed of himself because he knows full well
that when he speaks – like Lee – he is not going to tell the truth.
[Laughter.] You should be ashamed of yourself, my friend! One day I will go
to church with you and if you speak I am going to tell the congregation
that you are not telling the truth, because at Parliament you do not attend
meetings at all and here, too, you do not tell the truth. You must not do
that again. [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Order! Hon Tolo, when you address the
member you must not say “you” but “hon member”.

Bishop L J TOLO: Yes, that is true: He is the hon Simmons. Thank you very
much, Madam Chairperson.]

Mohlomphegi Tona, ke latela seo o se boletšego mong’aka ge o re kgolego ya
mehleng yeno ga e swane le ya bogologolo. O boletše therešo. Ke dumela gore
o yo mongwe wa bao ba kilego ba golegwa dikgolegong tša maloba.

A ke bontšhe gore ke tlile go bolela kudu ka tša tlhokomelo ya bagolegwa.
Ke therešo gore lenaneo la tlhokomelo ya bagolegwa le be le le gona le
mehleng ya apartheid, efela le be le sa akaretše bohle. Tlhokomelo yeo e
bego e le gona ya bagolegwa e be e le ya babašweu fela. Ebile ge o ka
lebelela, go be go na le diwekešopo tšeo di bego di agetšwe go thuša go
hlahla fela bagolegwa ba bašweu gore ba be le bokgoni bja mešomo gore e re
mohlang ba lokollwa kgolegong ba kgone go itirela. Yo mongwe wa bagolegwa
bao ba bego ba le kgolegong, bjaloka ge ke šetše ke boletše, e be e le wene
morw’a Balfour.

Seo se makatšago, magagešo, ke gore mmušo wa rena wo o etilwego pele ke
ANC, ge bjale o kopanya setšhaba ka moka sa babašweu le babaso gore ba
hlahlwe ka go swana, re thoma go sola ka la gore mmušo o dira phošo. Ke
nyaka go bontšha gore mohlomphegi Tona o e beile gabotse gobane le Mangwalo
a Makgethwa a bontšha gore re swanetše go swarelane melato. Ka
segagabobatho, motho o oba molato gomme a sekišwe; morago ga go bonwa
molato o a lefišwa gomme a boela setšhabeng seo se tlago mo amogela ka moya
wo borutho. Le go rena a go beng bjalo magagešo.

Ke rata go bolela kutšwana ka ga bomme bao ba lego dikgolegong – ke ra
bommagorena bao ba swarago thipa ka bogaleng. A ke bontšhe gore ba bangwe
ba bona ke baimana. Bjale nna seo ke sa se thekgego le ganyenyane ke gore
ba thušwe ka mobu - gobane ba bangwe ba baimana ba na le go ja mobu. Ga ke
dumela gore re ka ba nea mobu gore ba o je.

Basadi bao ba lego mmeleng ba kwana le dienywa tša go swana diapola le tše
dingwe. Nna ke be ke re go ka ba bjang gore tšeo ba di kganyogago re lekeng
go ba nea ka gore di re fepela ngwana yo a lego mo mmeleng wa mmagwe –
ngwana yo a tlilego go ba moetapele yo mokaone wa ka moso. Eupša seo nkago
se gatelela ke gore re a tseba gore ba bangwe ba basadi ge ba le mmeleng ba
rata go ja mobu gomme ge e le wona re se ke ra ba nea le ganyenyane.
[Disego.]

Ka le lengwe la matšatši re rile ge re etetše go ye nngwe ya digolego ka
profenseng ya gešo ya Limpopo, ke na le mohlomphedi Mna Denis Bloem le
Mokomišinare Tshivhase, re ile ra wela mmagwe ngwana wa lesea la kgwedi tše
selelago a fepa ngwana ka boušwa bjo a bego a bo hutšweditše ka meetse.
Taba yeo re swanetšego go e hlokomela kudu ke gobane phošo yeo e dirilwego
ke nna goba mmagwe ngwana, ngwana ga a e tsebe. Ka gona re swanetše go
hlokomela gore bana bao ba ja dijo tšeo di swanetšego.

Ga ke tsebe gore re ka dira bjang ka bommawešo bao ba lego dikgolegong ka
gore ge ngwana a gola a se na mmagwe o ipona bošuana. Go bolela nnete, ka
tlhago ngwana o rata tatagwe, efela ga a nape a mo rata ka kudu go swana le
mmagwe. Go swana le nna, ke rata tate, eupša ga ke mo rate kudukudu go
swana le mme. Ga se gore tate ke mo hloile. Ga ke tsebe gore re ka dira
bjang gore bagolegwa ba basadi bao ba nago le bana ba banyenyane ka ntle ba
fele ba bona bana ba bona kgafetšakgafetša gore bana ba gole ba bona lerato
la bommagobona.

Ke rata go bontšha gape gore ke kgahilwe ke mohlala wo o dirilwego ke Tona
Ngconde Balfour. Ka le lengwe la matšatši ge re be re le kgolegong ya
Pollsmoor, go be go le mogolegwa wa mosadi yo a bego a batametše go
lokollwa. Yena o rile go lokollwa, Tona a laetša ditšhaba tša borwa bja
Afrika le lefaseng ka bophara gore ge motho a dirile phošo gomme a
ahlotšwe, a amogele molato wa gagwe. A Modimo a go šegofatše, mohlomphegi
Tona. Mangwalo a Makgethwa a re yo a kwelago yo mongwe bohloko le Modimo o
tlo mo lebalela dibe tša gagwe. O tloge o e swere, mohlomphegi Tona. Le
rena bohle re lego fa a re hlokomeleng gore Tona o re file malebiša gore re
amogeleng bao ba re diretšego diphošo mohlang ba boago kgolegong.

Mongwaledipharephare wa Ditšhabakopano, Kofi Anan, o rile ge a bolela ka la
14 Matšhe 2006, a bontšha gore Afrika-Borwa ke naga yeo e bontšhitšego
mohlala wa ditshwarelano ka TRC - gobane re swaretše bao ba ilego ba re
gobatša, ba re kweša bohloko, ba re bolaya, ba re hlahlela dikgolegong. Seo
se ra gore bohle bao re lego mo ge motho a e tšwa kgolegong a re se mo
kgetholleng, eupša re netefatšeng gore re mo amogela ka ‘atla tše pedi, re
beng le yena, re pheleng le yena mmogo gobane ke ngwana wa rena, ke
ngwanaborena, re se ke ra mo kgetholla gobane ge re mo kgetholla re dira
gore a tuke pefelo yeo e tlago mo iša melekong gape. Tona o tloge a re
laeditše mohlala gomme ke dumela gore bohle bao re lego fa re tla o latela.

Pukung ya Mateo 18: 21-22 re bala gore: Ke mo Petrose a tlilego go Jesu, a
mmotšiša a re: ``Morena, na ge ngwanešo a ka no fela a mphošetša, ke mo
lebalele gakae? Ke mo lebalele gašupa?’’ Jesu a mo fetola a re: ``Nna ga ke
re gašupa, eupša ke re ga masome a šupago a balwa gašupa.’’ Bagešo, ke ra
gore ke mošomo wa rena go lebalela bao ba re diretšego diphošo gomme ba ya
dikgolegong. Seo se boletšwego ke Kofi Anan re swanetše go se phethagatša
ka gore o re dinaga tše dingwe di a swarelana bjale ka rena mo Afrika Borwa
ge re dirile gore go be le tshwarelano. Gape o bontšhitše le gore
Ditšhabakopano di tšea malebiša go Afrika Borwa.

Seo se ra gore le go tše tša dikgolego Ditšhabakopano di ka tšea malebiša
go Afrika Borwa. Ka gona, ge re ka dira ka mokgwa wo rena MaAfrika-Borwa re
dirago ka gona re tla be re dira mošomo wo mobotse. Ga ke dume gore re
lebeleleng Tona goba Mokomišinare ba le noši goba Kgoro ya Ditirelo tša
Tshokollo ya Basinyi. Mošomo wa dikgolego o lebane le rena ka moka mo borwa
bja Afrika.

Ge re be re ile go bona bagolegwa kua Pollsmoor, re na le Tona, baletakgoro
ba ile ba swara kgarebe ye botsebotse, ya nko ya lenono. Kgarebe yeo e be e
swere lebake, e le faketše ka potleng, e ilo le nea mogolegwa. Bjale re le
setšhaba re swanetše go netefatša gore dilo tše bjalo ka tšeo re a di
hlokomologa.

Bjalo ka ge Tona a šetše a hlalošitše, kgolegong ya Sonderwater batho ba
bolailwe ka dithunya. Batho ba bangwe ba tšea dijo ba di iša dikgolegong
gomme ba bula borotho nthoba, ba fakela dithunya ka gare ba a tswalela.
Sethunya seo se tlo newa mogolegwa. Ka tšatši le lengwe re be re le
Thohoyandou moo ba ilego ba tšea Peibele ba gagola matlakala a yona ka moka
gwa šala e le nthoba gomme ba fakela sethunya ka gare. Ge ba fihla
kgolegong ba tla re ba tlile go nea Tolo ``Peibele’’ ka gobane ke motho wa
go rata kereke. Ba tla nnea ``Peibele’’ yeo ka mo gare e na le sethunya.

Tše ka moka di bakwa ke rena setšhaba ka mo ntle. Re bakela kgoro mošomo wo
mogolo. Se se ra gore re le setšhaba ka moka re swanetše go ntšha maahlo
dinameng, re netefatšeng gore kgoro ya rena e kgona go šoma ka tshwanelo.

Ke gapeletšega go tsopola Mangwalo a Makgethwa bagešo. Mateo 6:15 e bontšha
gore ge re rapela re re Morena o re swarele melato ya rena bjalo ka ge re
swarela bao ba nago le melato go rena. A re kwešišeng gore re direng bjalo
ka ge Tona a swaretše yo mongwe ka mešogofela. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows)

[Hon Minister, I concur with what you said, prisons today are very
different from the prisons back then. It is true. I believe you are one of
those prisoners who was jailed back then.

Let me indicate that I am going to get deeper into the issue of caring for
prisoners. It is true that there was a programme for caring for prisoners
during the apartheid regime. Unfortunately this programme was not for all
prisoners. It was only meant for the white prisoners. If you look at it,
workshops were conducted only for the white prisoners, to equip them with
the necessary skills so that they could be independent when they were
released. One of those prisoners, as I already mentioned, was you, Mr
Balfour.

What is surprising is that the ANC-led government is now being criticised
for trying to bring the whole nation together so that all prisoners undergo
training, regardless of their race.

I would like to say that the hon Minister has made it clear, because even
the Bible says that we must forgive those who tresspass against us. In
life, if a person does something wrong, they are taken in for questioning.
If they are found guilty, they will be fined and welcomed back in the
community. Let us do the same.

Let me just touch on the women that are in prison. I am talking about the
women who would do anything to protect their families. Let me indicate that
some of them are pregnant. What I do not support is that they are given
soil, which they eat, and this is not healthy for them. Those women should
be given healthy food like apples. I suggest we give them healthy food
because that is also necessary for their babies’ growth. The babies are our
future leaders, after all. I would like to emphasise that we should never
give them soil to eat. [Laughter.]

One day as I was visiting one of the prisons in my province, Limpopo, with
hon Dennis Bloem and Commissioner Tshivase, we found the mother of a six-
month-old feeding her baby porridge and water. We need to remember that the
mistakes that the mothers have made have nothing to do with the childred.
We therefore need to make sure that the children are well fed.

I do not know how we can help the mothers who are in prison, because their
children feel left alone at home. To be honest, children love their
fathers, just not as much as they do their mothers. I love my father too,
but I love my mother more. That does not necessarily mean that I hate my
father. I am not sure how we can do it in such a way that the mothers who
are in prison are able to see their children more often so that the
children do no grow up without mother love.

I would also like to indicate that I am impressed by the hon Minister
Balfour’s example. One day when we were at Pollsmoor, there was a female
prisoner that was nearing her release. When she was released, the Minister
showed people in Southern Africa and the world at large that if a person
committed a crime and has been fined, they must acknowledge that they have
done wrong. May God bless you, hon Minister. The Bible says that if you
show pity on the people who are suffering, God will forgive your sins. You
have got it right, hon Minister. We must all realise that the Minister has
set an example by welcoming and forgiving those, who have inconvenienced
us, once they are released from prison.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Anan, said on 14 March
2006 that South Africa has set an example in terms of forgiveness through
the TRC. We have forgiven those who inconvenienced us, hurt us, killed us
and threw us in jail. That means that we should not discriminate against
those who were once imprisoned. We must receive them with open arms, and
live with them because they are our children, our brothers and sisters.
Rejection will only bring more anger, which will push them into more
trouble. I would like to believe that we would all follow the Minister’s
example.

According to Matthew 18:21-22, Peter came to Jesus and asked: ``Lord, if my
brother keeps on sinning against me, how many times do I have to forgive
him? Seven times?’’ Jesus replied: ``No, not seven times, but seventy times
seven’’. My people, all I am saying is that it is our responsibility to
forgive the people who have inconvenienced us and were therefore sent to
prison. Kofi Anan said that other countries are following South Africa’s
example. He even indicated that the United Nations is also following the
example.

That means the United Nations can also follow the example with regard to
what is happening in South African prisons. This means that we will be
doing a good job. I would not want us to look at the Minister, the
Commissioner or the Department of Correctional Services individually. This
is something we all have to do as South Africans.

When we visited Pollsmoor with the Minister, the prison warders there
caught a beautiful girl who had dagga in her pocket and was trying to take
it through to a prisoner. It is very important that we as a nation make
sure that we avoid such things.

As the Minister has already indicated, people were shot dead at Zonderwater
Prison. Some people hollow out bread and put guns in there and take them to
the prisoners. One day when we were in Thohoyandou the same thing happened,
only this time they used the Bible. The Bible’s pages were taken out and a
gun was put inside. When they arrive at the prison, they will say that they
brought the Bible for Tolo, because he/she is a believer. They will give me
the Bible with the gun inside.

It is the people from outside that are doing all these things. We are
creating a lot of chaos for the department. This means that we as a nation
need to be careful and make sure that the department is able to function
properly.

I feel obliged to quote the Bible. According to Matthews 6:15, `` ... if
you do not forgive others, then your Father will not forgive the wrongs you
have done’’. Let us do as the Minister has done by forgiving somebody
else.]

Ek dink agb Lee moet ook so maak. As hy dit nie doen nie sal daar
openhartig getuig kan word dat hy nie reg maak nie. Ek dink jy moet so
maak. Ek stem saam met agb Denis Bloem dat as jy nie so maak nie gaan ons
jou toesluit. Baie dankie, Mevrou die Voorsitter. [Gelag.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[I think that hon Lee should do the same thing. If he does not do so we
shall be able to state frankly that he is not doing the right thing. I
think you should do so. I agree with the hon Dennis Bloem that if you do
not do so, we will lock you up. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, hon Minister, the website of Correctional
Services states:

  It costs almost R40 489 of taxpayers’ funds to keep one offender in the
  correctional centre each year.

The emphasis of this debate today should not be why four new prisons
planned and funded to the tune of R1,2 billion have not been completed.
Yes, I agree that fruitless expenses must be addressed, but more
importantly there should be a major paradigm shift when we debate the need
for more prisons to prevent overcrowding in existing prisons.

I do not believe the answer lies in building more prisons, especially if
the taxpayer will have to fork out over R40 000 per annum for each new
offender. It does not make economic sense to spend R3 374 per month on an
awaiting trial prisoner who cannot afford to pay R50 bail on a charge of
stealing a chicken.

The 2005-06 South Africa Year Book states that there will be an increase of
202 400 offenders in 2006-07. This increase will probably cost over R287
million.

What our government should do is to examine the conditions and the factors
that lead to the dramatic increase in serious offenders each year. What are
the socioeconomic conditions that contribute to the increase in crime?

The FD welcomes the fact that Correctional Services has embraced the
restorative justice approach aimed at reducing crime and promoting healing
between offenders, victims and the community.

The Department of Justice must examine alternative sentencing options and
diversion programmes, especially for nonviolent crimes as a viable option
to a prison sentence.

With these few concerns raised, the FD supports the budget vote. I thank
you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr N B FIHLA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members and officials of
Correctional Services, at one time I thought that I would have to tackle
the hon Seaton severely. Seemingly, she was merely a front for the attack
that she made in the media.

Now firstly, let me start with the input by hon Selfe. He speaks of a
shortage of staff, social workers and psychologists. He says that there are
not enough professionals in our prisons today because of overcrowding.
Partly yes, it is owing to overcrowding, but Mr Selfe conveniently leaves
out the fact that prisons were built for incarcerations and not for
rehabilitation by the government that he served under as a senator.
Secondly, you speak of diversion - alternative sentencing - restorative
justice and you say there is lack of it in this government. You forget that
just about a year or two ago, there was a release of 31 000 prisoners. Now,
that was the work of the cluster - the cluster of the ANC that includes
Justice, Safety and Security and Correctional Services.

These departments are working together to try to decrease the number of
inmates in our prisons. They are doing a lot of work, even today. There are
prisons, for instance in the Eastern Cape, where there are pilot projects
being done, where an official of the Department of Safety and Security, a
prosecutor and an official of Correctional Services are working together,
before a person is brought to a court of law. That is what this ANC is
doing. Let’s come to the PP prisons where you are saying that they can do
better in rehabilitating people, and they need to be utilised. We are also
saying you are wrong there, again.

As the Minister is saying, we are not being assisted. How can a person who
is serving six life sentences be rehabilitated in a prison? How can a
person who is serving 2 000 years in prison be rehabilitated? When will he
come out of prison? That is the type of prisoners that are sent to those
private prisons. And the ANC says that it is definitely not assisting us,
because if they were putting inside people who are juveniles, people who
have short sentences, those people can easily be rehabilitated and go
outside and do better for society than rehabilitating somebody who is going
to stay there forever, until he dies in prison. What will the society gain
from that person?

So I’m saying that the Minister therefore was correct. As the ANC we are
great at discussing things, but we have often found that there are those
who can’t discuss, but who run to the media as their mouthpiece and avoid
discussing the issues within the correct democratic structures set up by
this beloved country under the leadership of the ANC.

The unfortunate part is that this onslaught does not only emanate from
forces outside our movement, who are jealous of the strides we have made to
liberate this country, but also from among other ranks that we thought for
some time were with us, yet they were firmly batting for the other side.
Others that were tasked to be responsible for this portfolio, in particular
the IFP leadership, have created this mess and are merely motivated by
their own narrow and selfish ambitions.

Effective oversight services are a high priority for Parliament, and the
crucial ingredient in the portfolio efforts to strengthen the organisation
in the 21st century. Basically, accountability means to give an account of
action on policies, or to account for spending and so forth. Accountability
can be said to require a person to explain and justify against criteria of
some kind, their decisions or actions. It also requires that the person
goes on to make amends for any fault or error, and takes steps to prevent
its recurrence in the future.

I’m tasked to contextualise the misnomer regarding the building of the four
new-generation prisons. The construction of the new generation centres,
announced by the President in his state of the nation address in 2002 and
2006, is proceeding as planned in spite of incorrect media reports to the
contrary. The reported delay in the media about the rechannelling of the
funds earmarked for the new generation centres was totally misleading and
off the mark. No money has been diverted from the budget of the
construction of these centres to other programmes of the department. What
would have possessed hon Seaton to be so meticulous in a portrayal of
hatred of the department, and government in particular?

A condition of the exercise of power in a constitutional democracy is that
the administration and the executive are checked by being held accountable
to an organ of government distinct from it. We took it as our
responsibility to get clarity on the media reports by calling into one room
the Department of Public Works, National Treasury and the Department of
Correctional Services, whereby the all the confusion was clarified to our
satisfaction. We were told by the three departments that the construction
of the centres announced in 2002, was planned to start last year for
completion after only three years in Kimberley, Nigel, Klerksdorp and
Leeuwkop, with the bulk earthworks already having been done in all three
sites except Klerksdorp.

However, the following factors led to the undesirable delays. Firstly, the
building industry market responsible for calls for tenders proved beyond
the available budget for starting with all four centres last year;
secondly, an environmental impact assessment report on Leeuwkop
construction is only expected to be finalised in August 2006. This is the
situational analysis report that will inform the department’s position on
the commencement of construction on the Leeuwkop site, whilst construction
with regard to other centres will proceed as planned.

Regarding the second group of four new generation correctional centres in
Paarl, East London, Port Shepstone and Polokwane announced this year, the
strategic plan of the department submitted to the portfolio committee
clearly indicates that the construction is expected to commence in the
financial year 2008-09, and to be completed in 2010. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: On 2 May I read to this House the
following, by way of an example:

   As Members of Parliament, we should recognise that the media can be
   driven by the agendas of those who feed them information and it is
   important for us as Members of Parliament to be vigilant in relation to
   the agendas of others and ensure that they are able to rise above being
   manipulated by the agendas of others, and ensure an objective and
   professional oversight. Furthermore, the public utterances of MPs should
   be based on sound independent investigations and analyses of the facts
   and explanations given, and not on the basis of facts presented by others
   without hearing the other side of the story.

That is from the extract that the hon Selfe was saying I gave a lecture on.
I am sorry, Mr Selfe, for giving a lecture. Maybe a “plaasjapie” [farm boy]
black guy like me should not give you such a lecture, but that is my
understanding as a member of this House. I was talking as an MP, because I
am an MP. So, for talking as an MP, if I were wrong, I am very sorry. But I
am still an MP.

Let me go to the responses. Oom Ben, thank you very much for explaining
things we have explained before. The paradigm shift, Mr Green, is needed
and you are quite correct and we are on that route.

Mnr Groenewald, twak. Twak! [Gelag.][Mr Groenewald, nonsense. Nonsense!
[Laughter.]]

Hon Mfundisi, you spoke very well. You are correct on all the points. We
have explained them in every part of that report that came before the
portfolio committee. Everything that you raised here is actually in that
report, because, every time we are called by the portfolio committee, we go
in and explain these things. But because you come from a smaller party and
you don’t have the opportunity to go to other meetings, I would rather
suggest, as a fellow MP that you do get the reports and just read it so you
can know what is going on. That is all! Instead of just taking it from the
papers, actually follow up on what the department has said on this
particular issue. It helps to read these things.

Mr Simmons, it is not Judge Flanagan, it’s Judge Fagan. [Laughter.] Please
make sure next time that you respond and say “Judge Fagan”. Again, it is a
situation of a smaller party. I don’t blame you for that, because you are
not there all the time, but please also read the reports. It will help you.

Nkosi Tolo, thank you very much. We don’t accept gangsterism within our
prisons. It is something that we keep harping on all the time. We have a
plan on how to tackle gangsters in our prisons and we have actually told
the portfolio committee that they can call on us for assistance.

Mrs Rajbally, we have reported back on the Jali commission time and time
again, through Oom Ben – not Oom Ben Fihla but Oom Ben Skosana. When I took
over there were 11 preliminary reports from the Jali commission and most of
them had already been implemented. And when he gave the last report to the
President we had to do the last bits of that. But keep in mind that it has
taken a long time for that commission. Some people who worked for
Correctional Services are gone. Some of those people are dead. Some who are
still within Correctional Services are going to be dealt with in the way a
dog deals with a bone. [Laughter.]

Hon Xolo, thank you very much for all the things that you have said. You
are right about guns going into prisons through radios. A mother, Sis
Dumisane, brought a radio to her son and at the back of the radio, instead
of a battery, there was a firearm. We have seen that and it has cost us
lives. A pistol was smuggled inside a loaf of bread into Pollsmoor. These
are the kinds of things we deal with on a daily basis.

The promotion of members, the low morale of staff, salaries of staff are
all things being looked into. We did have an internal promotion last year
thanks to the DPSA, Department of Public Service and Administration,
because they allowed us to do that to be able to boost staff, and we will
keep on doing that. Every time we get some savings we will again take more
staff members and try to push them up, because we need to boost their
morale. But we won’t do it in such a way that it will disadvantage what the
DPSA does every year with unions. It will be something that is done
internally only.

Professional staff are working very hard. It is tough. The DPSA and we are
deliberating on the matter, because we are not the only ones making those
decisions. Again, you spoke about the lekgotla and the cluster, hon
Groenewald. We know  about the clusters. We know about the lekgotlas, and
again, “twak”! [nonsense!]

The other issue that was raised by Mr Selfe, I fully agree. Hon Seaton, I
also fully agree with you. All we need to do is ensure that with these
things, as the portfolio committee, we call on the Portfolio Committee on
Justice and the Portfolio Committee on the SAPS, and that together with the
Ministers we get involved so that we can come up with something. So I fully
agree with you. You are members of that committee and you attend those
committee meetings.

It will be a very, very sad and wet day when opposition parties agree with
the ruling party on everything. You cannot. Your responsibility and right
is to oppose. So when you stand here and oppose, I am not shocked. I say to
myself, “That is what you do because you are an opposition party”. So, go
ahead and oppose, that is no problem. If you did not oppose, I would have
been the first one to ask: “Oh, bloody hell, what have I done wrong now?”
[Interjections.]

On international relations, Commissioner Linda Mti last year was elected as
the African deputy president of the Congress of International Corrections
and Prisons so he is holding that position for us. [Applause.] And then,
between 20–30 August, Cesca, which is the Conference of Eastern, Southern
and Central African Heads of Correctional Centres, will be holding a
turnaround conference in South Africa. Once again this shows that they do
have confidence in this country. So it is coming to South Africa and during
that time we will have members of correctional services from all the SADC
countries participating in sport and recreation. And we think it is part of
our contribution to turn things around within Correctional Services.

When we talk about issues of this hybrid system, we have not finalised this
hybrid system of building. We will definitely and undoubtedly bring it to
the committee for deliberation. We are discussing it with Treasury and the
Department of Public Works and we will again take those partners along to
the portfolio committee so that by the time we have finished, the portfolio
committee will be well aware of what we want to do. So to actually say that
we are trying to get a blank cheque from you as the portfolio committee is
incorrect. We are not doing that. We would like to finalise that hybrid
system in partnership with you.

Thank you, Mr Bloem and your committee. Thank you to all the members who
have contributed positively to this debate. We will go to the portfolio
committee before the 15th, but I can assure you of one thing: When we come
to vote here on the 15th of whatever month you are saying, it is not only
going to be us voting; it’s going to be the ANC that is going to vote as
well as the Members of this Parliament.

I don’t like to be threatened. I don’t like anybody to threaten me. I come
out fighting once I get threatened. [Interjections.] I come out fighting.
And when I start fighting, there’s going to be blood on the dance floor.
[Laughter.] [Applause.] However, thank you very much.

We are Members of Parliament; we are colleagues, are we not? We should tell
each other the truth. When we get out of here, you are invited by
Correctional Services, whether it was “twak” [nonsense] or not that you
said, you are still invited to join us for some coffee and tea in the Old
Assembly Chamber and then later on – Donald Lee and your group – you may
ask how much was spent on the party at the Old Assembly Chamber.
[Laughter.] Then, please, go there. Yes, you do not want to go there. You
are not used to going to the canteen. [Interjections.] To the “kroeg”
[bar], you are more used to the “kroeg” [bar]! So please join us in the Old
Assembly all of you. And thank you to all the members for their
contributions.

The House adjourned at 17:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                             MONDAY, 22 MAY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


          a) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill  [B 9 – 2006]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 28807 of 5 May 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Justice
         and Constitutional Development of the National Assembly, as well
         as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
         classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 23 May 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

    2. Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


           1) The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


           (a)   Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
                of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill, 2006,
                submitted by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional
                Development 8 May 2006. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
                on Justice and Constitutional Development and the Select
                Committee on Security and Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport


      a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2006 to 2009.

2.    The Minister for the Public Service and Administration


      a) Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
         Administration for 2006 to 2011.


COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


   1. Report of the  Standing  Committee  on  Private  Members’  Legislative
      Proposals and Special Petitions  on  the  proposed  Political  Parties
      Election Fund Bill, dated 15 November 2005:


        The Standing Committee on Private  Members’  Legislative  Proposals
        and Special Petitions, having  considered  the  proposed  Political
        Parties Election Fund Bill, submitted by Mr PF Smith  and  referred
        to the Committee and,  having  consulted  with  the  Department  of
        National  Treasury  and  Independent  Electoral  Commission  (IEC),
        recommends that permission not be given to the  member  to  proceed
        with the proposal due to the following reasons:

          1. Elections expenses are covered by the present fund.
          2. Extending  public  funding  of  political  parties  to  parties
             represented   in   municipal   councils   will   probably    be
             unconstitutional.
          3. We cannot  support  any  move  towards  increasing  the  public
             funding of represented political parties, especially by way  of
             the creation of a special election fund,  while  not  affording
             new and smaller parties some  form  of  assistance  with  their
             election expenses.

        Report to be considered.

   2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services  on  2006/7
      Budget Vote 20 and the 2006/7-2010/11 Strategic Plan of the Department
      of Correctional Services, dated 19 May 2006:


      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services having considered the
      Budget Vote 20 of the Department of Correctional Services for 2006/07,
      reports as follows:


      The Committee has examined  the  Budget  Vote  of  the  Department  of
      Correctional Services (Vote 20) for the 2006/07 financial year and the
      forward estimates for 2007/08 and 2008/09 included in the Estimates of
      National Expenditure (ENE) 2006, as well as the Department’s Strategic
      Plan 2006/07 - 2010/11, and reports as follows:
     1. Introduction

        The Portfolio  Committee  on  Correctional  Services  received  the
        following inputs on the  Budget  and  the  Strategic  Plan  of  the
        Department of Correctional Services (DCS) for 2006/7:


         • Presentation by the DCS on the 2006/7 Budget allocation and  the
           Strategic Plan for 2006/7 – 2010/11 on 9 March 2006.
         • Input from the public and civil society in the  form  of  Public
           Hearings held on 15 and  16  March  2006.  The  following  role-
           players presented comments on the Budget before the Committee:
            o Public Service Association (PSA)
            o South African Human Rights Council (SAHRC)
            o Civil Society Prison Reform Initiative (CSPRI)
            o   National   Institute   for   Crime   Prevention   and   the
              Rehabilitation of Offenders (NICRO).
            o Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons (JIOP)
            o Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation (CSVR)
            o Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (POPCRU)
         • Briefing by the Minister  and  the  Department  of  Correctional
           Services, National Treasury and the Department of  Public  Works
           on progress on the building of New Generation Prisons on 02  May
           2006.
         • Follow up meeting with the Department of  Correctional  Services
           on issues emanating from the budget hearings on 18 May 2006.

   2. Research Analysis and Overview of the 2006/7 Budget  and  the  2006/7-
      2010/11 Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services.

      The Department of Correctional Services (DCS)  will  receive  R10,  63
      billion for the 2006/07 financial year. This amounts to 4.09%  of  the
      total Budget.  Last year (2005/06) it received  R9,  88  billion  that
      amounted to 4.3% of the total Budget.
      The Department of Correctional Services received 14.5%  of  the  total
      allocation for the Justice  and  Protection  Services  cluster,  which
      includes the Departments of Correctional  Services,  Defence,  Justice
      and  Constitutional  Development,  Safety   and   Security   and   the
      Independent Complaints Directorate.  It  received  14%  of  the  total
      Justice and Protection Services cluster allocation in 2005/06 and thus
      has remained relatively stable in terms  of  its  percentage  of  this
      cluster allocation.


2.1.  Medium Term Budget Policy Statement

      The Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS) does not  specifically
      mention priorities related to the DCS but  includes  the  priority  of
      ‘improved access to justice, enhanced  policing  capacity  and  better
      quality of courts administration’.

      It must be taken into account  that  a  focus  on  improving  policing
      capacity, for example,  has  implications  for  prisons,  as  improved
      policing may mean more arrests and probably result in more  people  in
      prison. On the other hand, improved investigations and court processes
      may also have positive spin-offs for corrections as  this  may  reduce
      the length of time that  Awaiting  Trial  Detainees  (ATDs)  spend  in
      prison before being sentenced.

      During the MTBS budget hearings held by the Joint Budget Committee  of
      the Parliament of South Africa on 31 October 2005, the DCS raised  the
      following concerns:

      • That no additional allocation had been made in the  2006/07  budget
        for implementation of the White Paper. This may  negatively  affect
        the success  of  the  Centres  of  Excellence,  as  the  costs  for
        increased outputs are not accommodated on the baseline  allocations
        to the Department.
      • That no additional allocation had been made in the  2006/07  budget
        for implementation of the Fleet Management System which  was  based
        on a completed feasibility study by the Department of Transport. It
        was identified that there was a need for more vehicles as  well  as
        proper  fleet  management   including   controllers   and   control
        mechanisms.
      • The bids received for the tenders on the four new prisons were much
        higher than the anticipated costs outlined  by  the  Department  of
        Public Works (DPW).  The outcome of the completion of  the  centres
        is now subject to negotiations with  DPW  and  the  results  of  an
        independent study to bridge the gap between the  anticipated  costs
        of R360 million per facility and the new estimated costs of R2, 236
        billion over the MTEF.

      National Treasury has stated that the  DCS  is  expected  to  use  its
      savings (as a result of the special remission, reduction  of  overtime
      and savings on the medial aid) to fund  its  additional  projects  and
      needs, including the Fleet Management System and the implementation of
      the White Paper.  National Treasury has also stated that  if  the  DCS
      had begun building the four new prisons when they were given the money
      to do so, they would not be experiencing the huge escalation in  costs
      that they are at present. DCS has only been granted an additional R110
      million for 2007/08 and 2008/09 to fund information and  communication
      technologies.   However,  last  year  they  received   an   additional
      allocation over the MTEF and some of this money is earmarked  for  the
      2006/07 financial year.

2.2.  Broad Expenditure Trends

      The following table illustrates that for 2006/07, the budget  for  the
      DCS  has  increased  by  R740  million  (7.5%)  in  nominal  terms  in
      comparison to 2005/06.

|            |2005/06     |2006/07     |2007/08     |2008/09     |
|            |(R’000)     |(R’000)     |(R’000)     |(R’000)     |
|Vote 20     |9 888 887   |10 630 712  |11 767 489  |12 451 186  |
|Nominal %   |            |7.5%        |            |            |
|increase    |            |            |            |            |

      In 2006, an additional allocation of R110 million was given to DCS for
      Information and Communication Technologies, which includes R40 million
      for 2007/08  and  R70  million  for  2008/09.   This  will  facilitate
      information driven decision-making within the DCS,  the  JCPS  cluster
      and the Social Sector Cluster of integrated governance.

      Last year, an additional allocation was made to DCS  of  R200  million
      for 2005/06, R333 million for 2006/07, R805 million  for  2007/08  and
      R70 million for 2008/09. These allocations were for:


      • Implementing the White Paper on Corrections (R250 million).
      • Implementing the 7-day establishment (R255 million).
      • Meeting the costs of providing three meals a day to offenders (R160
        million).
      • Infrastructure (R140 million).
      • Salary adjustments (R593 million).

      The following details the total allocations for 2006/07 in  the  areas
      of infrastructure and training:

      • Infrastructure: R1 billion from R983 million in 2005/06.
      • Training: R113,5 million from R107,8 million in 2005/06.

      The following table illustrates the proportion of the total DCS budget
      for each programme and whether the programmes increased  or  decreased
      in 2006/07 in comparison to the previous year.

|Programme    |2005/06      |2006/07      |Nominal      |Percent of   |
|             |(R’000)      |(R’000)      |increase/    |total budget |
|             |             |             |decrease     |per programme|
|             |             |             |             |for 2006/07  |
|Administratio|2 554 463    |2 761 033    |8.1%         |26%          |
|n            |             |             |             |             |
|Security     |3 311 437    |3 336 036    |0.7%         |31.4%        |
|Corrections  |642 906      |853 538      |32.8%        |8%           |
|Care         |939 368      |1 214 535    |29.3%        |11.4%        |
|Development  |360 045      |395 366      |9.8%         |3.7%         |
|Social       |313 336      |342 008      |9.2%         |3.2%         |
|Reintegration|             |             |             |             |
|Facilities   |1 767 332    |1 728 196    |-2.2%        |16.3%        |

      Security is the largest programme within the budget  followed  closely
      by Administration. However, both the  Corrections  Programme  and  the
      Care Programmes receive an increased proportion of the 2006/07  budget
      in comparison to other programmes as  well  as  the  most  substantial
      increases in the amounts  allocated  to  these  programmes.   Thus  in
      2005/06, the Corrections Programme was allocated 6.5% of the total DCS
      budget and this has  increased  by  8%  in  2006/07.   Similarly,  the
      proportion of the budget allocated to the Care Programme has increased
      by 11.4% of the budget in comparison to 9.5% in 2005/06.  The  amounts
      allocated to the two programmes increase by 32%  for  the  Corrections
      Programme, and 29% for the Care Programme in 2006/07.

      This is in line with the  focus  of  the  White  Paper  on  correcting
      offender behaviour  in  a  targeted  manner  to  reduce  the  risk  of
      reoffending after release. This includes providing targeted programmes
      specifically to address problems which have been identified  for  each
      offender, such as alcohol abuse.

      The allocation for Development increases less substantially. While the
      provision of education and training programmes in prison is  still  an
      important aspect of the White Paper, the focus  for  the  MTEF  is  on
      correcting specific offending behavioural problems in conjunction with
      building general skills and education to improve chances of employment
      after release.

      The Facilities Programme is the only one that receives a  decrease  in
      allocation for 2006/07.  While this  would  generally  be  a  positive
      aspect of the budget as it would acknowledge the  fact  that  DCS  can
      never build itself out of the overcrowding  problem,  it  is  of  some
      concern in that the DCS and the President have stated  that  four  new
      prisons will be built by 2008, and yet the Facilities allocation seems
      not to cater for the construction of the four prisons during that time
      period.


2.3.  Strategic Objectives and Goals of the DCS

      Key strategic objectives and goals of the DCS for 2006 and the  medium
      term include:

      • Revision of the Correctional Services Act of 1998 to ensure that it
        is in line with the White Paper on Corrections.
      • Development of new and revised policies  in  line  with  the  White
        Paper.
      • Consolidation of plans to give effect to the Accelerated and Shared
        Growth Initiative of South Africa (ASGISA).
      • Implementation of aspects of the White Paper in the 36  Centres  of
        Excellence across the country (which were launched in August  2005)
        with  successes  replicated  at   other   centres.   The   Offender
        Rehabilitation Path has been approved and will  be  implemented  at
        the Centres of Excellence in 2006.
      • Hiring of more staff to implement the 6-day working week (which  is
        part of the phasing in of the 7-day  working  week  which  will  be
        fully established by March 2008). The 6-day working week provides a
        day off in lieu  of  payment  for  Saturdays.  A  total  of  3  057
        officials were appointed in 2005/06  and  2  627  appointments  are
        planned for 2006/07 and for 2007/08.
      • Improvements to security in prisons including biometric access  and
        movement  control  systems,  inmate  tracking,   the   vetting   of
        correctional officials and a minimum security standards policy.
      • The  DCS  has  a  commitment  to  serve  three  balanced  meals  at
        stipulated intervals and have stated that the  contracting  out  of
        this function in seven management areas will remain over the  short
        term.
      • The outcome of the HIV prevalence study will inform  future  policy
        around HIV and AIDS.
      • Mechanisms to decrease overcrowding, including the building of  new
        prisons,  development   of   a   national   framework   to   combat
        overcrowding,  investigation  into  a  more  accurate   model   for
        predicting  offender  population  and  operationalisation  of   the
        correctional supervision and parole boards. The  special  remission
        of sentences resulted in a reduction of sentenced offenders  of  31
        856. By December 2005, there were 112 019 offenders in the  prisons
        designed to hold 114 000.  In addition, the ATD offender population
        was reduced from 49 789 in August 2005 to 44 259 in  December  2005
        as a result of ongoing intersectoral focus on integrated case  flow
        management. Estimated savings due to the special remission in  2005
        was about R63 million.

   3. Presentation  by  the  Department  of  Correctional  Services  on  the
      2006/7–2010/11 Strategic Plan and the 2006/7 Budget of the  Department
      –  09 March 2006.

      The DCS indicated that its objective is to align the Budget  with  the
      Strategic Plan of the  DCS.  The  Estimates  of  National  Expenditure
      baseline allocation for the DCS for 2006/7 is R 10, 63 billion.


      Key cost drivers of the Department include:
      • Personnel totals.
      •  Inmates, including awaiting trial  detainee  totals,  probationers
        and parolees.
      • Strategic intentions such as the implementation of the White  Paper
        on Corrections.
      Salaries of personnel are a major cost driver and  are  determined  by
      means of financed and actual posts.


      From 01 April 2008, the actual overtime payment would be 1½ times  the
      salary scale of staff working on a Sunday and Saturdays  are  work  in
      lieu of a day off. The goal of  the  DCS  is  to  phase  out  overtime
      payments (with the exceptions of  Sundays  and  public  holidays),  as
      illustrated below:


   |              |2006/7          |2007/8          |2008/9        |
|Overtime      |502,900         |534,582         |208,000       |


      The following table illustrates average  annual  medium  term  nominal
      growth per Programme.


   |Programme            |2002/3- 2005/6       |2005/6 – 2008/9      |
|                     |(Historical Data)    |(MTEF Period)        |
|Administration       |4.6%                 |9.1%                 |
|Security             |10.8%                |2.8%                 |
|Corrections          |16.1%                |28.1%                |
|Care                 |11.6%                |16.2%                |
|Development          |12.6%                |6.4%                 |
|Social Reintegration |4.6%                 |5.4%                 |
|Facilities           |12.8%                |3.0%                 |
|Total                |9.6%                 |8.0%                 |


      The following table illustrates the  total  budget  the  regions  will
      receive during the 2006/07 financial year.


   |Region               |Original Budget      |% of Total Budget    |
|Gauteng              |1,457,465            |13.71%               |
|Western Cape         |1,153,399            |10.85%               |
|North West/          |921,323              |8.67%                |
|Mpumalanga & Limpopo |                     |                     |
|Kwa-Zulu Natal       |987,323              |9.29%                |
|Eastern Cape         |841,657              |7.92%                |
|Free State & Northern|815,424              |7.67%                |
|Cape                 |                     |                     |
|Head Office          |4,454,075            |41.90%               |


      The Strategic Plan of the DCS is a 5-year plan, which prioritizes  the
      first year of operation. The targets for the years that follow will be
      adjusted in terms of the changes in the environment of the DCS.

      Departmental performance highlights for 2005/6 include:

      The Special Remission process succeeded  in  lowering  the  number  of
      persons incarcerated from 180 000 to 150 000. The 7-day establishment,
      where Saturdays have become a working day and working on a  Sunday  is
      considered as overtime has also contributed to the success of the  DCS
      during 2005/6. The development of the Offender Rehabilitation Path has
      enabled the DCS to manage the life of an  offender  from  the  day  of
      admission until release. The development of Risk Assessment Tools  and
      the implementation of the three-meal system, Unit management  and  the
      Case Management Committees, have contributed  to  the  improvement  of
      Correctional Centre administration.

      Other performance highlights of the Department include  the  launching
      of the Centres of Excellence;  the  implementation  of  the  biometric
      systems; the launching of the Community Supervision and Parole Boards;
      launch of Grootvlei Correctional Centre as a site for the distribution
      of Antiretrovirals and the launch  of  the  a  trauma  centre  at  the
      Drakenstein Correctional Centre.

      The partnership between the Departmental Investigating Unit (DIU)  and
      the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) has assisted   in  the  successes
      of recovery of Medcor funds as well as the improved administration  of
      Medcor and the dismissal of eighteen officials.

3.1.  Administration


      The DCS intends prioritising  and  implementing  its  Human  Resources
      strategy in  terms  of  performance  management,  employee  relations,
      recruitment,  selection  and  retention  of  staff.  Standardised  and
      comprehensive training on Minimum Information Security  Standards  and
      minimum-security  standards  for   Heads   of   Security,   Heads   of
      Correctional Centres and Area Commissioners will be developed. The DCS
      will continue to provide training for junior and middle management and
      extend leadership training to senior management. Internships  for  500
      people will  also  be  implemented.  Amendments  to  the  Correctional
      Services Act will also be constituted. The DCS intends  improving  the
      Information Technology and Information management environment.


3.2.  Security


      A five-year Security Plan based on the Minimum Security Standards will
      be developed this year and will  be  implemented  at  the  Centres  of
      Excellence. The DCS plans  to  install  fences  and  implement  motion
      detectors.  Capacity  for  security  information  management  is  also
      prioritised.

3.3.  Corrections


      The Offender Rehabilitation Path, which manages the offender from  the
      day of admission until release, will be implemented during 2006/7  and
      will involve all branches of DCS. Various corrections programmes  will
      be implemented and run by accredited service providers.

3.4.  Development


      An  Offender  Skills  Development  Plan  will  be   implemented.   The
      finalising of the policy on compulsory programmes will also  be  done.
      National agriculture and production workshop will be expanded.


3.5.  Care


      The new tender for the HIV prevalence survey has been  finalised.  The
      DCS will introduce compulsory programmes on health and  phase  in  the
      provision of primary health care. The DCS plans to provide needs-based
      programmes  such  as  social   work,   spiritual   and   psychological
      programmes.

3.6.  Social Reintegration

      The functioning of the departmental paroling system i.e. the Community
      Supervision  and  Parole  Boards  needs   to   be   improved.   Social
      Reintegration  will  be  prioritised  to  ensure  improved   community
      participation. The DCS  has  begun  to  implement  the  classification
      system for parolees and probationers  during  March  2006.  Programmes
      that will assist pre–release, community supervision and  reintegration
      will have to be developed.

3.7.  Facilities


      DCS has reached agreement that the four new prisons will be built  and
      maintained by a private company but managed by DCS.  The principle  is
      the fact that facilities are a DCS responsibility  and  thus  must  be
      managed by DCS.  A full Public Private Partnership (PPP) is  not  cost
      effective for DCS and in addition,  DCS  has  a  legal  mandate  which
      cannot be transferred. The model is a form of  PPP  but  is  called  a
      Project Finance Model (PFM).  Essentially, it entails the building and
      maintenance of the prison by a private company  for  a  period  of  15
      years but the operation of the prison by the Department. The  DCS  can
      put in certain provisions to make the deal more cost effective in  the
      long run, including technological upgrades every 5 years and  ensuring
      the use of the best material and technology  available.  The  DCS  has
      agreed to follow this model which will  be  implemented  in  a  phased
      process and which will take  into  account  BEE  with  regard  to  the
      allocation of contracts.  Provision can be made for all 8  prisons  to
      go this route but it is not clear at this point if the model  will  be
      applied to all 8 prisons.
      The Department of Public Works has transferred a budget to DCS and DCS
      has entered into a contractual relationship with DPW who will  provide
      some services on an agency basis.  In the mean time DCS is  developing
      internal capacity to take over all these functions.

      The following table highlights the ENE allocation per subprogramme for
      the Facilities Programme over the MTEF:


   |               |2005/06    |2006/07   |%      |2007/08  |2008/09   |
|Facilities     |1,046,925  |1,008,284 |-3.69% |1,058,683|1,138,078 |
|Planning       |           |          |       |,        |          |
|Building and   |160,714,   |140,236   |-12.74%|153,035  |150,428   |
|Maintenance    |           |          |       |         |          |
|Total          |1,767,332  |1,728,196 |-2.21% |1,814,402|1,930,773 |


3.8.  Challenges faced by the DCS

      The retention and attraction of scarce skills such as medical doctors,
      nurses, social workers and psychologists and the filling of  vacancies
      still remains a serious challenge for the DCS. The DCS has  to  adhere
      to  the  framework  of  the   Department   of   Public   Service   and
      Administration  guidelines.  The   entire   programme   of   community
      corrections needs to be overhauled to ensure the effective functioning
      of community corrections.

      The capacity to deliver at management area level taking  into  account
      local government’s role needs to be improved. It is also important for
      the DCS to develop its  own  capacity  to  manage  facilities  better.
      Issues that require the intervention of management at the  Centres  of
      Excellence will be prioritised for  implementation  during  the  first
      quarter of 2006/7.

4. Public Hearings on the 2006/7 Budget and Strategic Plan of the DCS.


      The Committee held Public Hearings on the Budget on 15  and  16  March
      2006. Stakeholder concerns included:


Civil Society Prison Reform Initiative (CSPRI)


      ❑ CSPRI raised many areas of concern  which  include  the  number  of
        deaths in prison, the implementation of the anti-gang  strategy  of
        the  DCS,  the  progress  on  the  prison  construction  programme,
        privatisation within the DCS, and that  community  corrections  and
        correctional supervision are not directly included in the Strategic
        Plan of the DCS.
      ❑ CSPRI indicated that it is important that correctional  supervision
        is in a healthy state and continues to grow and  CSPRI  supports  a
        budgetary expansion of this programme.
      ❑ The DCS has the opportunity over the next three  years  to  restore
        the faith of the judiciary in non-custodial sentencing options.
      ❑  CSPRI  believes  that  correctional  supervision  requires  active
        promotion within the DCS and the broader  criminal  justice  system
        and this should be done by being a visible champion of the cause.
      ❑ The 2004/5 Annual Report utilised a reporting format that  differed
        substantially from the Strategic Plan in place at  the  time.  This
        made it  extremely  difficult  to  assess  progress  on  particular
        objectives. CSPRI recommended to the Portfolio Committee  that  the
        departmental annual report should follow the exact  format  of  the
        Strategic Plan  to  facilitate  the  monitoring  of  progress,  and
        further that the reporting should be historical in nature, in other
        words reflecting the progress made towards a particular target over
        a multi-year period.
      ❑  Regular  reporting  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  key  issues
        affecting the DCS, would also assist the Committee in its oversight
        functions.


Public Service Association (PSA)


      ❑  The  White  Paper  on  Correctional  Services,  as  well  as   the
        subsequent  Strategic  Plan  for  Correctional  Services   (2006/7-
        2010/11), set targets  to  transform  South  Africa’s  Correctional
        Services into  world-class  facilities,  which  would  be  able  to
        successfully fulfil its mandate and  responsibility  to  its  major
        client, the South African community.
      ❑ The PSA is of  the  opinion  that  these  objectives  can  only  be
        reached through dedicated and motivated staff.
      ❑ The violent escapes at Correctional Centres has a direct impact  on
        the safety of employees and focus should be placed on the effective
        utilisation of current resources in an effort to  alleviate  safety
        related problems.
      ❑ The PSA indicated that communication,  information  and  agreements
        between the employer and the unions should be  between  all  unions
        represented in the DCS, to a have a healthy working environment.


Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation (CSVR)


      ❑  The  CSVR  mentioned  that  the  explanations  for   expenditures,
        especially  large  expenditure,  are  vague  and  that  the  detail
        provided in the Annual Report of 2004/5  and  the  budget  are  not
        always reflective of what is set out in the Strategic Plan. Many of
        the targets that the DCS set in the 2005/6 Strategic Plan have  not
        been met and have been shifted into the strategic plan of 2006/7.
      ❑ There is still a need for reprioritisation of  funds  freed  up  by
        under-expenditure to ensure the improvement of existing facilities,
        the  building  of  classrooms  and  workshops  to  facilitate   the
        development  and  correction  of  prisoners,  the  recruitment  and
        payment  of  professionals  at  market-related  salaries,  and  the
        development,  rehabilitation  and   work   opportunities   of   all
        offenders.
      ❑ Unit  Management  will  only  be  rolled  out  in  the  Centres  of
        Excellence in 2007/8 and to other prisons by  2009/10,  though  the
        2002/3 Annual Report states that Unit Management was rolled out  in
        101 prisons around the country.
      ❑ Risk assessment and profiling tools have  been  developed,  but  no
        offenders have been assessed.
      ❑ The DCS should develop  a  strategy  to  deal  with  mental  health
        problems of offenders and  also  revisit  the  salary  packages  of
        scarce skills employees.
      ❑ The delay in the building of new prisons is  extremely  problematic
        and it is indicated that with the  delays,  the  cost  of  building
        increased dramatically. The CSVR noted with concern  that  Treasury
        has suggested that it is no longer necessary to continue  to  build
        prisons given the current occupancy levels.
      ❑ More attention should  be  paid  to  female  offenders  and  female
        prisons by means of increasing the  number  of  activities,  better
        access  to  mental  and  physical   health   facilities   and   the
        reintegration of women released from prison.

South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC)


         ❑ A key issue of concern raised by the  SAHRC  is  the  number  of
           unnatural deaths in prison. The safety and security of offenders
           can be improved through more resources and  personnel.  Conflict
           resolution and  anger  management  should  also  be  offered  to
           offenders.
         ❑ Corruption needs to be addressed in the DCS,  as  offenders  can
           perceive corruption and crime as acceptable.
         ❑ The SAHRC is of the opinion that a public debate on  overcrowded
           prisons needs to be taken forward. There is a  need  for  public
           debate on the usefulness of imprisonment for all crimes and what
           the possible  alternative  sentencing  options  are.  The  SAHRC
           stated that  building  more  prisons  is  not  the  solution  to
           overcrowding and that more  options  to  incarceration  and  the
           development of integrated approaches need to be explored.
         ❑ The DCS  needs  to  ensure  that  its  HIV/AIDS  programmes  and
           services, including an ARV programme is rolled out.


National Institute for Crime Prevention and the Rehabilitation of  Offenders
(NICRO)


      ❑ NICRO welcomed the Imbizos held in different parts of  the  country
        as  they  invited  input  from  society  and   created   a   better
        understanding of rehabilitation and reintegration.
      ❑ NICRO also propagates the introduction of  the  concept  of  family
        reconstruction and family reunification.
      ❑ Rehabilitation programmes offered must be appropriate and not  just
        recreational in nature or aimed at keeping offenders occupied.
      ❑ Direct and strategic partnerships between the  DCS  and  NGO’s  are
        critical.
      ❑ The White Paper on Corrections will be implemented at  the  Centres
        of Excellence and NICRO noted that the Centres of  Excellence  only
        represents about 15% of the total number of centres.
      ❑  NICRO  furthermore  recommends  scrapping  the  minimum   sentence
        legislation and strongly propagates the  use  of  alternative  non-
        custodial sentencing.

Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons (JIOP)


         ❑ The Judicial Inspectorate of Prisons believes that the  rate  at
           which the expenditure of Correctional Services is growing is too
           high and should be reduced,  but  to  do  this,  the  number  of
           prisoners needs to be reduced.
         ❑ The JIOP is also of the  opinion  that  the  increased  prisoner
           population has since 2000 been caused by the increased number of
           people sentenced to long periods of imprisonment and  no  longer
           by the unsentenced prisoner numbers.
         ❑ The JIOP recommended that the Portfolio Committee explores  ways
           to reduce the sentenced prisoner population.


Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (POPCRU)


         ❑ POPCRU stated that there should be a  lean  and  mean  structure
           for the DCS with few bottlenecks.
         ❑ The Budget should make provision for the transformation  of  the
           DCS as required by the White  Paper  on  Transformation  of  the
           Public Service.
         ❑ The DCS should take over complete management and  administration
           of the private prisons.
         ❑ It is POPCRU’s contention that the structure of the DCS is  top-
           heavy  and  this  impedes  the  necessary  service  delivery  as
           required by the Correctional Services Act.
         ❑ POPCRU stated that the bigger part of the  budget  is  spent  on
           the management echelon whilst the filling of  positions  at  the
           lowest levels is compromised.


5.    Meeting between the Portfolio Committee on Correctional  Services  and
      the  Department  of  Correctional  Services  on  the  New   Generation
      Facilities 02 May 2006.

      In the light of both Committee concerns and  concerns  raised  by  the
      media during the budget process, the Committee  called  a  meeting  to
      specifically discuss the  issue  of  the  building  of  the  four  new
      prisons, which were  to  be  completed  by  2007,  as  well  as  funds
      allocated to the construction of these facilities during  the  2005/06
      financial year.


      In terms of funds allocated for  the  four  prisons  in  2005/06,  the
      Minister assured the Committee that the Department  has  acted  within
      its mandate and that the virements were legitimate  as  prescribed  by
      the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). The  Department  has  during
      the  past  financial  year  accrued  savings  and  this  enabled   the
      Department to shift funds in a  specific  budget  programme.  National
      Treasury was aware of this  shift  of  funds.  These  funds  were  not
      shifted from the Facilities Programme.


      The Minister also assured the Committee that the building of all eight
      New Generation Prisons will proceed and that there are enough funds to
      build these prisons.


      The DCS reported that a private  consultant  had  developed  the  Blue
      Print model for the new generation prisons. The  original  costs  were
      estimated at R150 million per prison, but shortcomings were identified
      and resulted in an escalation in cost to R230 million. Estimated costs
      then increased to R282 million and  later  to  R350  million.  Further
      developments resulted in baseline 4, which was 18% over  baseline  3’s
      cost of R350 million. Tender  documentation  was  completed  early  in
      2004.

      Three of the projects (Kimberley, Leeuwkop and Nigel) were split  into
      phases of which Phase 1 (bulk earthworks) was fully  completed  during
      July 2005 at all three Centres at a total cost of R80.8 million.


      In terms of Phase 2, bids were called  for  Klerksdorp  on  5/11/2004,
      Nigel on 25/02/2005 and Kimberley on 04/03/2005 and were received  for
      all three centres. The outcome of the Bid Adjudication indicated  that
      the cost of centres is substantially higher than the budgeted  amount.
      In July 2005, the DCS decided  to  appoint,  with  the  assistance  of
      Public Works, an Independent Quantity Surveyor (IQS) to  evaluate  the
      bid documentation and to provide both Departments with  an  assessment
      of the price escalation and compare it with  market  trends.  The  IQS
      report highlighted that the following had a  negative  impact  on  the
      bidding process and influenced high costs of bids received:
         - The incubator procurement model
         - Increase in building costs
         - Timing of the tenders in respect of market conditions.

      The  following  decisions  have  been  taken  with   regard   to   the
      construction of the new prisons:

      ❑ The construction of Kimberley  will  start  during  the  course  of
        2006/07  and  the  procurement  process  will  be   done   in   the
        conventional way with the assistance of the DPW.

      ❑ Part of the allocation for Nigel and Klerksdorp will  be  used  for
        procuring the services  of  a  transaction  advisor  as  Nigel  and
        Klerksdorp will be constructed  using  the  Project  Finance  Model
        (PFM), that is, enter into a PPP arrangement for design by concept,
        construction, finance and maintenance of the centres and  DCS  will
        be responsible for the operations.

      ❑  Leeukop  has  been  put  on  hold  pending  the  outcome  of   the
        Environmental Assessment study.

      ❑ The incubator programme will be abandoned as the premium  that  the
        DCS is paying for this route is ( 14%  of  the  cost.  The  bidding
        documentation will be adjusted to allow for main contractor and own
        choice of subcontractors.

      ❑ The bidding system will be reopened to allow  a  larger  sector  of
        the construction market to submit bids. Tender  documentation  will
        be published on 5 May 2006 with the target date to  hand  over  the
        site to the successful bidder in September 2006.

      ❑ In principle, PFM will also be used for the second set of four  new
        generation correctional centres. Feasibility  studies  are  in  the
        process for centres at  East  London,  Paarl,  Port  Shepstone  and
        Polokwane. Sites have already been earmarked for three of the  four
        complexes, whilst negotiations are still underway for the Polokwane
        site.

      In terms of the allocated funds for the new prisons for  2005/06,  the
      DCS reported that the amount allocated for  the  Facilities  Programme
      for 2005/06 was R1,7  billion  of  which  R560  million  was  for  the
      existing two public-private  partnership  prisons,  R160  million  for
      building and maintenance and R984 million for Facilities Planning.  Of
      this R1,7 billion, R1,2  is  allocated  for  Capital  Assets  and  the
      remainder goes to salaries,  transfers  and  payments  for  goods  and
      services. Of this R1,2 billion for Capital Assets an amount of  R982,9
      million was allocated to Capital Works.  Of this  R982,9  million  for
      Capital Works, an amount of R390 million was allocated in 2005/06  for
      the construction of the four new prisons.

      According to the Minister, no virements were made in terms of the R1,7
      billion allocated to Facilities. In other words, money was not shifted
      from this programme  to  any  other  programme.   However,  money  was
      shifted from Compensation to  Employees  (due  to  savings)  to  other
      projects, the details of which are illustrated below.

      During the 2005/6 financial year,  savings  totalling  R868,8  million
      from the compensation of employees (due to reduction of  overtime  and
      decreased employer payments for the medical aid) was used to fund  the
      following major projects:

      Information Technology                       136 854

      Fleet Management                               50 000

      Fencing                                 360 876

      X Ray Scanners                             70 000

      TV Monitors                                   106 000

      Other compensation of employees               145 100



6.    The following are key issues of concern raised  by  the  Committee  on
      the Strategic Plan and Budget of the DCS,  and  the  departmental  and
      stakeholder responses thereto:

      Spending

      The Committee requested information on under - or overspending.

      According to the DCS, it had not overspent on its budget  and  it  did
      not envisage any under spending.

      Health Care

      Clarity was sought on the phasing in of a 24- hour primary health care
      service and when this will be implemented.  The  Committee  is  aware,
      through its oversight visits and individual  visits  to  prisons  that
      when medical staff go off duty, custodial staff administer medicines.


      The DCS responded that those prisons with hospitals do operate for  24
      hours. If  offenders  are  very  ill,  they  are  referred  to  public
      hospitals accompanied by custodial staff.

      HIV prevalence survey

      The new tender for the HIV prevalence survey has been  finalised.  The
      DCS will introduce compulsory programmes on health and  phase  in  the
      provision of primary health care. The Committee wanted  to  know  when
      the results from the survey will be available, and when the compulsory
      programmes will be introduced.


      Ethical approval to undertake the HIV Prevalence survey in the DCS has
      been given by the Human Science Research  Council  (HSRC).  The  pilot
      survey has commenced in Gauteng and will be completed by  the  end  of
      May 2006. It is envisaged that the  pilot  report  will  be  finalised
      towards the end of June 2006. If  the  participation  level  (response
      rate) is above 30% during the pilot survey, it will be rolled  out  to
      the rest of the country. If not the contract will  be  halted.  It  is
      envisaged that the survey should be completed by the end of  September
      2006. A final report should be available by the end  of  October  2006
      and possible publication of findings by then.


      To  improve  the  health  status  of  offenders,  measures   will   be
      implemented to encourage offenders to  participate  in  programmes  to
      contribute to the  following:  promote  healthy  lifestyles,  improved
      management of communicable and non-communicable diseases,  recognition
      and respect of human dignity in order to improve the quality of care.

      Rehabilitation and the Offender Rehabilitation Path(ORP)
      It  was  raised  that  the  major  objective  of  DCS   is   that   of
      Rehabilitation. It was also questioned whether the DCS  has  a  proper
      retention strategy in place,  especially  for  staff  such  as  social
      workers, psychologists, nurses and doctors as these staff are  at  the
      core of rehabilitation programmes in DCS. It was also  indicated  that
      the DCS should monitor the implementation of training offered to staff
      members to ensure that Rehabilitation is effective.

      The Offender Rehabilitation Path (ORP),  which  manages  the  offender
      from the day he or she  enters  the  system  until  release  has  been
      finalized. The ORP has started in  6  Centres  of  Excellence  (1  per
      region) in order to serve as a “blue print” for the roll  out  to  the
      regions and training on the ORP was conducted. Selected  functionaries
      on all organizational levels were orientated and empowered.


      The number of programmes conducted was audited and  the  relevance  of
      these programmes to the policy directives  was  evaluated.  The  audit
      revealed that programmes are there, but not adequate.  A further audit
      was conducted on services and programmes rendered within  the  centres
      by various service providers. The work to  conduct  quality  assurance
      and to enter into operational contracts with these  service  providers
      is ongoing.

      Scarce Skills
      The retention of scarce skills is still acknowledged as a key concern.
       According to the Minister, the DCS has to work within  the  framework
      of the Department of Public Service and Administration  guidelines  in
      this regard.


      A  Department  of  Correctional  Services  recruitment  and  retention
      strategy has been drafted with regard to all scarce skills categories.
      This strategy has  already  been  consulted  with  DPSA  and  National
      Treasury and will be operationalised by means of an action plan, which
      will include liaising with all role players.

      National Council of Corrections

      The Committee also wanted clarity on  the  budget  allocation  to  the
      National Council of Corrections.
      The budget allocated to the National  Council  of  Corrections  is  an
      amount of R250 000.00 per annum.  This  is  mainly  used  to  schedule
      meetings and for  subsistence  and  travel  allowances.  The  NCCS  is
      planning on strengthening its administrative capacity.

      Unnatural Deaths

      Unnatural deaths in prison are of serious concern to the Committee and
      should not occur in prisons. The Committee is also of the opinion that
      a capacitated staff complement will assist in addressing this problem.

      The DCS stated that it tries to be realistic when it projects targets.
      Civil society said that deaths in prison should be reviewed from a
      human rights perspective. The target projected by the DCS was 45, but
      71 unnatural deaths occurred. Unnatural deaths do pose a problem for
      the DCS and are viewed in a serious light. However, unnatural deaths
      do not only result from shortage of health care personnel, but
      multiple factors like homicides, suicides, accidents, assaults,
      gangsterism and overcrowding that impede proper supervision.


      Anti-Gang Strategy


      The Committee was under the impression that an Anti-Gang Strategy has
      been developed and was interested in its implementation and successes.
      The Committee is also aware that civil gangs influence prison gangs.


      According to the Strategic Plan, a draft strategy will be developed
      during this year. The DCS is however, also in the process of
      developing a specific anti-gang strategy. This is a very difficult and
      complicated task. Although research and consultation with various role-
      players were done in 2005, further consultations with the regions will
      be done in 2006, with a view to obtaining a more representative
      understanding of gangs in different regions. These processes will be
      utilised when the Anti-Gang Strategy is drafted.
      In lieu of the above, the DCS has methods and procedures in place when
      dealing with gangs and gang violence in centres.

      Annual Report, the Strategic Plan and the Budget

      The Committee also raised the issue that there is no uniformity
      between the Strategic Plan, the Annual Report and the Budget of the
      DCS. These documents are important sources of information when
      conducting oversight. The DCS has submitted their third five-year
      Strategic Plan and thus makes it difficult to measure targets.

      The DCS responded that the format and development process of both the
      Annual Report and the Strategic Plan are prescribed by the DPSA and
      Treasury.


      The Structure of the DCS is in keeping with the new strategic
      direction of the DCS. The basic structure shall remain intact for a
      while whilst additional functions may from time to time be added on as
      the need arises, especially from the implementation processes of the
      White Paper.

      Morale of Staff


      The Committee is  aware  of  the  low  morale  amongst  staff  members
      especially in terms of salary packages. The Committee  has  also  been
      briefed about the Promotion policy of the DCS where staff  on  certain
      levels would have been promoted. The 7-day Establishment also  had  an
      effect on the morale of staff. The  Committee  is  interested  in  the
      successes of this project and whether it has been  fully  implemented.
      The Committee wanted to know what other programmes are in place,  both
      by the DCS and civil society to boost the morale of staff.

      The DCS conducted an intensive Public Perception Survey, which
      revealed that low morale exists at middle management levels and not
      across the spectrum. The DCS is classified as an essential service
      department in terms of the Labour Relations Act and is a part of the
      Criminal Justice Cluster. The Department renders services 24- hours
      over seven days a week. These working conditions have the following
      implications for employees: extended working hours, weekend duties,
      standby duties after hours for emergency cases, night duties,
      emergency situations, monitoring parolees and escort duties. Given a
      number of factors, employees are exposed to service conditions that
      are adverse to them. High stress levels can in some instances lead to
      suicide.


      The DCS announced the promotion of Custodial and Support Personnel
      with effect from 01 February 2006. Nationally, a total of 4 583
      officials have been promoted from Grade 111 to Grade 11, whilst 2 499
      officials have been promoted from Grade 11 to Grade 1; 85.39% of the
      total number of Social Workers’ posts have been upgraded.


      It is expected that this progression of officials will enhance service
      delivery in line with the DCS’ objectives and promote compliance with
      the White Paper.

      Centres of Excellence


      The White Paper on Corrections will be implemented at the  36  Centres
      of Excellence that the DCS has identified. Civil  Society  is  of  the
      view that piloting studies  only  at  the  Centres  of  Excellence  is
      discriminatory to offenders, as not all  offenders  will  receive  the
      same services or be able to partake in rehabilitation models that will
      be implemented at these Centres.


      The DCS stated that it would roll out the implementation of the White
      Paper to all centres across the country and not only at the Centres of
      Excellence. By piloting the White Paper at these Centres, the DCS will
      be determining the resources required to implement the White Paper in
      prisons across the country.

      Concept of Family Reconstruction and Family Reunification


      Civil Society mentioned this concept and  the  Committee  needed  more
      clarity on what it entails.


      Civil Society stated that this is therapeutic support to families when
      offenders are released in their care. This concept  aims  at  avoiding
      anger at offenders and advocates the assistance to the  offender  from
      the family when released.

      Social Reintegration


      The DCS stated that it would  develop  new  programmes  for  community
      supervision, prerelease and reintegration. More clarity is  needed  on
      this.


      The DCS is in the process of finalizing a  Position  Paper  on  Social
      Reintegration  and  major  activities  aimed  at  rolling  out  Social
      Reintegration will begin  during  the  month  of  June.  The  work  of
      community  corrections  continued  including   activities   aimed   at
      promoting non-custodial measures as prescribed  in  various  statutory
      instruments and international protocols.


      Pre-Release programmes were developed  during  the  Special  Remission
      process, which  all  offenders  who  qualified  attended.  Pre–release
      programmes  were  subsequently  enhanced  and  are   currently   being
      presented  to  all  sentenced  offenders  prior  to   release.   These
      programmes are presented by vocational staff  as  well  as  functional
      staff  and  where  possible,  Non-governmental  and  Community   Based
      Organisations (NGOs & CBOs) are involved.

      Intersectoral Co-operation and Alternative Sentencing


      The Committee wanted clarity on the role of the DCS  in  Intersectoral
      bodies that exist in the region and the DCS’s  stance  on  alternative
      sentencing.


      The DCS participates mainly in four (4) categories  of  government  in
      all provinces. The DCS further participates in  various  other  forums
      established by provincial government  and  continuously  liaises  with
      Provincial Legislatures.


      At local level Area Management offices are encouraged  to  participate
      in the Integrated Justice Cluster (IJS)  not  only  for  promotion  of
      alternative sentencing but for continuous  improvement  of  case  flow
      management to alleviate overcrowding.

      Children and Awaiting Trials in prison


      The Minister stated that DCS has three months to report on its
      Awaiting Trial Detainee project.  With regard to children, the Durban
      and Port Elizabeth projects are working well but others are less
      successful. The DCS has explored the option of fallow buildings to
      identify facilities for children, but this has not been successful.
      DCS cannot depend on the Department of Social Development to identify
      places of safety and needs to take some initiative in this regard.


      The JCPS tabled a Cabinet Memorandum on the issue of the improved
      management of awaiting trial detention on the January Lekgotla. A
      report on the matter would be ready in June. The approach is that the
      project will be part of the DCS’s organisational structure in the form
      of a dedicated Awaiting Trial Detention Branch. This component should
      have its own appropriate policy and procedure, necessary protocols
      with the relevant government agencies to deliver care to ATDs. It
      should develop appropriate facilities and develop a remand facilities
      building plan, and ensure compliance with the constitutional
      requirements of ATDs.

      Parole Review Board

      The Parole Review Board will be implemented in 2006/07. The  Committee
      needs clarity on the structure of this board and how it will function.


      The Correctional Supervision Parole Review Board (Review Board) is
      constituted in terms of Section 76 of the Correctional Services Act.
      Members of the Review Board are selected from the National Council for
      Correctional Services. A Judge of the Supreme Court, presently Judge
      Desai, chairs the Review Board.


      The function of the  Review  Board  is  to  review  decisions  of  the
      Correctional Supervision and Parole Board. Only the  Minister  or  the
      Commissioner of Correctional Services may refer cases for review  when
      they are of the opinion that the Correctional Supervision  and  Parole
      Board have erred in their decision.



      Facilities and the Building of New Generation Prisons

      A concern was raised around the state of the earthworks that  amounted
      to R80 million particularly whether these would require  further  work
      if the DCS decides to continue the building process. More details  are
      also needed in terms of the earthworks,  especially  at  the  Leeuwkop
      site.

      The  Committee  wanted  to  ascertain  when  these  prisons  would  be
      completed, especially the Kimberley prison as it was  expected  to  be
      completed by September of this year.

      Clarity is needed around the Polokwane site, which  is  still  in  the
      negotiation phase.

      The DCS stated that it is in discussion with the DPW in terms  of  the
      earthworks for the Leeuwkop and Nigel prisons. There are many factors,
      such as the prevention of erosion, that have to be taken into account.
      The DCS also stated that it would not move away from the current sites
      for the first four New Generation Prisons, but will consider a  number
      of issues, such as the existing prisons in the  area  and  communities
      the offenders come from, for the second set of prisons.

      The DCS responded that the Kimberley prison would be completed  within
      24 months of the tender being awarded.

      State-owned land was identified for the site in Polokwane, but it  was
      not suitable for the building of a prison. Privately  owned  land  was
      then identified, but the owner withdrew the offer to sell.

      The Committee mentioned that in a briefing on 21 June 2005,  the  main
      building works at Kimberley was projected at  R499  million,  but  the
      figures presented before the Committee at this  meeting  indicated  an
      amount of R571.7 million. More clarity is sought on this issue.

      The DPW stated that it in its contracts provision is made for contract
      price adjustments. This allows contractors to claim additional amounts
      due to the escalation in costs.  The  R  571.7  million  included  the
      contract price adjustments.

      The Committee also questioned the processes of awarding tenders,  such
      as for X-Ray Scanners, TV Monitors and fencing within the DCS.

      The DCS responded that tenders were published for these services for a
      period of 30 days, after which the adjudication was done and  the  bid
      committee then awards the tender to the company.

      The Committee was also concerned about the  Rehabilitation  programmes
      at these new facilities and whether the building of  these  facilities
      will address poverty alleviation and job creation.

      The DCS stated that the facilities would be  designed  to  accommodate
      Unit Management and that there would be smaller units compared to  the
      large units in  other  prisons.  The  New  Generation  Prison  concept
      definitely accommodates rehabilitation programmes and will  take  into
      account the implementation of the White Paper.

      The Committee raised the fact that the issue  of  the  New  Generation
      prisons had been before the Committee several times, but  the  process
      is still not completed. The Committee indicated that it  needs  to  be
      kept abreast of all the  developments  around  these  facilities.  The
      Committee was anxious  to  ascertain  when  these  projects  would  be
      completed.

      The DPW responded that the designs of the first  four  New  Generation
      facilities were subject to many changes and additions, which  affected
      the cost of the facilities. The  DPW  further  stated  that  it  would
      complete the facilities within the specified timeframes.

      The DCS assured the Committee that the funds are  still  available  to
      continue with the building of the New Generation facilities.  It  also
      recommended that the transactional advisor who did feasibility studies
      on the PPPs be invited to address the Committee on the matter.


      Department of Public Works
      The Department of Public Works (DPW) has transferred a budget  to  DCS
      and DCS has entered into a contractual relationship with DPW who  will
      provide some services on an agency basis.   In  the  meantime  DCS  is
      developing internal capacity to take over  all  these  functions.  Can
      more details be provided on this matter?




      As of 01 April 2006, accommodation-related  budgets  and  municipality
      fees have been devolved to DCS by National Treasury and  the  DPW.  In
      terms of the current terms of devolution, DPW has  to  continue  these
      payments on an agency basis while DCS  develop  internal  capacity  to
      take over these functions an infrastructure management in its totality
      from the DPW. It is anticipated that this will continue only  for  the
      current financial year.



7.    Recommendations:

      The Committee makes the following recommendations:

      Administration Programme


      The Portfolio Committee supports the allocation to the  Administration
      Programme.  The Committee commends the DCS for its movement  from  the
      current Medkor scheme to the GEMS  and  the  savings  it  has  accrued
      through this process. The Committee also supports the movement to a 7-
      day establishment and the reduction of  overtime.   However,  the  DCS
      must ensure that staff at all levels benefit from  interim  promotions
      and not only staff on certain levels. The Committee recommends that it
      be provided  with  a  hierarchy  of  positions  and  salaries  of  all
      management of the DCS.


      Security Programme

      The  Committee  supports  the  increase  in  the  Security   programme
      allocation. It is, however, concerned about the  number  of  unnatural
      deaths in prison and is of the view that unnatural  deaths  should  be
      prevented wherever possible. Violent escapes have put a lot of  strain
      on officials and offenders and the Committee recommends that stringent
      measures be put  in  place  to  deal  with  officials  abetting  these
      escapes. The Committee  must  be  informed,  within  three  months  of
      tabling this report, when the new national operation  centre  for  the
      management of the biometric equipment will be in operation.

      Corrections Programme


      The Committee supports  the  increase  in  the  Corrections  programme
      allocation.  However, the allocation to this programme  will  need  to
      increase in subsequent years  to  ensure  the  proper  assessment  and
      profiling of all offenders,  and  to  ensure  that  sufficient  social
      workers and other professional staff are  recruited  and  retained  to
      perform these functions.


      Care Programme

      The Committee supports the increased allocation to the Care  programme
      but is concerned that this allocation may not be sufficient  to  cover
      all the challenges faced in this programme.  Offenders suffering  from
      mental health conditions are of serious concern to the Committee.  The
      DCS needs to ensure that sufficient psychological care is  offered  to
      these offenders. This  will  possibly  curb  distraught  psychological
      behaviours such as setting cells alight etc. The new compulsory health
      programmes should be implemented  at  all  centres.  The  shortage  of
      nurses, social workers,  doctors  and  psychologists  within  the  DCS
      remains of concern to the Committee.  The  Committee  welcomes  recent
      attempts made by the DCS to improve the salaries of  professionals  by
      using the scarce skills and rural allowances, as well as  its  attempt
      to recruit doctors, but the DCS should  seriously  review  the  salary
      packages offered to these officials.


      Development Programme

      The Portfolio Committee supports this allocation but  recommends  that
      more priority be given to ensure sufficient education and  development
      programmes within prisons in order to assist in the rehabilitation  of
      offenders and to reduce recidivism.

      Social Reintegration Programme

      The Portfolio Committee supports this  allocation.  The  Committee  is
      aware that the overhauling of this programme will be very helpful  but
      recommends that it capacitate staff so that Community Corrections  can
      be in a healthy state. TheCommittee would like to be kept informed  of
      the recruiting of supervision personnel for parolees and  probationers
      as well as be involved  in  the  recruitment  process.  The  Committee
      further requests to be briefed on the review on the policy  on  Social
      Reintegration.


      Facilities Programme

      The Committee urgently  requests  a  briefing  by  the  Department  of
      Correctional Services on the Public  Finance  Model,  before  12  June
      2006. At present,  due  to  insufficient  information,  the  Committee
      cannot make a decision on whether to support or  not  to  support  the
      construction of the new prisons using the Public Finance Model  (PFM).
      The Committee requires a full written report and  verbal  briefing  by
      the DCS highlighting the comparative cost implications,  in  both  the
      short and long term, for building using  conventional  processes,  the
      PFM or the PPP routes and until such time the Committee  is  satisfied
      with the idea of the Public  Finance  Model,  the  Committee  strongly
      recommends that funds for the building of prisons,  not  be  released.
      The Committee also recommends that it be part of  future  developments
      with regard to New Generation facilities. The Committee  supports  the
      decision by the DCS to review the contracts of  the  existing  public-
      private prisons and believes that these prisons may be better utilised
      for juvenile and minimum offenders.


      General

      The Portfolio Committee  requests  that  the  DCS  provides  quarterly
      performance and financial reports to the Committee at the same time as
      these are submitted to Treasury. ThePortfolio Committee  will  request
      that Treasury provides analysis of these reports to the Committee on a
      regular basis to highlight concerns and potential problems.

      The Committee  requests  that  the  DCS  provide  a  briefing  to  the
      Committee  immediately  after  submission  of  their  initial   budget
      requests to Treasury. This will provide an opportunity for Members  of
      the  Committee  to  make  a  more  meaningful  contribution   to   the
      development of the DCS budget.

8.    Comments:


      The Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services supports the  2006/07
      budget allocation for the Department  of  Correctional  Services.  The
      Committee will continue to monitor the effectiveness  of  the  DCS  in
      realising its mandate as outlined in the  Correctional  Services  Act,
      No. 111 of 1998 and the White Paper on Corrections.

Report to be considered.

                            TUESDAY, 23 MAY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of the Assembly


     1) The following member vacated his seat in the National Assembly with
        effect from 15 May 2006:

        Gabela, L S.

2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     The following members have been appointed to serve  on  the  Ad
        Hoc Committee on Appointment of Auditor-General, viz:


        African National Congress
        Asiya, Mr SE
        Fubbs, Mr J L
        Gabela, Mr L S
        Gumede, Mr D M
        Hogan, Ms B A
        Johnson, Mr M
        Ngcengwane, Ms N D
        Mashiane, Ms L M
        Smith, Mr V G
        Zita, Mr L





        Democratic Alliance

        Trent, Mr E W
        Dreyer, Ms A M



        Inkatha Freedom Party

        Vezi, Mr E T



        National Democratic Convention

        Woods, Dr G G


        United Party of South Africa
        Simmons, Mr S



        Pan Africanist Congress of Azania

        Likotsi, Mr M T



        Minority Front

        Rajbally, Ms S


TABLINGS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Home Affairs


      1) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for 2006/07 to
         2008/09.


National Assembly


1.    The Speaker

     1) Petition from Brig J D Krige praying for the transfer of his
        spouse’s pension benefits to his disabled son – (Presented by Dr F
        J Van Heerden).

        Referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
        Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


    Report of the Joint Monitoring Committee on Ethics and Members’
    Interests on Investigation regarding the Auditor-General’s Report on the
    Alleged Non-disclosure of Ministers and Deputy Ministers





   Background



   The Auditor-General had on the 15 September 2005 requested information
   regarding the disclosure of interests of the following Members of the
   Executive.
   The Office of the Registrar checked the disclosures and forwarded the
   following table to reflect the disclosure status of the member concerned.
   The Registrar also indicated to the Office of the Auditor General that
   she would seek the responses from the Members concerned regarding the
   alleged non-disclosure.

|Enterprise name            |Name                       |Disclosed in the|
|                           |                           |Register        |
|Votani Mawethu             |Nqakula C                  |No              |
|Raffles Health and Fitness |Padayachie RL              |Yes             |
|Club                       |                           |                |
|Casbah Cinema              |Surty ME                   |Yes             |
|Hectaris and Hectaris      |Surty  ME                  |Yes             |
|Go Ja Beng                 |Surty ME                   |No              |
|Happy Developers           |Surty ME                   |No              |
|Luthando Investments       |Pandor GNM                 |No              |
|Luthando Investment        |Pandor GNM                 |No              |
|Holdings                   |                           |                |
|All Pay Western Cape       |Hangana N                  |Yes             |
|Balsas Management          |Hangana N                  |Yes             |
|Momentum Oil Refinery      |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|Thaba Drank Kelders        |Oosthuizen GC              |No              |
|Development Enterprise for |Gigaba MKN                 |No              |
|Management and Strategic   |                           |                |
|Services                   |                           |                |
|Lesila                     |Mlambo Ngcuka P            |No              |
|CityCat Trading 54         |Xingwana L                 |Resigned from CC|
|Jongilizwe Investment      |Sigcau SN                  |No              |
|Holding                    |                           |                |
|Jongilizwe Medical         |Sigcau SN                  |No              |

Close Corporations

|Enterprise name                |Name                   |Disclosed in the|
|                               |                       |Register        |
|Vintria Investments and        |Padayachie RL          |Yes             |
|Property Development           |                       |                |
|Vintria International          |Padayachie RL          |Yes             |
|Enterprises                    |                       |                |
|Treveni Property Investment    |Padayachie RL          |Yes             |
|Tregoyd                        |Hanekom DA             |Yes             |
|Stand 1993 Houghton            |Radebe JT              |Yes             |
|Zinrus Developers              |Surty ME               |Yes             |
|Western Oceans Investments     |Shabangu S             |Resigned from CC|
|Braai Spot                     |Oosthuizen GC          |No              |
|Hoewe 114 Lyttleton            |Skweyiya ZST           |No              |
|Landbouhoewes                  |                       |                |

   Section 21 Companies
|Enterprise name                |Name                   |Disclosed in the|
|                               |                       |Register        |
|The Tertiary Education Fund of |Pandor GNM             |No              |
|South Africa                   |                       |                |
|Black South African Freedom    |Sisulu Guma LN         |No              |
|Songs and Poems                |                       |                |
|Community Peace Foundation     |Mabandla B             |No              |
|Community Peace Foundation     |Mlambo Ngcuka P        |No              |
|Creative Housing Utility       |Oosthuizen GC          |No              |
|JobCo                          |Didiza AT              |No              |
|Biz Africa 1477                |Malusi G               |No              |
|Land and Agricultural Policy   |Hanekom DA             |No              |
|Centre                         |                       |                |
|SA National NGO Coalition      |Padayachie RL          |Resigned        |

   All Members had responded to the Registrar’s request for clarification
   and amendments.


   Following the publication of the “Auditor General’s Report on the
   Declarations of Interests by Ministers, Deputy Ministers and Government
   employees” in January 2006, the Chairperson of the Joint Committee on
   Ethics and Members’ Interests requested that the Registrar obtain from
   the Auditor General further information regarding the alleged non-
   disclosure of Members.


   The Registrar established that the Auditor General’s Report report was
   based on the 15 September 2005 request for information.



   The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests met on 5 April 2006
   to consider the Auditor General’s Report.






   In order to obtain background information regarding the completeness and
   accuracy of Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation’s
   database, the Committee requested that the Chief Executive Officer of
   CIPRO brief it on the above matters as well as the process to resign as a
   director of a company.



1.    Briefing by the Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisation
   (CIPRO)

Mr Modiba (Deputy Registrar of Companies), Mr Voller and Mr Ali attended on
behalf of CIPRO. They indicated that the Registrar of Companies had
suddenly taken ill and was unable to attend.

The Committee was informed that Mr Modiba would respond to queries from the
Committee on behalf of the Registrar of Companies. The Committee expressed
its displeasure that the Registrar of Companies was not available to attend
the Committee meeting.

The Committee expressed concerns on the accuracy and completeness of the
database. In his response to this, Mr Modiba indicated that the database
was audited and it was their view that the information was accurate. He
conceded that while there are no backlogs some data may have been
incorrectly captured and further that there was some information missing.
Mr Modiba informed the Committee that the current e-lodgement system allows
for the client to update the information electronically thus reducing the
margin of error. CIPRO had also offered to address any issues related to
errors on their system on a case-by-case basis.

In his input to the Committee, Mr Modiba stated that the Companies Act
prescribes the process to follow when a director resigns from a company.
The Act also prescribes the process to deregister a company. He agreed that
CIPRO was constrained by the prescribed processes in the Companies Act.

The Committee recommended that should CIPRO find their work constrained by
the Companies Act they should table amendments for Parliament’s
consideration. The Committee also recommended that CIPRO improve
communication with its clients.

The Committee agreed that it will hold a follow-up meeting with the
Accounting Officer of CIPRO.

Briefing by the Auditor General.

In his briefing to the Committee, the Auditor General stated that his
Office had received numerous requests to investigate alleged irregularities
by government employees and had on that basis, carried a transversal audit
of 142 departments.
The purpose of the audit was to ensure that public officials declare their
interests appropriately.

The CIPRO databases were compared to the PERSAL database. When the list was
scrutinised, Ministers and Deputy Ministers were included on the list. The
Auditor General reported that the Minister of Public Service and
Administration had indicated that she would issue a letter to all other
Ministers informing them about the audit investigation with a request to
cooperate with the Auditor General.

The Registrar had been sent correspondence from the Auditor General on the
disclosure status of the Members. The Registrar responded with the
information table above.
The Auditor General indicated that the Ministers and Deputy Ministers had
an opportunity to respond to the report before it was finalised.

The Committee asked the Auditor General whether he had verified the
accuracy of the CIPRO database. The Auditor General said that he could not
verify the completeness of the CIPRO database.

The Auditor General in response to a question by a Member indicated that
there was direct engagement with individual Members and the Minister of
Public Administration.

The Committee agreed that in similar cases related to Members of Parliament
there should be communication between the Auditor General, the Office of
the Registrar and CIPRO. In this regard the Auditor General should engage
the Registrar to ascertain all the information before any report related to
Members is published.

The Chairperson thanked the Auditor General for the report and agreed that
the process assisted in improving awareness and would aid in ensuring
compliance with the requirements of the Code of Conduct.

The Committee then considered the Report of the Registrar and agreed to the
following:


1.    Minister C Nqakula


On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the
Minister’s interests in Votani Mawethu.

The Minister responded on the 13 October 2006 that Votani Mawethu was an
NGO which was established to assist people to obtain identity documents for
the 1999 election.  The directors shut down the programme of the
organisation in 2000.

The Minister was not aware that the organisation was not formally
disbanded, but has now taken steps to disband the organisation.

Findings


The Committee found that the entity was a not-for-profit organisation and
therefore did not need to be disclosed.





The Committee noted that the House had adopted a Committee Report on 11
November 2005 ATC number 1262 which states that Members need not disclose
not-for-profit entities.





2. Deputy Minister Padayachie


Deputy Minister has disclosed his interests in Raffles Health and Fitness
Club, Vintria Investments and Property Development, Triveni Property
Enterpises, he also advised the Registrar of his resignation from the SANGO
Coalition.





Findings

The Member complied with the requirements of the Code accordingly  there  is
no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.


3.    Deputy Minister ME Surty

On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in  writing  details  of  the
Deputy Minister’s interests in Go Ja Beng Fast Foods and Happy Developers.
The Deputy Minister had disclosed his interests in Casbah  Cinema,  Hectaris
and Hectaris and Zinrus Developers.

The Deputy Minister advised that Go Ja Beng Foods and Happy Developers  were
deregistered  on  27-06-2001.  The  deregistration  was  published  in   the
Government Gazette of 22 June 2001,  Gazette  number  22372,  notice  number
129785.


Findings

The Committee ruled that as these companies are formally deregistered  there
is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.


4.    Minister GNM Pandor

On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in  writing  details  of  the
Minister’s interest in Luthando and the Tertiary Education  Funds  of  South
Africa.

Minister Pandor indicated in her response on 18 October 2005  that  she  had
disclosed her interests in Luthando in 2003 and 2004. In 2005  she  resigned
her directorships in Luthando and therefore did not  deem  it  necessary  to
disclose.

She also indicated that the article 21 company Tertiary  Education  Fund  of
South Africa no longer exists.


Findings

There is no breach regarding the Tertiary Education Fund as Members are  not
required to disclose directorships in article 21 companies.  Refer  to  (ATC
of 11 November 2005 number 1262).
The Committee found that on the matter  of  Luthando  that  the  Member  had
disclosed  in  2004.  With  regard  to  her  directorship  in  Luthando  the
Committee accepts the Minister’s  undertaking  that  she  had  resigned  her
directorship.

The Committee finds that there is no breach of the Code.


5.    Deputy Minister N Hangana

Deputy Minister N Hangana has disclosed her interests in  Balsas  Management
and All Pay.


Findings

There is no breach of the Code as the  Member  disclosed  her  interests  as
required.




6.    Deputy Minister GC Oosthuizen

On the 3 October  2005,  the  Registrar  requested  in  writing  details  of
interests in companies in Momentum Oil Refinery  Explorations,  Thaba  Drank
Kelders, Braai Spot CC and article 21 company Creative Housing Utility.

Deputy Minister Oosthuizen produced documents which show  that  he  resigned
as director of Momentum Oil refinery on the 1 January 1985.

The Deputy Minister produced documents that  shows  that  he  resigned  from
Creative Housing Untility on 20 June 1987.

The Deputy Minister indicated that Thaba Drank Kelders  and  Braai  Spot  CC
were dormant and were deregistered in November  2005.  The  Deputy  Minister
had also shown that the companies had not traded for more than 10 years  and
that Thaba Drank Winkel was established in 1986 and the Deputy Minister  was
unaware that he was connected to the entities.


Findings


The Committee finds that there is no breach of the Code of Conduct for
Memebrs of Parliament.





7.    Deputy Minister MKN Gigaba

On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in  writing  details  of  the
Deputy Minister’s interests in Development  Enterprise  for  Management  and
Strategic Services as well as Biz Africa.

In his response on the 11 October 2005 the Deputy Minister submitted a  copy
of his letter of resignation from Development Enterprise for Management  and
Strategic Services. The Deputy Minister advised that  his  participation  in
Biz Africa was in his capacity as the President of the ANC Youth League,  he
relinquished the Presidency on the 14  August  2004  and  automatically  all
interests in Biz Africa.


Findings

There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for  Members  of  Parliament.  The
Committee  notes  that  Deputy  Minister  Gigaba  had  disclosed  both   the
interests in his 2004 disclosure, this gives credence to his  response  that
he is in the process of resigning the interests.


8.    Deputy President P Mlambo-Ngcuka


On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested in writing details of the
Deputy President’s interests in Lesila (burial society) and The Community
Peace Foundation a section 21company.


The Deputy President responded on the 14 November  2005  that  in  1997  the
University of the Western Cape deregistered the Community Peace Foundation.

The Deputy President indicated that  Lesila  was  established  in  1999,  in
response to frequent requests for assistance with burials by members of  the
community.

The Deputy President  further  indicated  that  Lesila  was  established  to
provide financial support to needy families  who  could  not  afford  burial
expenses. Lesila was therefore an  organisation  for  which  no  benefit  or
remuneration  could  be  accrued.  In  any  event  the  organisation   never
operated.


Findings


Based on the information received the Committee finds that as there  was  no
intention of financial gain  in  the  establishment  of  the  Lesila  Burial
Society, there is no breach of the Code of Conduct.


9.    Deputy Minister L Xingwana

Deputy Minister Xingwana had advised the Registrar of her  resignation  from
City Cat after the matter was considered by the  Committee  on  11  November
2005.




Findings

The Committee finds that there is no breach  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  for
Members of Parliament.


10.   Minister SN Sigcau (Deceased)


11.   Deputy Minister DA Hanekom
On the 3 October 2005,  the  Registrar  requested  the  Deputy  Minister  in
writing to submit details of his interests in Land and  Agricultural  Policy
Centre. Deputy Minister has disclosed his interests in Tregoyd.

Deputy Minister Hanekom in his response  confirmed  that  he  resigned  from
Land and Agricultural Policy Centre 10 years ago. He contacted the Land  and
Agricultural Policy Centre in  order  to  ensure  that  his  resignation  is
formalised.


Findings

Tregoyd has been disclosed so there is no breach. The Land and  Agricultural
Policy Centre is a not-for-profit organisation and  therefore  there  is  no
breach of the Code of Conduct.

12.   Minister JT Radebe
Minister Radebe declared his interest under Land and Property, he has a  50%
interest in Stand 1993 in Houghton.


Findings

There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

13.   Minister ZST Skweyiya
The CC Hoewe 114 Lyttleton was a property holding CC that owned two  holiday
flats in Port Edward, which were sold in 2005.  The  flats  were  previously
disclosed in the 2003-2004 register.  The  Minister  has  also  subsequently
signed papers to be excluded from the CC.


Findings

There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

14. Minister L Sisulu-Guma
On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested the Minister  in  writing  to
submit details of her association with Black South Africa Freedom  Songs  an
article 21 company.  The  Minister  indicated  that  the  entity  had  never
operated.


Findings

Members  are  not  required  to   disclose   interests   in   not-for-profit
organisations. There is no breach of the Code  of  Conduct  for  Members  of
Parliament.

15.   Deputy Minister S Shabangu
On the 3 October 2005,  the  Registrar  requested  the  Deputy  Minister  to
advise on the status of her resignation from Western Ocean  38.  The  Deputy
Minister had informed the Registrar that she had resigned her  interests  in
Western Ocean 38. She submitted  proof  of  resignation.  (This  matter  was
previously considered by the Committee.) Refer to ATC 11 November 2005  page
number 1262.


Findings

There is no breach of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament.

16.   Minister AT Didiza
On the 3 October 2005,  the  Registrar  requested  the  Minister  to  submit
details of her association with Jobco a section 21 company.

The Minister  indicated  that  the  Directorship  arose  from  her  role  as
government trustee on the Business Trust. The  programmes  included  Tourism
and Education. The Minister updated her record accordingly.


Findings

As this is an article 21 company directly  associated  with  the  Minister’s
Executive role, there is no breach of the Code of  Conduct  for  Members  of
Parliament.

17.   Minister B. Mabandla
On the 3 October 2005, the Registrar requested the Minister  in  writing  to
submit details of her association with The Community peace Foundation.

The Minister  advised  she  was  never  a  Member  of  the  Community  Peace
Foundation and in any event it was deregistered on 1997




Findings


The Company was deregistered. There is no breach of the Code of Conduct  for
Members of Parliament.


Conclusion


In its  consideration  of  the  alleged  non-disclosure  of  interests,  the
Committee noted that there is no conflict of interests.  There  is  also  no
evidence that any member named above  has  promoted  his  or  her  financial
interest.
The Committee notes that the purpose of the  Code  is  to  ensure  that  the
member discloses his or her financial or pecuniary interest.  In  the  cases
outlined above there are no current active  financial  interests  that  have
not been disclosed. The Committee is also mindful that the  purpose  of  the
Code is to promote ethical conduct.

In its consideration of these matters, the Committee has concluded  that  it
must  develop  further  guidelines  to  assist  members.  To  this  end  the
Committee hopes to host a series of workshops within Parliament  to  promote
debate on the issue of ethics and examine various systems of  accountability
for elected representatives. The Committee will also host  a  conference  on
ethics in public life  to  obtain  an  expert  view  and  facilitate  public
comment on the issues.

The report was adopted by the Committee on the 23 May 2006.

Signed




_______________________                 _____________________
Mr L Landers                                 Date
Chairperson of the Joint Committee
on Ethics and Members’ Interests





______________________            _____________________
Mr AL Moseki                                 Date
Deputy Chairperson of the Joint Committee
on Ethics and Members’ Interests


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on Oversight Visit to
    Further Education and Training Colleges, dated 29 March 2006:

   A. INTRODUCTION

The Portfolio Committee on Education having undertaken  an  oversight  visit
to Education and Training (FET) Colleges, reports as follows:

As part of its  oversight  function  over  Further  Education  and  Training
Colleges, the Portfolio Committee took a decision to conduct its  visits  on
15-19 August 2005. The  Committee  visited  the  FET  Colleges  in  Limpopo,
Gauteng, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

The Further Education and Training (FET) Act No. 98 of 1998 was  promulgated
in 1998. It provides for a broad framework within which the FET  system  can
be developed  and  implemented.  The  Act  regulates  the  FET  Colleges  by
providing for the  establishment,  governance  and  funding  of  public  FET
institutions. The FET Sector is divided into two sections, the  FET  schools
(grades 10 to 12) and the FET Colleges. There are  50  Public  FET  Colleges
that are a result of a merger of the previous 152  technical  colleges  that
is made up of multi-Campus institutions  that  are  distributed  across  the
country. The sector is constituted by 206 Campus sites.

B.    LOGISTICAL ARRANGEMENTS


The Portfolio Committee Members divided themselves into two teams of  multi-
party delegations.

The delegation to the Limpopo and Gauteng Provinces under the leadership  of
Prof SM Mayatula (ANC) included Ms PR Mashangoane (ANC), Ms  DG  Nhlengethwa
(ANC), Mr JJ Maake (ANC) who replaced Mr LW  Greyling  (ID)  who  could  not
make the trip and Mr AM Mpontshane  (IFP).  Mr  S  Morometsi  the  Committee
Secretary accompanied the delegation.

While in Limpopo Privince the delegation was joined by  the  Chairperson  of
the Provincial  Legislature  Portfolio  Committee  on  Education,  Ms  Joyce
Ndimande and Mr LJ Lepulane, a Member of the Provincial Legislature, Ms  Ida
Maaga,  Committee  Secretary,  Limpopo  Provincial  Legislature,  Mr  Rapule
Matsane, Manager Parliamentary Affairs in the Office of the MEC  and  Ms  SE
Lekoloane,  FET  Curriculum.  The  National  Department  of  Education   was
represented by Mr MD Mashaba, and Mr MW Mogashoa, FET, IDS.

The delegation of the Eastern Cape and  KwaZulu-Natal  Provinces  under  the
leadership of Mr Mthembu included Adv A Gaum  (NNP), Mr G Boinamo  (DA)  and
Ms J Ngele (ANC). Mr T Madima, Control Committee Secretary  accompanied  the
delegation.  Ms A  Singh,  and  Mr  Khanya  Ngaso,  Acting  Chief  Director,
Eastern Cape FET Colleges represented the National Department.


C.      TERMS OF REFERENCE


The main purpose of the oversight  visit  was  to  assess  and  monitor  the
readiness of all the FET Colleges with relation to:
Governance; Human Resource; Finances; Learnership support services;
status  of  workshops  and  curricula;  implementation  of   Employment   of
Educators Act and progress on appointment of Chief Executive Officers.

   D. FINDINGS

1.    REPORT ON VISIT TO LIMPOPO PROVINCE

1.1 Meeting with MEC  for  Education,  Limpopo  Province,  Honourable  Dr  A
Motsoaledi

On 14 August 2005, the delegation was  hosted  by  the  MEC  for  Education,
Limpopo Province, the Honourable Dr  A  Motsoaledi  at  a  dinner  party  at
Meropa Guest House. Also present were the Provincial Head of the  Department
Prof Nengwekhulu and  officials  of  the  Provincial  Department  and  Chief
Executive Officers of all the Further Education  and  Training  Colleges  in
Limpopo province.

The MEC in his welcoming speech gave an overview of the FET Colleges in  the
Province. He conceded that the province has  embraced  the  recapitalisation
process. However, there are glaring challenges facing FET Colleges that  are
in relation to machinery, infrastructure,  accreditation  of  workshops  and
learnership support services. He made the following observations:

    • The education pyramid is inverted. There are more university  students
      than FET college students. This must be corrected.
    • The recapitalisation of FET colleges needs  a  clear  definition.  The
      process seems to be confined to infrastructure development.
    • Experts should have been involved in a broad analysis to have a  long-
      term plan for the sector.
    • The FET colleges are not well advertised and yet  they  make  a  vital
      contribution. The Agriculture, mining and  tourism  are  the  economic
      drivers and FET colleges must be geared to support these sectors.
    • There are  some  challenges  associated  with  implementation  of  the
      Employment of Educators Act.
    • The cross-border FET colleges should be controlled centrally.

He indicated that his office was considering the possibility  of  organising
a provincial mini summit to address the challenges facing  FET  Colleges  in
the province.

2.    VISIT TO FET COLLEGES

On 15 August 2005, the delegation visited a number of FET  Colleges  in  the
province:

2.1   CAPRICORN FET COLLEGE, SESHEGO CAMPUS

The Chief Executive Officer of Capricorn FET College, Polokwane  Campus,  Mr
KR Madzhie and the Campus Manager, Mr M Letsoalo welcomed the delegation.

The CEO reported to the  delegation  on  issues  of  governance  within  the
College. While the Councils  are  operational,  the  College  still  has  to
clarify on the following matters pertaining to governance of the Council:
    • Who should be the members of Council and what allowances  they  should
      receive?
    • What are the roles and responsibilities of the Council versus those of
      management?
    • What are the powers of Councils versus those of the provinces?
    • There is a need for the coordination of the engagement of FET colleges
      with industries.
    • The FET Colleges Act needs to be revisited.

Mr  TJ  Kekana  CEO,  Human  Resources  reported  that  the  institution  is
experiencing  challenges  with  the  implementation  of  the  Employment  of
Educators Act, (1998). Though the institution has  an  organogram,  some  of
the staff members are people employed on contract posts. There is a lack  of
specialisation in the  institution.   The  challenge  for  FET  colleges  is
grading between those with full time equivalent (FTE) of  2  000  and  above
and those that are below.

On  Infrastructure,  CEO,  Mr  KR  Madzhie,  reported   on   the   following
challenges:
    •  Equipment is old. Since the mergers, no funds have been received from
      the provinces.
    • Equipment for information technology is very old and the new ones  are
      very expensive.


On Finance, Ms MJ Botha CEO Finance reported the  Colleges  receive  budgets
from  the  provincial  government.  The  concern   however   is   that   the
institutions generally do not have financial managers.

On Curriculum, CEO Ms  SC  Sehlake  indicated  that  there  is  no  national
qualifications framework (NQF) for FET colleges. She also reported that  the
Industry  has  no  confidence  in  FET   college   courses.   When   writing
examinations, the Department assesses on NATED  courses  and  not  on  their
practical work.  The SETAs are also involved in the assessment of learners.
The Co-ordinator of Hospitality and  Food  Services,  Ms  Ngoasheng  gave  a
brief inspection tour of  the  facilities.  She  reported  that  the  Campus
offers  trimester  courses  in  Carpentry,  Clothing  Production,   Interior
Decoration, Hospitality and Food Services, Tourism and Motor  Mechanic.  The
emphasis on these courses is on theory  and  not  practical.  The  Umsombovu
Youth Fund, a structure established by Government  to  provide  funding  for
learnership programmes sponsors the out of  school  learners  for  practical
classes on welding.  The challenge facing the Campus is  that  the  machines
that they are using are old and the workshops are dilapidated  and  posed  a
health risk.

   2. CAPRICORN FET COLLEGE, POLOKWANE CAMPUS

2.2.1 Meeting with Chief Executive Officers of all FET Colleges in Limpopo


The report presented by the CEOs/Principals referred  to  observations  made
on the state of affairs and challenges in the  areas  of  governance,  human
resource, infrastructure and facilities, curriculum,  finances  and  learner
support.

    • Governance
The Chief Executive Officer of Vhembe, Mr MH Mnisi, briefed  the  delegation
on governance with specific reference to  College  Councils  operations  and
the laws regulating  FET  Colleges.  He  reported  that  all  Colleges  have
Councils, which  were  appointed  by  the  Provincial  MEC,  and  these  are
operational. They  have  all  developed  college  policies  that  have  been
submitted to the provincial office for approval during the  merger  process.
The challenges however facing governance of Further Education  and  Training
Colleges have to do with regularisation of the  National  Guidelines  (needs
to be standardised) and the clarification of roles and  responsibilities  in
the FET Landscape of College Managers. He stated that in  order  to  address
these challenges, the  Department  needed  to  develop  National  Norms  and
Standards that would be applicable to all FET Colleges in the country.

    • Human Resources
The Chief Executive Officer of Sekhukhune FET College, Mr TJ Kekana  briefed
the  delegation  on  current  and  related  human  resource  challenges  and
mechanisms to overcome shortcomings relating  to  effective  functioning  of
the campus. The colleges have been provided with two  sets  of  organograms.
The first organogram was the one for smaller colleges  under  Post  Level  5
and the other was for bigger colleges that were classified under Post  Level
6. As a result of upgrading technical  schools  into  FET  Colleges,  former
technical colleges staff members  were  absorbed  into  the  colleges.  This
necessitated colleges to offer new  courses.  As  a  result  therefore,  the
colleges began to offer new courses, and appoint  their  own  lecturers  and
staff on a temporary basis. It is against this  background  that  the  Chief
Executive Officers /Principals were  appointed  and  no  further  management
positions were filled.

The delays in filling middle management  positions  contributed  to  further
challenges that affected the delivery  on  the  expected  functions  of  the
Colleges.  As  a  result  of  the  willy-nilly  appointment  of  staff  into
positions, this compromised professionalism and affected the  working  hours
of educators.
In order to overcome the challenges of job security  and  high  turnover  of
educators, the  college  proposed  that  the  provincial  department  should
rather fill the vacant positions and develop separate working hours for  FET
educators in the FET Colleges sector, and also  consider  standardising  the
grading of Principals.

    • Infrastructure and Facilities
The CEO of Polokwane  Campus  of  Capricorn  FET  College,  Mr  KR  Madzhie,
reported on the existing challenges relating to  infrastructure  development
and provision of learning facilities. Infrastructure and facilities in  this
case  refers  to  the  classroom  required  for  theoretical  learning,  the
workshops for practical training, equipment used for both learning aids  and
administration. All the Colleges  have  inherited  infrastructure  from  the
previous technical colleges, thus some have  workshops  and  others  do  not
have. The existing workshops are generally located in  old  and  dilapidated
buildings and most of the equipment used for both  management  and  learning
aids are obsolete.

The major challenges mentioned related to the non-existence  of  information
communication technology,  non-responsiveness  to  industrial  requirements,
dilapidated  buildings   and   old   machinery.   In   order   to   overcome
infrastructural challenges, they proposed that the recapitalisation  process
should set aside funds to upgrade and develop infrastructure  and  that  the
provincial department and the private  sector  should  support  colleges  to
develop resources to effectively provide training.

    • Finance
The Chief executive officer of FET College, Mrs MJ Botha,  reported  on  the
finances of the colleges. She focused on the way colleges are raising  funds
and how those finances are managed. The Department through subsidies,  which
are divided in terms of their own formula, funds the Colleges.  The  subsidy
is mainly utilised for  operational  purposes.  The  additional  revenue  is
earned through learner tuition fees. The  challenges  relating  to  finances
are that colleges  are  pressed  to  utilise  the  funds  for  staffing  and
infrastructure and this creates problems when utilising earmarked funds  for
operational purposes.

They proposed that the Provincial  Department  should  set  aside  earmarked
funds for the maintenance of college infrastructure,  that  colleges  should
not be funded based on the number of registrations instead, colleges  should
be funded on the production of quality programmes that address the  economic
needs of the country.

    • Learner Support
The CEO of Lephalale FET College,  Mr  J  Raath,  reported  on  the  learner
support services. The learner support services had been  the  initiative  of
colleges  and  some  colleges  had  entered  into  partnership   with   Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) to offer learnership services.

The challenge is that learners need to be supported to gain  access  to  the
industries. The  Colleges  need  to  develop  centres  of  relaxation  where
learners could feel relaxed to learn and discuss personal problems.

    • Curriculum
The CEO of Mopani South East FET College, Ms SC Sehlake reported on the  old
Nated programmes of the Department. Most of the curricula  at  colleges  are
designed along the National Education Document (Nated). There is an  attempt
to  align  programmes  in  conjunction  with  the   National   Qualification
Framework. The FET exams are based on theory and not on practical.  However,
colleges are encouraged to enter into partnership with industries. The  more
collaboration with industries, the greater opportunities for  employment  of
learners and for job creation.

2.2.2 Meeting with Student Representative Council (SRC)

Ms Mariette Britz, the Student Representative Council  member,  reported  on
gains made by the SRC and the challenges facing students. There are two  (2)
student representatives on the Management Board of the college, and two  (2)
on the College Council. She  informed  the  delegation  that  students  need
bursaries to relieve them from financial debts and also support centres  for
the three Campuses.

She highlighted  that  the  emphasis  on  theory  and  not  practical  makes
students face a bleak future upon completion of  their  studies.  This  also
contributes as a deterrent for students to  gain  access  into  the  private
sector. Further the programmes that are offered do  not  take  into  account
the threat faced by students when infected with the  HIV/AIDS  virus.  There
are  no  support  services  to  support  students  socially,   economically,
emotionally and even to gain access to Internet facilities.

2.2.3 Meeting with Academic Staff

Ms Hettie Cloete, a representative of the academic staff,  reported  on  the
frustrations faced by academics in relation to job security. Most  academics
are employed on a temporary basis and this makes them feel  alienated.  They
appreciated the efforts of Management having  standardised  salary  packages
of educators, however,  they  still  felt  uncertain  on  the  lack  of  job
security.

2.2.4 Meeting with Executive Board

Ms EKM Masehela, the Campus Manager of Polokwane  Campus,  reported  on  the
challenges facing the college. She said  that  the  college  lacked  student
support resources, the equipment in the college is old, the  lack  of  human
resource capacity to match access demand,  lack  of  sports  facilities  for
student to participate, the continued  employment  of  temporary  lecturers,
high turnover of educators in pursuit of greener pastures.


2.2.5 Meeting with College Council

Mr  Dikobo,  the  Chairperson  of  the  College  Council,  reported  on  the
challenges facing the college.  He reported that the reduction  of  the  FET
Colleges to 52 and the merger process had been an  enormous  task  performed
by the Department. The disparities at colleges are historical and are  as  a
result of merging a former college of education  with  a  state  school  and
former state-aided schools. The challenge facing National Department  is  to
change mindset. In order for FET Colleges to meet  National  mandate,  there
is a need for adequate and donor funding. There is a  need  to  establish  a
funding framework for FET Colleges in order to attract the kind of  students
that would swell the numbers in FET Colleges. The lack  of  funds  makes  it
difficult for Colleges to retain staff  in  the  College.  Even  though  the
challenges seem to be astronomical, colleges endorse the merger process.

   3. WATERBERG COLLEGE OF LEBOWAKGOMO CAMPUS

The Chief Executive Officer of Waterberg FET College Lebowakgomo Campus,  Mr
SP Mailula,  welcomed  the  delegation  and  provided  an  overview  of  the
college.  The  College  Council,   the   Academic   staff,   the   Learners,
representative of labour, Lepelle-Nkumpi  Municipality  Councillor  reported
on challenges faced by stakeholders.

       1. Meeting with College Council

The Chairperson of the College Council, Mr ER  Maponya,  reported  on  three
pertinent issues. The first issue was on the history  of  the  College.  The
College received funding from the Development Bank of  South  Africa  (DBSA)
and the South African Brewery to the value of R250, 000. The College  has  a
High  School  component,  which  since  1994,  offers  bridging  courses  on
Commercial subjects and the first Principal is the present CEO.  The  school
started offering Grades 8 to 10 and has a 100% Matric pass rate. The  second
school project that  was  introduced  was  the  Adult  Basic  Education  and
Training program. The courses that are offered for the  ABET  programme  are
courses such as computer literacy. The third  school  project  at  Waterberg
FET College is to become a  leader  in  marketing  the  skills  acquired  by
learners and converting them into employable artisans.

The mission and vision of Waterberg FET College was to  identify  people  in
the community who have acquired skills and absorb them into the College  and
assist them by honing and refining the skills they  possessed.  He  outlined
the  challenges  facing  FET  Colleges  and  proposed  that  the  Department
developed a training programme for instructors and that the  positioning  of
the FET Colleges on the education landscape band be reconsidered.

       2. Meeting with Academic Staff


A representative of the academic staff, Mr AM Phasha, gave a report  to  the
delegation. He said that the development of the  FET  Curriculum  should  be
responsive to the needs of the community. Their aim is to  develop  learners
into  becoming  professional  artisans.  By  assisting  learners  to  become
professional artisans, learners would become employable and  assist  in  the
eradication  of  poverty.  In  order  for  educators  to  provide  effective
assistance  to  learners  to  become  professional  artisans,  the  physical
infrastructure of the College needs to be developed. However, for  educators
to enable learners to acquire those scarce skills, the temporary  employment
status of educators needs to be converted into permanent positions to  bring
stability.

       3. Meeting with Learners


The President of  the  Student  Representative  Council,  Mr  Isaac  Phetla,
reported on the shortage of academic staff and recreational learner  support
services, lack of  access  to  telephone  and  fax  machines,  the  lack  of
Internet services impedes learners in  obtaining  quality  information,  the
poor quality of programmes offered impacts negatively on  the  marketability
of learners.

       4. Meeting with Representative of Labour
Ms RM Phaahla, the representative reported that, in order that  the  College
should be seen as providing a service to the community,  the  core  function
of the college,  which  is  to  empower  learners  with  skills,  should  be
emblazoned on the entrance of the college. In that way the college would  be
responsive to the needs of the community. For members of  the  community  to
embrace the college as their own,  the  college  needs  to  recognise  prior
learning.

       5. Meeting with the Lepelle-Nkumpi Municipality Councillor


Mr MT Mogano a ward councillor of  Lepelle-Nkumpi  outlined  the  challenges
facing the college. He reported that  the  greatest  challenges  facing  the
college  are  archaic  infrastructure  and  facilities,  poor   quality   of
equipment. For the college to make a lasting impression  on  the  community,
the college needs to offer courses  such  as  computer  literacy.  In  their
endeavour to involve members of the community, the college  should  approach
the municipality to assist them  to  identify  empty  structures  to  launch
community-driven initiatives.

2.4   MOPANI SOUTH EAST FET COLLEGE

On the 16 August 2005, the Chief Executive Officer of Mopani South East  FET
College, Ms SC Sehlake welcomed members of the delegation. She proceeded  by
outlining the issues to be discussed that includes presentations by  learner
representative, representative of workers union, representative of  academic
staff.

2.4.1 Meeting with Learner Representative

The President of  the  Student  Representative  Council  (SRC)  reported  on
critical issues that  the  skills  training  facilities  are  outdated,  the
machinery is obsolete and lack of  student  support  services.  He  proposed
that the college should consider offering programmes such as art  and  craft
as the region is situated in a tourist dominated area. He said  that  seeing
that the economy of the province as outlined in its Growth  and  Development
Strategy is centred on mining, agriculture, forestry and tourism,  it  would
be advisable for the college to  align  its  curriculum  along  agricultural
development.

2.4.2 Meeting with Academic Staff

Ms JL  Dibakwana,  a  representative  of  the  academic  staff  reported  on
pertinent issues. The introduction of new programmes resulted in  attracting
white students who started  registering  at  Sir  Val  Duncan  College.  The
introduction of  new  programmes  eliminated  the  duplication  of  courses.
Another positive development at the college was  the  accreditation  of  the
carpentry workshop  by  FIETA  SETA.  The  accreditation  would  enable  the
college to issue certificates to learners, which would be recognised by  the
industries. The  college  also  offers  short  courses  in  Engineering  and
Business on a part-time basis.

The first challenge facing the college is that when offering  short  courses
on a part-time basis, the facilitators who lecture in  those  classes,  work
for eight hours. Because they work for eight hours, no  provision  has  been
made in the South African Schools Act (Act no.84 of 1996)  for  remuneration
when working after hours. The second challenge facing the  college  is  that
of facilitators who have been employed on a  temporary  basis.  As  soon  as
they find a better offer of employment, they tender their  resignations  and
leave the students stranded without an educator. The third challenge  facing
the college is the scarcity of water that makes  it  practically  impossible
to offer courses in agriculture.
Despite the lack of resources, the  future  plans  of  the  college  are  on
track. The college has recently entered into partnership with  Umsombovu  to
start a youth advisory centre at its two  satellite  Campuses.  The  college
has been selected by Indlela (that  is  the  new  name  for  Olifantsfontein
Trade Centre) to plan and prepare learners for  assessment  on  their  trade
tests. The college is in the process of upgrading their  workshops  and  are
in the final stages of being approved by the Sector Education  and  Training
Authorities.

2.4.3 Meeting with SADTU Representative

The Chairperson of South African Democratic Teachers Union, Mr. B  Selelwane
(SADTU) Bushbuckridge region reported to the  delegation  on  the  role  the
union played during the merger process. The Union  would  want  to  see  the
College offering courses that are responsive to the needs of the  community.
For the college to play that  role,  they  (the  college)  have  to  conduct
extensive research and collect information on the needs  of  the  community.
As a union they would want to see the college  playing  an  active  role  in
eliminating illiteracy amongst members of the  community.  The  way  through
which the college could achieve  that  is  by  introducing  an  Adult  Basic
Education and Training Learning courses.

3.    REPORT ON VISIT TO FET COLLEGES IN LIMPOPO: OVERVIEW OF COLLEGES

3.1   Workshops

Part  of  the  role  of  the  delegation  in  conducting  oversight  was  to
practically inspect the facilities at FET  Colleges  in  Limpopo.  The  FETs
offered a range of  courses  in  Electrical  Engineering,  Motor  mechanics,
Business, Panel-beating, Plumbing and Welding, etc. What drew the  attention
of the members was the condition of those machines and  the  status  of  the
workshops.

In providing an overview of the status of these workshops at  FET  Colleges,
the inspections conducted would  be  divided  into  the  conditions  of  the
machinery, the equipment used, accreditation of workshops and peculiarity.

Lephalale FET College is  making  use  of  the  Mining  workshops  that  are
adjacent to the College and are well equipped and technologically advanced.

Workshops in all other colleges are poorly resourced and  utilized  outdated
equipment. These conditions have a negative impact for  the  preparation  of
the learners for labour market. The machinery in most of  the  workshops  at
FET Colleges in Limpopo are old,  archaic,  broken,  health  hazard,  rusty,
dilapidated to non-existent.

   2. Accreditation

For a FET College to produce a learner that has gone through all the  stages
of his/her studies a learner has got to have done theory  and  practice  and
obtained an apprenticeship certificate and finally has  written  and  passed
his/her  trade  test  and  become  an  artisan.  Colleges  need   accredited
workshops.  Most  of  the  workshops  at  FETs  in  Limpopo  have  not  been
accredited due to bad conditions.

   3. Predicament faced by learners
When learners complete their theoretical courses,  they  are  faced  with  a
predicament because industries do not recognise the certificates,  also  the
theoretical courses are only offered for three months.

   4.  Observations by the delegation
The delegation noted the progress made by the Department with regard to  the
merger of Further Education and Training Colleges and having  set  aside  an
amount of R12, 5 billion for re-capitalization, the delegation  observes  as
follows:

  • Chief Executive Officers/ Principals
The  Chief  Executive  Officers  embraced  the  merger  process.  They   are
committed to transforming colleges and to uplift the skills  of  members  of
the society and the country in general. They (the  CEO’s)  speak  in  unison
under, governance, human resource, infrastructure, finance, curriculum,  and
learnership  support  services.  In  the  interim,   they   propose   urgent
intervention from the Provincial and National Departments on  the  following
policy matters:

  • Curriculum
The National  Education  Document  (Nated)  programmes  are  not  linked  to
practical  work.  The  examination  on  theory   is   written   either   per
trimester/semester/annually  depending  on  the  length  of  theory  to   be
covered. Neither the department nor Umalusi accredit the  practical  because
they are not aligned to the National Qualification Framework (NQF).
In order to overcome  the  challenge  of  the  Curriculum;  colleges  should
proceed with the Nated programmes for learners who  want  to  further  their
studies or want to acquire more content knowledge or those that need  theory
for trade certificates, that Nated  programmes  should  be  aligned  to  NQF
which would have a practical component  to  assess  skills,  while  aligning
Nated programmes to NQF, allow colleges  to  offer  NQF  programmes  and  be
accredited by various SETAs but those programmes  should  be  responsive  to
the need of the economy. The criteria used  for  accreditation  should  have
proper infrastructure, equipment, materials, health  and  safety  compliance
plans, learner support services and relevant academic staff  that  would  be
retrained.

    • Learners
The delegation  noted  that  the  learners  need  learner  support  centres,
bursaries and access to Internet facilities and libraries.  It  was  further
noted that that biggest frustration for the academic staff members  is  lack
of job security.

    • Labour formation
In relation to labour, members of the delegation noted that labour  embraces
the merger process and support the re-capitalization. That they  would  want
colleges  to  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  communities  and  the
curriculum should be in line with those needs.

4.    REPORT ON VISIT TO GAUTENG FET COLLEGES

On the 17 August 2005, the Chief Executive Officer of the  Sedibeng  Further
Education and Training  College,  Dr  Abe  Machele,  accompanied  by  Mr.  A
Bornman fetched members of the delegation from the Riverside Hotel.
Thereafter, the  delegation  proceeded  to  the  Sedibeng  FET  College,  in
Vereeniging Campus where they (the  delegation)  were  welcomed  by  Mr  Len
Davis, Deputy Director General, Group General Manager,  Curriculum,  Gauteng
Provincial  Department  on  behalf  of  the  Provincial  MEC  of  Education,
Honourable Ms Motshekga. The MEC and the Head of the  Provincial  Department
joined the delegation on Friday on the last lap of the visit at  South  West
Gauteng College, Molapo Campus.

Following the welcome, the delegation toured the Vereeniging Campus, led  by
Ms L Ngoasheng Campus Manager, inspecting various Hospitality Salons,  where
learners  are  taught  to  become  Beauticians,  Nail   Technologists.   The
delegation inspected a Hair  Care  Salon  that  specializes  in  Afro  Hair.
Thereafter, they inspected workshops of trade such  as  Fitter  and  Turner,
Motor Mechanic, Boilermaker,  Electrician,  Motor  and  Body  repairing  and
spray-painting.

After  having  inspected  the  workshops  and   Hospitality   classes,   the
delegation travelled to the Sedibeng FET College, Sebokeng Campus where  the
delegation interacted with Chief Executive Officers of all FET  Colleges  in
Gauteng,   Student   Representative   Council,    Labour    Representatives,
Learnership Representative and Community Projects Representatives.


 1. Meeting with Principals of FET Colleges


Dr Abe Mashele, the Chief Executive Officer of Sedibeng FET College  gave  a
report on behalf of Principals of FET Colleges in Gauteng province.
The structural adjustment to transform systems has  succeeded  in  reforming
former Technical Colleges into  Further  Education  and  Training  Colleges.
However, the lack of merger  synchronised  funding  unravelled  the  initial
momentum and successes of mergers as  a  result  the  successful  structural
adjustment exists as an isolated concept without  an  immediate  and  direct
meaningfulness to the FET College population.
He further outlined  the  challenges  posed  by  the  merger  process  under
infrastructural   deficiencies,   funding,   curriculum,   governance    and
management of FET Colleges.

First the shortcomings and challenges posed by  the  merger  process  caused
delays on lifting of the moratorium on existing promotion posts (Level 3  to
Level 5) since 1999. Delays occurred in the lifting  of  the  moratorium  on
existing Senior support staff positions (Public Servants) for  the  past  10
years, The limitations in the Employment of Educators Act, of  1998  related
to inflexible leave arrangements impacts  negatively  on  working  hours  of
educator.  The  regulations  governing  workload  of  educators   does   not
recognise relevant and essential  occupation-acquired  technical  competence
and experience of artisans.

    • Infrastructure Deficiencies
Under  infrastructural  deficiencies  the   Principals   argued   that   the
establishment of Central Offices  at  Campuses  had  resulted  in  generally
insufficient  and  inadequate  office  space  and  that  the  student   fees
structures of former state colleges and  state-aided  colleges  need  to  be
standardised.

    • Funding of FET Colleges
Funding derived from the province is currently meant  for  rates  and  taxes
and a small portion thereof is directed towards  infrastructure  maintenance
and repairs. In order that colleges are able to  effectively  conduct  their
core functions, the infrastructure and equipment need  to  be  rehabilitated
or  refurbished.  It  is  imperative  for  colleges  that  when   developing
curricula they need to be innovative. It is  the  duty  of  the  college  to
capacitate staff in order that they perform their  duties  effectively.  The
institution needs to put in place structures that would attract  and  retain
staff. There is a significant deficiency  in  funding  for  student  support
centres, and a student financial aid scheme for students in  colleges  needs
to be considered. Students are overburdened by debt, there is a need  for  a
new funding formula to promote equity and redress at institutional level.

    • Curriculum
There are curriculum problems linked to  the  implementation  of  SETA-based
programmes.  The  Provincial  and  National  Department  do  not  fund   the
programmes, they are regarded as Non-DoE programmes. The  implementation  of
new South African Qualification Authority accredited  programmes  should  be
expedited; the National-Qualification-Framework-aligned  and  Outcomes-Based
Education programmes need  to  be  clearly  delineated;  the  current  Nated
190/191programmes should be replaced  by  a  framework  that  would  provide
colleges with a structure and direction in designing a  curriculum  that  is
responsive to local, provincial and national needs; that teaching  practices
need  to  address  barriers  that  prevent  students  from  realising  their
potential; that evaluation and  assessment  strategies  that  are  practised
should strive  to  deepen  understanding  and  promote  the  application  of
knowledge and  skills  in  different  contexts  to  achieve  optimum  and  a
comprehensive Quality Assurance System need to be put in place.

    • Governance and Management
On this aspect there is a need to strike a balance between the roles of  the
College Council and management. It is important for a  new  college-specific
legislation that excludes schools but incorporates  provision  of  staffing,
no  clear  defined  roles  of  previous  Principals/Rectors  of  the  former
Technical colleges and no provision is  considered  to  encapsulate  college
schedules e.g. trimesters in favour of school-oriented practices.

 2. Meeting with Student Representative Council (SRC)


The President of the Student Representative Council, Mr P Makole,  gave  the
report on the following issues: the absence  of  a  bursary  or  scholarship
scheme for learners, the need for hostel accommodation for  learners.  There
is a need to absorb learners into learnership  programmes  after  they  have
completed the 18  months  theory  into  industries  to  gain  the  necessary
experience.  There is a need for a student  resource  centres.  The  college
does not have enough classrooms  as  a  result  students  are  being  denied
access to the college.  The  trimesters  system  should  be  replaced  by  a
semesters system to enable learners to complete their work within 10  weeks.
The College should consider offering courses in engineering.

    3. Meeting with the Labour Representative
A representative of Labour, Ms EM Masilo reported on the  challenges  facing
the union and provided proposals as to how to  overcome  them.  The  College
would like the 3-months training system (trimester) should be  changed  into
a semester to afford learners sufficient time  to  acquire  skills  (theory)
and prepare optimally for the exams. Further, educators experience  problems
related to the high student lecturer ratio. They  proposed  that  management
should consider not allowing learners to write exams  without  a  year  mark
and having not attended classes regularly. The  presenter  reported  further
that  most  Campuses  lacked  well-equipped  workshops  that  would   enable
learners to put theory into practice.

4.4   Presentation by Learnership Representative


The Chief Operations Officer, Dr CF Ayres, briefed  the  delegation  on  the
following areas:

    • Learnership in FET Colleges
The source of learnership programmes emanated from  the  Skills  Development
Act, which encouraged partnership between the public and private  sector  of
the economy to offer practical training in  the  workplace  and  theoretical
education within the educational sector.

    • Recognition of Prior Learning
It is hoped that FET Colleges should be capable of  determining  and  giving
Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL)  of  learners  who  want  to  enter  the
education system. A study conducted on FET Colleges found that the  majority
of colleges do not possess a system for the recognition of prior learning.

    • Partnerships
The success of learnerships is dependent on  the  involvement  of  commerce,
industry  and  the  service  providers  for  practical  training.  The  more
learnerships that can  be  presented  in  collaboration  with  commerce  and
industry, the greater the opportunities for employment of learners  and  for
job creation.

    • Skills Development Facilitators
Further Education and Training Colleges have a competent Skills  Development
Facilitators (SDF) because a  facilitator  would  determine  the  successful
implementation of learnership to a large extent.  It  was  also  noted  that
some of the colleges had  the  support  and  assistance  of  several  Sector
Education and Training Authorities, while others  had  to  manage  on  their
own. This resulted in  the  colleges  having  to  appoint  additional  staff
members from the college funds.

 4.5 Challenges


The Colleges had to appoint additional members of staff to  conduct  classes
after hours. This is a breach of the Employment of Educators Act (Act 76  of
1998)  that  prohibits  educators  from  receiving  any   money   or   other
remuneration from member of the public  or  another  employer  in  order  to
execute his/her duties without written permission  from  the  Department  of
Education.  Learnerships  are  not  regarded  as  Department  of   Education
programmes, but as Department of Labour programmes.

    • Development of Learnerships
The new learnership system includes the old  apprenticeship  system,  namely
the integration of theory  and  practice.  At  present  most  colleges  only
present the theoretical tuition and the  learner  cannot  demonstrate  which
practical skills he/she has mastered.

    • Successful implementation of learnership programmes
Colleges  were  not  easily  accepted   as   service   providers   for   the
implementation of learnerships by the private sector,  because  no  previous
similarities between the FETs and industry existed.  The  expertise  of  the
college staff regarding the required content of the  new  learning  material
was utilised optimally. The development of the learning  material  was  time
consuming and therefore staff were  selected  who  had  declared  themselves
willing to put in extra time and sacrifice  college  holidays  in  order  to
develop learning material.

    • Readiness of FETs to Implement Learnerships
The Further Education and Training Colleges are  not  completely  ready  for
the implementation of learnership, due to the  lack  of  infrastructure  and
colleges had no leverage to offer learnership due to the Act.  A  number  of
colleges have already completed pilot learnerships successfully  or  are  in
the process of doing  so.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  FETs  have  the
expertise to successfully implement learnerships programmes.

6. WESTERN FET COLLEGE

On the 18 August 2005,  the  delegation  visited  the  Western  College  for
Further Education and Training. The delegation  proceeded  to  Lanseria.  At
Lanseria the delegation was welcomed  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of
Western FET College, Mr Louis and later joined by  the  Provincial  Head  of
Department of Gauteng, Mr Mallele Petje. He reported that he was  given  the
responsibility to develop a Provincial Human Resource Development  Strategy,
whose main objective is to map the  positioning  of  the  FET  Colleges  and
spearheading the learnership programme as a priority.

The Executive Officer of Aerospace Chamber, Mr Johan de  Beer,  reported  to
the delegation that he approached Western College and said that the  chamber
in its mission and vision are planning to train  black  learners  to  become
commercial pilots. Western College took the initiative and  identified  five
(5) black students. One out of  those  five  students,  namely,  Mr  William
Modiroa, briefed members of the delegation on his successes at  the  gliding
school. He informed the  delegation  that  he  obtained  his  private  pilot
licence (PPL) and has got into  power  flying.  He  is  busy  finishing  his
commercial pilot licence. Upon finishing, he  wants  to  fly  South  African
Airways. His long-term vision is to become an instructor and  open  his  own
air school where he could train less fortunate students.

    7.  THE MAGALIES GLIDING SCHOOL


The delegation visited the Magalies Gliding Club and  was  welcomed  by  the
Chairperson of the club, Mr C Danturn. The delegation was briefed as to  how
to become a member of the club and how the club  works  and  how  to  get  a
glider out of a hangar. To be able to get a glider out  of  a  hangar  there
must be a minimum of three persons. One person holds onto the wing tip,  one
would push on the glider and the third will lift the tail  or  push  on  the
nose.
At the glider club, there were fifteen students who are club  members.  What
is a glider? A glider is a sailplane, or glider as they are known, which  is
an engineless aircraft, using gravity as its source of power. A  glider  has
all  the  same  control  surfaces  (ailerons,   elevator,   rudder,   flaps,
spoilers/airbrakes) and similar instruments to  those  of  a  conventionally
powered aircraft. Some Members of the delegation were taken for  a  ride  to
test the power of gliding.

    8.  CAROL SHAW REHABILITATION CENTRE


The  Executive  Director,  Rev  Tsietsi  Zacharia  Motaung,   welcomed   the
delegation. He reported that the Minister of  Social  Development  supported
the Centre.

He gave a brief background of the centre. In 2002 the  centre  entered  into
partnership with Western College, Randfontein  Campus,  and  offered  skills
development programmes to recovering alcohol and drug addicts  and  HIV/AIDS
clients. A farm  was  bought  in  Brandvlei  where  they  started  vegetable
farming with the assistance of the Israeli Embassy Consulate.

The centre has  identified  two  learners  to  participate  in  the  Western
College agricultural farming learnership programme. They  would  also  share
with other learners their experiences of drug  and  alcohol  abuse  and  the
consequences thereof. They reported that the Centre  had  assisted  them  to
refrain  from  their  abusive  indulgence  and  are  in   the   process   of
rehabilitation and had found salvation in God.

4.9  ZAMANI/ZIBO COMMUNITY PROJECT AND PEACE HAVEN


The delegation visited Zibo Enterprise. Zibo Enterprise was formed from  the
merger  of  the  Zamani,  Itireleng,  Bona  Lesedi   and   Omana   Bencubeko
Organisations (Zibo). The organisations co-ordinated self-help  projects  in
Bekkersdal, near Westonaria in which women made candles, beadwork,  dresses,
disposable napkins, paintings and Vaseline.

The Co-ordinator of the  project,  Ms  Annamarie  Botes  reported  that  the
success of the project could be  attributed  to  hard  work,  sacrifice  and
commitment. The merger came  after  three  years  of  life-skills  training,
compiling of budgets, management restructuring and strategic  planning.  The
project currently employs 50 women but the number of fulltime  employees  is
expected to reach 150 by the end of the year.

The noted challenges facing Zibo organisation is  the  lack  of  networking.
They want  the  Provincial  Department  and  college  to  assist  them  with
marketing and networking in order for them to sustain the project and  would
like the college to assist them to obtain SETA accreditation status.

   5.   REPORT ON VISIT TO SOUTH WEST GAUTENG COLLEGE


On 19 August 2005, the delegation visited South West  Gauteng  College.  The
Chief Executive Officer of Molapo Campus, Mr Dan L Nkosi and members of  the
College Council, welcomed the delegation.

   1. Brief Overview of South West Gauteng College


The CEO of Molapo Campus presented  a  brief  overview  of  the  South  West
Gauteng College. The salient points he outlined were inter alia:
    • Mission and vision; Organogram; Campuses; expansion of Campus  spread;
      College snippets; Strategic objectives 2004-2005; Niche areas;
    • Re-capitalization proposal; Partnerships and linkages  and  on  merger
      challenges and strides


     1. Tour of Molapo Campus


The Campus Manager, Mr Motlhatlhedi, took the delegation around  to  inspect
the three workshops. The workshops toured  were  the  electrical,  carpentry
and plumbing workshops. The Campus Manager informed members that  the  three
workshops were  SETA  Accredited.  The  delegation  left  for  George  Tabor
Campus.

     2. George Tabor Campus
At George Tabor, the Campus Manager, Mr I Coetzer, welcomed the  delegation.
Mr Coetzer said that George Tabor is one  of  the  five  Campuses  providing
basic skills, learnership and arts. The  delegation  was  taken  around  the
Campus, inspecting one workshop and three classes. The workshop and  classes
toured were: panel-beating workshop, pottery classes, clothing  classes  and
art classes. The delegation departed for Roodepoort Campus.

     3. Roodepoort Campus


At Roodepoort Campus,  the  Campus  Manager,  Ms  Richardson,  welcomed  the
delegation. Due to the enormous layout of the  Campus,  the  delegation  was
divided into two groups.
   a) Group 1: Inspected: Hair-care; Hospitality, Catering and Tourism
   b) Group 2: Inspected: Cosmetology; IT Workshop;  Pro-metric  centre  and
      Educare
   c) Group 1&2: Touring: Student services office; Resource centre and  drop
      off zone


     4. Meeting in Gazelle, Roodepoort Campus

The meeting on the Roodepoort Campus was a meeting set aside  for  the  MEC,
Principals, Gauteng Department of Education officials  and  members  of  the
delegation. It was a  follow-up  to  a  meeting  with  the  Chief  Executive
Officer  concerning  the  status  of  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum   of
Understanding with Sector Education and Training Authorities.

The brief report  on  the  status  of  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of
Understanding reads that  in  July  2005,  Umalusi  appointed  a  Task  Team
consisting of representatives of different Provincial Education  Departments
to work on the generic MOU for all SETAs. The key focus of the MOU was  that
the Further Education and  Training  Colleges  should  be  considered  as  a
preferred provider for SETA accredited programmes that would  be  responsive
to the Expanded Public Works program targeting both ABET and the  FET  Level
2-4 program.

The MEC was unable to attend the meeting, and  the  Provincial  Departmental
Officials were requested to take up the matter with the MEC and report  back
to the Chief Executive Officers. The MEC was  requested  to  make  available
the copy of the report to the Committee Secretary for  the  benefit  of  the
Committee.

6.    REPORT ON VISIT TO THE EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE

6.1  BUFFALO CITY COLLEGE

    • The Merger Process
The Buffalo City College was officially established in 2002 out of a  merger
between East London College, John Knox Bokwe College  and  Border  Technical
College. It comprises four Campuses, namely East  London  Campus;  St  Marks
Campus; John Knox Bokwe Campus and  King  Street  Campus.  The  College  has
three residences and an Admin Centre. Buffalo  City  College.  Its  students
intake for 2004 exceeded 9 000 and out of which 2 619 are  FTEs  (Full  Time
Equivalents).

    • Governance and Management
This structure was established in accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
Further Education Training Act of 1998.

Management indicated that the members of staff  are  willing  to  work  with
government towards the college’s vision.  The  management  of  this  college
ensures that the needs of the community and those of the students  are  met.
In terms of the college council and how it was established,  the  delegation
learnt that a consultative process was followed, and  a  range  of  external
and internal stakeholders is represented in it.

    • Student Governance
It was reported that students have a well-managed SRC,  and  although  there
are successes  in  their  activities  there  are  also  some  challenges  in
relation to how the institution is run  and  how  the  students  lead  their
lives on the Campus.
The SRC is gender-balanced, and they regularly hold meetings on the Campus.

    • Curriculum
Both Full-time and part-time courses are offered in Art &  Design,  Business
and   Utilities,   Engineering,   electrical,   robotics,   mechanical   and
electronics. The Business Skills  Centre  offers  part-time  courses  geared
towards skills training, retraining and enrichment.

    • Student Support Services
There is learnership development in the region and  King  Street  Campus  is
currently working with SETA and companies such as  DCSA,  Summerpride  Foods
and a number of local retail organizations on learnership projects.

    • Funding
The college receives funding from:
Amatole District Council, Buffalo City Municipality, Centre for  Information
Migration (CIM), Daimler Chrysler, First  National  Bank,  German  Technical
Corporation, The Government of Lower Saxony, Germany and ROC Leiden and  the
Municipality of Leiden
    • Staffing
The staff component is 253 made up of 147 Educators, 60 Admin staff  and  48
General Assistants.

    • Accesses and Participation
There  is  an  increased  access  for  all  the  learners   from   different
background. Students  are  able  to  access  the  college  with  ease;  this
includes students studying both part-time and full-time.

     • Readiness for Recapitalization
The college was almost ready to meet the deadline  on  the  plan.  The  plan
will be available once finalised.

    • Achievements
The student enrolment has grown in greater number over the past  few  years.
There is greater emphasis on automotive engineering and  generic  management
and entrepreneurial skills. This has increased potential student chances  of
placement in gainful employment in the city and the surroundings.

6.2   LOVEDALE FET COLLEGE

    • Merger Process
The impact of the merger proved to be an important step  towards  the  right
direction in this college. A new structure in which major  stakeholders  and
role-players have to work hand in hand was established.  This  structure  is
called SAFTECH.

    • Governance and Management
This structure  is  established  in  principle  to  provide  management  and
governance in all matters that contribute  to  the  smooth  running  of  the
college.

The college council provides the overall governance of the  institution  and
by a date or dates in the manner determined by the executive council.
When it comes to  responding  to  urgent  matters,  it  takes  a  while  for
government to respond, and this leads to frustration on  the  side  of  both
staff and the students. The delays in appointment of senior managers  are  a
challenge. It is three years now since the CEOs have signed the  performance
management – and as they only come at  the  end  of  the  third  year,  this
affects delivery, outcomes and outputs. These  delays  lead  to  a  negative
impact on other issues such as budgetary programmes. The department gives  a
specific budget verbally, and it only comes in months later,  and  does  not
talk to the programmes that have been put in place.

    • Student Governance
There is an SRC, which administers its own budget. The SRC  keeps  a  record
of expenditure, and it submits the financial report for the period  of  term
of office within three weeks, after the end of the period  to  the  CEO  and
the College Executive Council.

    • Curriculum
The  following  learning  fields  are  offered:  Arts,   Business   Studies,
Engineering, Utility Studies, Agriculture, Fine Arts and Music
The  most  common  learnerships  are  Wholesale  and  Retail   and   Primary
Agricultural Education and Training Authority (PAETA)

    • Student Support Service
There is a Department of Learner Affairs Support  that  facilitates  in  the
running of the election of  the  SRC.  The  College’s  Learner  Affairs  and
Support Department and the SRC hold capacity-building  workshops  and  other
meetings. This department also runs workshops on HIV/AIDS awareness.
Alexander Forbes Computer  Centre  was  also  launched.  There  is  a  fully
fledged learnership Programme and Skills Unit.

    • Funding
The college is also state-aided. Subsidy schemes do exist. The college  also
derives its funds from the student fees and from other partnerships such  as
government programmes like Setas.

    • Staffing
Critical management and support staff vacancies were not filled up to  2004.
 Twenty-four college council short contract posts were  filled  and  six  N6
experimental trainees were appointed in an effort  to  undergo  experimental
training in different careers. Five years down the line, there  is  still  a
delay in appointments of  staff.  Lectures  need  to  be  assured  of  their
appointments in  time.  Staff  development  normally  takes  place  in  this
college. This is done to increase the capacity in the staff’s skills.

     • Access and Participation
The  training  and  participation  of   educators   in   business   teaching
contributes to regular attendance by learners, since  they  feel  motivated.
As a result, the numbers of students  accessing  the  college  continued  to
rise.

    • Readiness for Recapitalization
The college is ready for the programme, and it has submitted all  the  plans
to  the  department.  There  were  no  reports  of  any  serious  challenges
regarding what was expected of them in order to fulfil the  recapitalization
plan. The recapitalization plan was adopted to address  the  infrastructural
challenges of the Campus, re-skilling and redirection of programmes.

    • Partnerships
Business and industry have close ties with the  college.   The  college  has
ties  with  Scotland;  Daimler  Chrysler  South  Africa;  Amathole  District
Municipality; Uluntu Skills Development Centre and Fabkomp PTY (LTD).

The budget is not  aligned  to  the  programme.  The  understanding  of  the
college  is  that  although  government  or  the  department  is  still   to
implement,  it  proactively  does  something  to  ensure  that  there  is  a
difference in terms of the lives of the  people.  The  department  does  not
give any bursaries to the institution. The reading  materials  are  outdated
and irrelevant, and need to be updated.


   1. Challenges


The placement programme also has challenges, particularly  with  what  would
happen if the college could be sued. It was reported that  the  Ministry  is
taking too long to take decisions around the budget issues  and  employment.
Reference was made on the Teacher Policy Guideline document, which also  has
some difficulties.

The budget is not  aligned  to  the  programme.  The  understanding  of  the
college  is  that  although  government  or  the  department  is  still   to
implement,  it  proactively  does  something  to  ensure  that  there  is  a
difference in terms of the lives of the people. It was  indicated  that  the
department does not give any bursary to the institution.  Concern  was  also
raised that the reading materials are outdated and irrelevant, and needs  to
be updated.

6.3   KING HINTSA FET COLLEGE

    • Merger Process
The rural and poor communities were identified. The merger process  affected
other areas of the college activities such  as  the  resources,  which  were
supposed to be put together in order to improve the quality of education.

    • Governance and Management
A permanent college council is in place. The  council  meeting  takes  place
four times a year except extra  ordinary  meetings.  They  are  trained  and
capacitated  on  various  governing  matters.  Policy   issues   are   being
addressed.

Council committees are in place and they do regularly meet once a month  and
discuss issues for council  approval.  Management  and  administration  meet
once a month; senior managers meet once a fortnight.

The Strategic Plan of the college is  used  and  it  is  implemented  fully.
Management submits progress reports to the  Department  and  Campus  reports
are forwarded to the CEOs  office  via  the  Senior  Manager  Education  and
Training Services. The CEO and the Chief Directorate are closely  monitoring
an operational Plan/Work Plan. The College Council  with  the  CEO  monitors
partnership and Governance issues.

    • Student Governance
An SRC does exist, however, it is faced with the following challenges:
The lack of financial support for disadvantaged students. The students  feel
that the attendance is poor because the transport system  is  not  reliable.
Another concern is that the shortage of staff is impacting on  their  school
activities.

    • Curriculum
This college offers the following programmes:
The existing niche areas, levels, learnerships and skills programmes  exist.
It is proposed that the following should be accredited in the  near  future:
Civil Engineering, Agriculture, and Business Studies.

Furthermore, the  college  is  responding  to  the  training  needs  of  the
students, and this  is  done  in  partnership  with  the  Setas.  There  is,
however, a lack of relevant training equipment.

    • Student Support Services
The college has a support service,  particularly  on  matters  dealing  with
HIV/AIDS. This is so because the college  saw  the  need  of  combating  the
problem as it was beginning to spread. The management  feels  it  is  within
its power to ensure that this  service  extends  from  the  college  to  the
communities as well.

    • Funding
Funding comes from the department of education in  the  province.  There  is
also on-going discussions  with  funding  institutions,  particularly  those
whose core activities are in line with the programmes that  are  offered  in
the college.
The CEO acknowledges that the funding of  R64  million  is  not  enough  and
hoped that it would be increased.

    • Staffing
There are few posts, which  have  not  been  filled.  There  is  a  need  to
increase the number of educators.  Management  is  dealing  with  issues  of
recruitment in consultation with the department.

    • Access and Participation
The  student  number  is  dropping,   because   the   students   come   from
disadvantaged areas. Transportation is a problem, and  the  students  put  a
proposal on the table, namely that the college has  to  purchase  a  bus  to
assist students.
It is also because of the shortage of staff that students  are  not  willing
to enrol in great numbers in this college.

    • Readiness for Recapitalization
The college is ready, and it has  sent  the  plans  to  the  department  for
evaluation.

    • Partnership
Business and industry, together with the  municipality  work  hand  in  hand
with the college

   2. Challenges


The structure of the buildings of this Campus is  very  old  and  not  user-
friendly.
Although the provincial department supports the  initiatives,  it  is  still
not being adequately addressed. The course designs are not  aligned  to  the
programmes and  the  available  skills.  Approval  of  building  a  standard
college is underway. However, there is a problem, this can be attributed  to
the quality of equipment. Building of workshops is  of  primary  importance.
The equipment is not cheap. This equipment should be similar  to  that  used
in the building industry.

The Level of poverty of the learners’ parents, hence it is difficult to  pay
these fees. There are no bursaries offered by the  government  as  with  the
Higher Education. The college cannot make vocational institution free.   The
college is situated in a rural  area,  and  since  the  previous  government
ignored the colleges in rural areas, the  recapitalization  programme  comes
in handy in order to deal with such problems

The shortage of staff members is a serious challenge, especially for  senior
managers positions. It was reported that the National Department is  looking
into the matter.
Key personnel such as  financial  officers  need  to  be  added  for  better
service delivery. The fees paid by the learners are supposed to be  utilised
for training and equipment; however, they are used to pay staff members.

6.4   KING SABATA DALINYEBO FET COLLEGE

    • The Merger process
The college  comprises  the  following  Campuses:   Mthatha  Campus,  Mapuzi
Campus, Engcobo Campus, Libode Campus,  Ntabozuko  Campus,  Mgazi  Campuses.
The area in which the College is situated as a result of the  merger  has  a
great potential for agriculture, tourism, civil engineering  and  mechanical
engineering.

    • Governance and management
A management structure has been put in place. There are, however,  no  major
challenges regarding meetings that are regularly held. The  members  of  the
management hold an executive meeting four times a year.

    • Student Governance
The SRC exists, and was established in terms of  the  regulations  governing
college’s establishment of SRCs.  The students feel  that  there  should  be
funding of youth programmes and projects as a way of changing the  students’
mindsets in respect of vocationalised and technological education.

    • Curriculum
Courses offered include Agriculture, Tourism, Civil Engineering,  Electrical
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering.
The NATED Programme offers courses in: Carpentry and  Joinery,  Bricklaying,
Panel  Beating,  Business  Studies,   Electrical   Engineering   and   Motor
Mechanics.

    • Student support services
It was reported that there is very little support services for students  who
have difficulties.

    • Funding
On government side there are very few financial  schemes  available  in  the
form of bursaries.

    • Staffing
There is lack of support staff  employed  by  the  department,  particularly
clerical staff, cleaners and general workers.

    • Access and participation
Learners do access the college freely. However, the numbers drop  after  the
first block in a year. This is because the majority of the  students  prefer
to go to colleges, which are urban-based.

    • Readiness for recapitalization
Despite all the problems, the  college  is  ready  for  the  programme.  The
college submitted the recap plan to the department.

    • Achievements
There  are  good  community  programmes  and  learnership  programmes,  most
particularly those driven by the Setas. These programmes target  the  youth,
the disabled and women. The college assists the local  communities  in  crop
farming, poultry farming and animal husbandry.

7.    REPORT ON VISIT TO KWAZULU NATAL PROVINCE

   1. MNAMBITI FET COLLEGE

    • Merger Process
The Mnambiti College is made up of  a  merger  between  Ladysmith  Technical
College, the Ezakheni Technical College and the Ezakheni skills  centre.  It
has six campuses and negotiations are underway to open another college.

    • Governance and Management
This is the  only  college  that  is  affiliated  to  the  Medical  Research
Council.
The Section 09 Council has been established and there is  clear  delineation
of  duties  between  council  and  management.  There  are  regular  council
meetings, finance meetings and academic board meetings.
The rector has been appointed, and a central office has been established.
The council’s view is  that  the  infrastructure  and  student’s  activities
should show capability in being able to compete in today’s world.  There  is
noted a gap in the middle management  despite  the  fact  that  the  council
tries its best to pay other people to do the job since the merger posts  are
not being filled.

    • Student Governance
There is one SRC, which serves all Campuses.  The  SRC  is  gender-balanced;
there are three female and two male students. The  noted  challenge  is  the
trimester  programme,  which  affects  continuity.  A  healthy  relationship
between SRC and management exists.

    • Curriculum
Apart from the core business of the college, the  business  studies  of  the
college, engineering studies, hospitality and catering courses exist.
The Mnambiti College is the only college in South  Africa  that  offers  the
national senior certificate in health and community care.
The aim of this course is to:
   a) Achieve a senior certificate in a specialized field, especially  those
      who want to pursue a career  in  the  health  services,  e.g.  medical
      assistants, paramedics, ambulance services, first aid and nursing
   b) Cater for those who cannot afford to go to universities and  thus  the
      course serves as a stepping-stone into nursing school. It  also  gives
      an  opportunity  for  those  who  are  not  so  good  at  science  and
      mathematics to become qualified in the medical field.


The Mnambiti FET College is the only FET  College  in  the  country  with  a
nursing school affiliated to it, which is registered with the South  African
Nursing Council.

The college provides education and training  programmes  to  the  unemployed
and underqualified people by offering various  community  projects  such  as
Project Rave under the auspices of the wholesale and  Retail  SETA  –  these
are business start-ups and business improvement programmes.

It also offers early childhood development that is unique in  terms  of  its
target market. The college trains unemployed, disadvantaged women  from  the
rural areas who are  running  informal  crèches  for  children  orphaned  by
HIV/AIDS. The programme empowers women to become  caregivers  with  critical
skills such as counselling traumatized children, managing crèches and  later
become trainers of trainers.

    • The Student Support Services
The college has an excellent student support structure that is headed  by  a
qualified psychometricist, who is registered with  the  Health  Professional
Council  of  South  Africa.  The  students  receive   academic,   financial,
psychological and career counselling.

    • Funding
The College is funded from State subsidies,  student  fees  including  funds
from partnership with SETA and Provincial Recapitalization.

    • Staffing
Due to the extensive and  intensive  campaign,  the  college  experienced  a
surge in student numbers  (growing  by  78%).  As  a  result,  there  was  a
shortage of staffing; the college council  has  appointed  additional  staff
members on contract basis. Out  of  the  58  CS-Educators,  30  are  council
appointments on a temporary basis.

Although a Rector has been appointed, there are vacant positions  at  senior
management level.
    • Access and Participation
   a) Out of the total enrolment of 1 483  (excluding  cooperatives),  there
      are 646 female students and 837 male students.
   b) There are more female students on Ladysmith Campus A (414 out of  710)
      compared to Ladysmith Campus BC (149 out of 337).
   c)  Out  of  35  enrolments  in  skills  centre,  there  are  no   female
      participants.
   d) Out of 2 310 participants in the co-operatives, there are 1 458 female
      participants and 852 male  participants.  The  participants  rate  has
      increased by 78%.
   e) The FET college is well prepared with regard to  the  recapitalisation
      plan for submission by due date.

    • Partnerships
Through a joint venture between the Ministry of Education and  the  Ministry
of Finance and Economic Affairs, the college is able to  offer  co-operative
training in order to eliminate poverty and decrease unemployment.
The college has entered into partnership  with  the  wholesale  and  retail,
local economic development, local government, health and welfare Setas.

    • Achievements
The College won the Gold Award in 2003 at the  SABC  Careers  Exhibition  in
Durban.
Featuring of the SABC documentary on training of  co-operatives  at  cripple
care centre in Ladysmith. Having an ex-FET  student,  Brian  Lewis,  as  the
guest speaker at the Annual Top  Award  Ceremony.  Brian’s  Company  is  now
listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.

        2. Challenges
Absence of staffing norms leads to temporary  appointments,  which  in  turn
causes insecurity and low morale. There are concerns about noted  delays  in
the appointment of middle management.
The institution is not accessible to learners due to poor  transport  system
and the shortage of boarding facilities poses a challenge  in  reaching  the
poorest of the poor in the deeper rural areas.

7.2   MAJUBA (Newcastle) FET COLLEGE

    • Merger Process
There was a successful co-ordination of five Campuses, which  had  different
ethos and lecturers. There  is  a  centralized  administration  system;  the
realignment of Campuses  eliminates  inefficiencies.  One  of  the  learning
points was that at least niche Campuses have to be developed and there  have
to be areas of specialization. The  measure  of  success  is  based  on  the
following statistics, A, Pre-merger: 6000 FTEs, B, Post-merger:  9500  FTEs.
Nationally, the college is recognized as a centre of excellence.


    • Governance and Management
The college is fully compliant with  the  FET  Act.  Its  Council  is  fully
functional, and has an equitable  representation.  However,  the  management
structures and levels are not yet in place. There are interim structures  in
place for student support, human resources, finance and  administration  and
quality assurance and programmes have been established.


      • Readiness for Recapitalization
The draft five-year strategic plan of the college has  been  submitted.  Its
strategy and objectives  are  aligned  with  the  provincial  strategy.  The
college’s recapitalization  plans  were  submitted  to  the  province,  with
emphasis on new infrastructure.

      • Access
The access is limited to the Newcastle and immediate environment. There  are
proposed satellites at Glencoe, Dannhauser and Osizweni.  The  College  does
not have hostels  and  this  impacts  on  accessibility  for  learners.  The
colleges  attract  the  school  leavers,  matriculants,  unemployed,   ABET,
retrenched,  and  niche  employment  opportunities.  The  tuition  fees  are
reported to be the lowest in the country, currently  standing  at  R500  per
trimester. It offers three outreach programmes.

         • Funding
The available funding for tuition fees and from the education. In  addition,
there is also funding for US-based skills programmes  and  learnership.  All
learning materials are developed and  funded  internally.  The  FET  College
would prefer to receive more funding for engineering-based learnerships.
         • Curriculum
The curriculum is predominantly based on Nated programmes.  There  are  also
artisan  training  supplementary  traditional  N-courses  –   NTC   attracts
trainees  from  South  Africa  and  neighbouring  states.  The   Learnership
programmes are for NQF Levels 1-4.


      • Skills Programmes
The ABET learneship is offered in partnership with the relevant  industries.
 They cover areas for niche areas such as  refractoriness,  engineering  and
manufacturing, textiles, catering and hotel management and hairdressing.


    • Staff Issues
The college has a strict plan for capacitating staff  members.  There  is  a
need for expertise on new programmes. They have been trained  on  curriculum
transformation.  There  are  no  permanent  staff   members   for   critical
positions. The college offers the poorest of the poor an access to  college.
The concern though is some staff members are appointed as  temporary  staff,
and their salary scales are not the same. This creates  a  lot  of  problems
amongst staff members.
There was concern raised that the funding for the  strategic  plans  of  the
college is not transparent.


The  experts  have  failed  to  come  up  with  the  policy  to  fulfil  the
expectations.
The College does not have job descriptions or duty statements,  which  guide
the employment of staff. There are only draft  policy  documents  and  these
have not been finalized.


7.2.1 Achievements

    • The college has established and  introduced  the  training  programme,
      which has motivated and developed Majuba staff. At least  90%  of  the
      staff members have been trained on Outcomes-based Education (OBE).
    • Staff has now set up  new  targets  with  regard  to  the  learnership
      programmes
    • There is a healthy spread of assessor and moderator training in  which
      skills development is the key. This will ensure that NATED courses are
      phased out as well.
    • Community outreach programmes have increased with the introduction  of
      Projet RAVE.
    • The acquisition of a new  college  vehicle  has  added  value  in  the
      college’s daily operations.

7.2.2 Challenges

    • Student support services in relation to subsidy  and  bursary  funding
      needs an improvement.
    • College management seem to have communication problem since there  are
      no formal policies  and  procedures  on  meeting  staff  requests  and
      demands. For instance, the College Equity Plan and the  Funding  Plans
      have not been thoroughly discussed with the staff.
    • IT infrastructure is sadly lacking  on  some  Campuses,  because  some
      members do not even have access to the E-mails and internet.
    • Employment creation is still problematic since most staff members  are
      on contract, hence insufficient number of permanent staff.

7.3   UMBUMBULU FET COLLEGE

    • Merger process
The former Durban Technical College,  Swinton  Road  Technical  College  and
Umlazi Technical College. It was reported  that  the  process  was  followed
smoothly, without any notable problems.
    • Governance and Management
Council and management structures exist. Management has a  plan  stipulating
that programmes should align themselves with skills  development.  Community
issues are dealt with at council level as well.  Funding model  and  bursary
issues are being revisited  in  order  to  assist  the  students.  Personnel
department is in the process of  being  skilled  on  the  national  staffing
laws. Information management system is in order.

    • Student governance
There are student exchange programmes, which  ensure  world-class  standards
in diverse areas. The SRC is  proud  of  the  college  and  management.  The
students are also very settled.

    • Curriculum
There is a mixture of programmes, from the existing niche areas and  levels,
learnerships, skills programmes, training partnership and NATED programmes.

    • Student Support Services
The municipality is helpful enough in  terms  of  offering  the  support  on
issues around health and agriculture. Some departments such  as  Health  and
Arts do offer some advice together with the community people.

    • Funding
The college-based student funding offers bursaries to the needy students.
There are some projects that are  funded  by  SETA.  These  projects  assist
students with their tuition fees and other learner-based requirements.

    • Staff issues
Equity has been addressed; but there is no uniform appointment of staff  and
benefits. The entry level is still  problematic  because  the  students  are
still being graded with school grades.


    • Access and Participation
The college is well known for catering for adult  learners,  unemployed  and
employed by the local industry. There is growth in the student numbers,  and
the residence offers ample opportunities for students to  be  well  prepared
for further education


    • Readiness for recapitalization
The college is geared for the recapitalization process and is  part  of  all
the planning required.

     1. Challenges and highlights

   a) Staffing norms to be fast tracked.
   b) Funding norms of the FET.
   c) Achievement of equity targets at all levels.
   d) Interdepartmental partnerships and collaborative arrangements.
   e) Redressing the resources and other imbalances of apartheid.

7.4   ESAYADI FET COLLEGE

    • The Merger Process
The Esayadi College is a result of a merger between the Port  Shepstone  and
Enyenyezi Technical Colleges together with six Skills Centres. This  process
proceeded well and the stakeholders involved appreciated the developments.

    • Governance and Management
The college is in compliance with the FET Act of 1999. The  strategic  plans
are fully understood, and they are broken down into key  performance  areas,
which form part of the business plan.
There are plans being considered for the training  of  Council  Members  and
all layers of management between 2006-2008  effectively.  They  will  engage
the national department as well.

    • Students Governance
An SRC is well constituted, and it is also gender-based. The  duty  of  this
body is to form a link between management and student body.

    • Staffing
The staff members are highly professional, and members function as  a  team.
The College places emphasis on empowerment of women and on gender equality.
There is also a focus on ground level training,  and  career  guidance  with
reference to defined career paths. This is considered as  the  best  options
the college has chosen. The Teacher’s Union SADTU  has  noted  the  changes,
however, the organization is still concerned about the problem of  temporary
teachers.

    • Access and Participation
The college accommodates students  from  all  racial  groups,  who  have  no
challenges in  accessing  the  institution.  It  reported  that  by  end  of
December 2004, the student intake had increased to 9 542.
    • Partnerships
Some institutions do assist in the awarding of  bursaries  (Edwala  company,
and Ziphakamise partnership).  They  help  with  marketing;  local  district
education offices, local municipalities, market museum.

TSHINTSHA Project; Dynasty Trust partnership
Correctional services – partners, Department of Health
Community projects: crèche, Artistic Arts Department

The municipality is also involved through the Agritourism  programme,  which
is funded by the European Union (EU Programme).

    • Readiness for Recapitalization
The college is  ready  to  meet  the  deadline  and  the  documentation  for
recapitilization is available.
    • Curriculum
The college assured the delegates that its programme  would  remain  demand-
driven. Currently, the college  offers  programmes,  which  address  issues,
which are top priority of the government agenda. These are  issues  such  as
Aids,  Unemployment,  Crime,  Poverty  Alleviation,  Women,  Disability  and
Youth.

Most lecturers and facilitators have received Assessor  Training.  Moderator
Training has been  given  to  Assessors  that  have  Learnerships  on  their
Campuses.

Most of the staff members have been trained on OBE. One  staff  member  from
the College had been sent overseas for further training on  RPL.  There  are
processes  for  the  accreditation  for  all   courses,   offered   in   the
institution. Currently, Merseta,  Fieta,  Construction  and  Services  SETAs
offer accreditation to the College.

The  following  skills  are  being  offered:  Computer  Literacy,   Business
Management,  Mechanics,  Spray  Painting,  Arts  and  Crafts,   Sewing   and
Upholstery, Electrical appliances, Catering training, Bricklaying

    • Student support services
The college is making a number of  initiatives  to  enhance  the  throughput
rate. A number  of  industries  and  businesses  have  been  contacted.  The
students are also regularly  informed  about  the  HIV/AIDS  programmes  and
initiatives.

    1. Achievements and highlights


The Chief Director indicated that the provincial chamber has concluded  that
all 252 peer temporary teachers who have been with the institution for  more
than a year are being absorbed.
    • There is planned retraining to capacitate the staff members.
    • The Infrastructure and Recap plans are focused on equity and redress.
    • The Rector was congratulated for the job well done.
    • The student enrolment is also appropriately in line with the demand of
      the community around.
    • The  challenge  that  some  students  have  short  courses  should  be
      resolved.
    • The institution needs funding to address the outstanding issues.

7.5   UMGUNGUNDLOVU  FET COLLEGE

    • The Merger process
The genesis of this college  lies  in  the  merger  between  five  technical
colleges,  namely  Edendale,  Plessislaer,  Msunduzi,   KZN   Midlands   and
Northdale in 2002.
Each one of the colleges that came into the merger brought  a  rich  history
that added to the tapestry that is in the new institution.
The college concedes that the following circumstances existed in 2002:
   a) A newly merged institution
   b) Divided, fearful and nervous personnel
   c) Five separate cultures and ``ways of doing things’’
   d) Five separate financial systems
   e) A NATED-focused curriculum
   f) Differing curriculum practices
   g) Differing operational practices
   h) Despite all these conditions, which impacted  on  the  morale  of  the
      students and staff, there are also tremendous achievements.

    • Governance and management
Not all management posts have been filled.  The  Executive  committee  meets
every time to discuss problems and challenges facing the colleges.
Portfolio managers have been identified and  so  were  college  managers  in
order for them to run the different Campuses. It is also easy to  run  these
colleges because there is  a  central  office  which  houses  the  executive
management.
Regular workshops and meetings are held in order  to  deal  with  issues  of
policy and management. In particular, there are sessions,  which  look  into
the legislation governing colleges, and there is  greater  awareness  around
this issue.

    • Student Governance
An SRC exists, and it is helpful in the times of crises  and  also  forms  a
link between the student body, management and  the  society  at  large.  The
Students Representative Council is elected after immense  consultation.  All
portfolios are gender equity-based. The policy was that if the  student  has
failed,  he/she  cannot  continue  with  the  portfolio.  The  SRC  is  also
represented in the council meeting, and  it  forms  an  integral  part  with
regard to communication mechanisms.
Extensive workshops are held in  which  clear  policies  regarding  all  the
operations are dealt with.

    • Curriculum
There are generic courses that are  crucially  pertinent  to  the  community
needs. The following are the NATED and training provision  areas:  Full-time
and distance learning: Business studies, Engineering, NQF  provision:  These
are assessor-training programmes from the ETDP SETA.
The Research Unit has also been established in order to  enhance  curriculum
development.

    • Partnerships
Relevant partners signing Memorandum of Understanding( MOUs) add  value.  It
is important to share our own moral values.  The  college  directly  engages
with the business sector. The Action Plan, which was instituted,  led  to  a
number of developments in the college.
ITHALA Funds are also used in the training  of  co-operatives,  particularly
for women construction workers. There are also  training  partners  such  as
SAPS,  Unifoods,  Escom,  Natalia,  Nestle,  Aberdare  Cables,  Black  Eagle
Engineering, Ben Booysens and the Department of Nursing.

    • Staffing
Communication is a problem between department,  management  and  staff.  The
union comes to staff first before the  college  tells  them  the  media  has
information that many stakeholders do not have  post  structure  for  senior
management and is a problem, since some people are not  applying  for  these
posts because they already earn more  than  what  they  are  being  offered.
Union representation in interviews is relevant and important. The  FET  band
needs a perception change. A national initiative is needed.

    • Access and Participation
The number of learner numbers have increased post  merger,  largely  because
of the following:  Specialization; Training of cooperatives;  Increased  NQF
provision   Increased   skills   provision;   Increased   marketing   drive,
Development of skills centres. There is greater access for  ELSEN  learners,
and the directorate has greater access as well.


    • Readiness on Recapitalization
The college’s  recapitalisation  plan  has  been  submitted.  There  is  co-
operation  between  the  different  portfolios  in   line   with   strategic
operational plans within the colleges.

    • Funding
The  college  receives  funding  from  the  following  sources:  FTEs,   NQF
provision, Hiring of venues, Sponsors and Learner fees.

 7.5.1     Key Challenges


Maths, Science and Languages are big problem in  the  learner’s  achievement
goals.  Most importantly, there is a problem  of  a  total  college  buy-in.
Some people do not see the relevance of NQF provision.

There is  need  for  a  lot  of  infrastructure  upgrading,  especially  for
accreditation purposes. Recruitment is still a  problem.  The  challenge  is
that the funding model being used does not encourage the provision  of  non-
NATED programmes. This problem hinders growth in relevant provision areas.

7.6   ESAYINDI FET COLLEGE

    • The Merger Process
The  chairperson  of  the  council,  Mr  Denmnis  Narsimuli,  addressed  the
delegation.  He informed  the  delegation  that  the  provincial  department
indicated that in  terms  of  the  FET  Act  of  1998,  the  Port  Shepstone
Technical College and Enyenyezi Technical Colleges  and  its  skill  centres
had to merge to form an institution. Eventually Esayidi came into  being  in
2002. The council was appointed by the MEC for Education in 2003.

    • Governance and Management
The governing  council  of  the  Esayidi  FET  College  abides  by  all  its
requirements in terms of the Acts of Parliament governing colleges.

The rector and the team  of  acting  deputies  manage  the  college  in  the
absence of permanent deputies, and this  creates  many  challenges  for  the
council and the rector.

    • Staffing
Currently, the college is functioning on the 2002  provisioning  norms.  The
MEC of Education, Mrs Ina Cronje released permanent posts, but  appointments
are still being awaited. The problem is that the situation creates a lot  of
anxiety amongst temporary staff members.

    • Curriculum
The college offers a wide range of  programmes,  including  Engineering  and
Business Studies. Skills Programmes relevant to the  local  environment  and
SETA-accredited learnership are  offered.  ABET  and  Numeracy  classes  are
offered too.
The college also has the following facilities, which we had  an  opportunity
to view: computer  laboratories;  travel  and  tourism  centre,  hospitality
training kitchen; woodwork workshops and Exhibition Halls.

    •  Recapitalization
The National Minister of Education allocated funding for this  process.  The
college embraces the Batho Pele principle, and is ready for the process.

    7. SIVANANDA FET COLLEGE

    • The Merger Process
Sivananda College  arose  out  of  the  merger  of  five  Campuses,  namely,
KwaMashu, Mpumalanga, Ntuzuma, Pinetown and Qadi.
The merger represented a dynamic transition from an  independent  Campus  to
an institution with a common purpose.

    • Governance and Management
Sivananda College has had a  section  of  college  council  in  place  since
February  2002.  The  council  consists  of  12   business   and   community
representatives and 10 internal members  (Campus  manager,  Academic  Senate
Representative,   Academic   Staff   representative,   non-academic    staff
representative and student representative).
The council had further been divided into  the  committee  and  an  academic
board.  It focuses mainly on governance and maintenance. Operational  issues
are left  to  management  to  deal  with.  Sivananda  College  is  currently
updating all policies and procedures to eight main portfolios. To  date,  64
have been developed within the  scope  of  financial  Management  and  Human
Resources.

The College Institutional Management Team (IMI) consists of Campus and  unit
managers and focuses mainly on dealing with policy and general guidelines.
Each Campus has its own Campus Management Team  (CMT)  that  is  responsible
for handling operational matters. They meet on a weekly basis.
To ensure low cost  implications,  the  college  is  on  e-mail.  This  also
ensures that important communication documents, decisions  are  received  in
written format.

 • Student Governance
The college has one SRC  representing  all  Campuses.  The  SRC  chairperson
attends the  college  council  meeting  and  provides  feedback  on  student
matters.
The chairperson of the SRC raised the concern that  Campuses  do  not  share
similar facilities,  these  facilities  include:  proper  study  facilities,
media centre, student centre, psychological services,  sporting  facilities,
financial assistance and basic health care.

    • Curriculum
Curriculum  has  been  developed  to  suit  the  needs   of   industry   and
communities. Programmes offered are currently being aligned to the  National
Qualifications Framework (NQF).
Preferred overall college courses in niche areas informed by needs  analysis
are hospitality and tourism, organic farming,  entrepreneurship  development
and construction skills.

Niche areas per Campus:
    •  Mpumalanga:  Farming,  Entrepreneurship   development,   Construction
      Skills, ABET
    • Ntuzuma: Skills (plumbing, electrical, computers,  bricklaying,  motor
      mechanic), ABET
    • Pinetown: Hospitality and Tourism, New Venture Creation, Insurance and
      Banking, Seta courses, ABET.
    • Qadi: Dress and Garment Making, plumbing, construction, ABET
    • Currently, the college has the following learnership actively  running
      with the college:
            The  New  Venture  Creation  Learnership  (NQF4)  furnishes  the
   learners with the skills to
            establish and run effective businesses.
            The Wholesale and Retail Generalist Learnership (NQF2)  prepares
   learners in the
            service structures, administration and  finance  of  the  retail
   industry.


Student  Support  Services:  There  are   no   dedicated   student   support
structures.
     • Funding
The College is funded by transfer payments from the Department  as  well  as
student fees. Its budgeting process is done on  a  cost  centre  basis.  For
example the central office  has  an  operational  budget  where  operational
expenses are centralized. A standard template  is  utilized  throughout  the
college. Another source is from  Education  and  Skills  Development  (SESD)
programme.  This  has  contributed  in  the   establishment   units,   like:
curriculum, partnerships  and  linkages,  marketing  and  communication  and
human resources. Various projects have also been funded through  SESD,  such
as organic farming, engineering. Studies as well  as  computers  with  PLATO
and HIV/AIDS software for all Campuses.


    • Staffing
Of the 82 college  staff,  22  are  temporary  appointment  and  14  council
appointments. The second level of management was in  the  process  of  being
appointed.
    • Access and Participation
Out of a total of 1 806 there are only 582 female learners as opposed  to  1
224 male learners. Out of the total of  614  engineering  learners  123  are
female learners as opposed to 491 male learners.

    • Readiness for Recapitalization
A project manager for recapitalization programme  has  been  appointed.  The
Sivananda college strategic plan  has  been  updated  up  to  2008  and  the
proposed  college  recapitalization  plan  has   been   submitted   to   the
Department. The college central office has a dedicated financial  department
to  successfully  manage  all  financial  aspects  of  the  recapitalization
programme. The college procument policies are  in  line  with  the  relevant
legislation.

    • Partnerships
The dynamic partnership formed between Sivananda College  and  Technisa  has
allowed for the college to be announced as the  preferred  service  provider
in  the  KwaZulu-Natal  region.  All  distance  education   programmes   are
available from Technisa. Support  is  also  received  from  Umsobomvu  Youth
Fund,
Thetha and Ethekwini Municipalities

7.7.1 Highlights and Achievements

    • The Umsobomvu Youth Fund provides  funding  to  New  Venture  Creation
      learners for their business ventures.
    • The first merged Diploma and Award Ceremony for Sivananda College  was
      held on 19 May 2005. The ceremony was for Diploma students  that  have
      met the requirements for the Diploma in various levels during 2004.
    •  The  first  group  of  organic  farming   students   received   their
      certificates  for  the  NQF  courses  that  they  have  completed   at
      Mpumalanga Campus. This  ceremony  was  held  on  25  April  2005  and
      attended by the MEC of Education, Mrs I Cronje.


    2. Key Challenges


The main challenge for the College is accreditation of  courses  offered  by
various   Sector   Education   and   Training   Authorities   (Setas).   The
accreditation will enable the college to  offer  more  NQF-based  programmes
for vocational-oriented training that is responsive to industry.

Also there is a need to employ staff members  that  have  relevant  industry
experience, for  example  in  organic  farming  to  enable  the  college  to
effectively respond to these needs.

8.    RECOMMENDATIONS

8.1  Financial Support

Considering that FET Colleges are also confronted  with  the  constraint  of
significant  deficiency  in  funding  for  learner  support   centres,   the
Committee recommends that the Department of Education should consider  other
forms of  sources of funding such as financial aid schemes for learners  and
college students.

8.2   Learner Support Services

The Committee has observed that some of the FET Campuses  are  situated  far
away from residential areas, thus making it difficult for learners to  reach
the institutions of learning due  to  lack  of  transport  in  these  areas,
particularly  in  rural  areas.  It  is  therefore  recommended   that   the
Department  of  Education  should  collaborate  in  its  efforts  with   the
Departments of Public Works and Transport in ensuring that FET Colleges  are
accessible for effective learning to take place. An integrated  approach  to
the challenge of the lack of effective  transport  system  would  facilitate
the attainment of a sustainable solution to the problem.

Moreover, some of the FET Colleges do not have relevant  teaching  equipment
suitable for the realisation of  effective  learning.  Learning  under  such
conditions is an impediment  to  acquiring  good  practical  skills.  It  is
recommended  that  all  FET  Colleges   should   be   equipped   with   good
infrastructure and sophisticated equipment if the  objectives  of  providing
learners with meaningful knowledge and skills  that  will  empower  them  to
take part fully in the economic, political and cultural life of the  country
is to be realised. Furthermore, the  Department,  in  partnership  with  the
business sector in  the  respective  provinces  should  consider  developing
systems to ensure that the infrastructure and equipment in FET Colleges  are
rehabilitated  and  refurbished.  It  is  hoped  that  the  recapitalisation
programme will soon address this problem.

8.3   Human Resources

8.3.1 Support Staff

The Committee has noted that FET Colleges do not  have  staffing  norms  and
guidelines for appointment of temporary staff. Most of the visited  Colleges
have an insufficient number of permanent staff because of the  temporary  or
contract nature of the employment status of most of the  staff.  This  state
of affairs creates an environment of insecurity among staff  members,  which
gives rise to high staff turnover in pursuit of better career  opportunities
externally  in  other  organisations.  This   impacts   adversely   on   the
institutions with  regard  to  the  shortage  of  educators.  The  Committee
recommends that there should be measures in place that seek to  address  the
challenges educators at these FET Colleges are  confronting.  In  order  for
the FET Colleges to function  effectively,  the  Committee  recommends  that
suitably qualified people  should  fill  both  academic  and  administrative
vacant posts, with immediate effect.

8.3.2 Management Staff

The Committee has noted delays in the appointment  of  staff  in  management
positions. These positions remain vacant due to  management  structures  and
posts grades or levels that are not yet in  place.  The  moratorium  on  the
appointment of management staff  partly  contributes  to  high  turnover  of
educators. Consequently, there is absence of  permanent  staff  in  critical
positions. The Committee recommends that the existing moratorium  on  senior
positions should be lifted and  the  development  of  clear  procedures  for
appointment is considered. It  is  further  recommended  that  the  National
Guidelines should be standardised and the roles and responsibilities in  the
FET Landscape of College Managers be clearly defined.

8.4.3 Alignment of FET Colleges Budgets

It has been observed that the budget of Lovedale FET College is not  aligned
to their programmes. In this  regard,  the  Portfolio  Committee  recommends
that the budgets for all FET Colleges should be aligned to their  programmes
because National Treasury Regulations and the Public Finance Management  Act
(Act No. 1 of 1999) require such.  The alignment of  budgets  to  programmes
has the following benefits:

    • It makes it easy to monitor budgetary planning  and  expenditure,  and
      the establishment of expenditure trends or patterns.
    • It will enable the Portfolio Committee to  monitor  the  alignment  of
      budgets to service delivery objectives, outputs and targets.
    • It also allows for  transparency  and  the  creation  of  an  enabling
      environment for accountability.

8.4.4 Alignment of Curriculum with NQF

The National Education Document programmes are theoretical  and  not  linked
to practical work.  As a result, FET Colleges offer practical work  that  is
not accredited by the Department  of  Education  or  Umalusi  because  their
programmes are not aligned to the National Qualifications  Framework  (NQF).
To this end,  the  Committee  recommends  the  National  Education  Document
programmes should be aligned to the NQF, which have  a  practical  component
to assess skills. FET Colleges should be afforded the opportunity  to  offer
NQF programmes that are responsive to the needs of the  economy,  which  are
accredited by the Sector Education and  Training  Authority  (SETA).  It  is
further recommended that the criteria used  for  accreditation  should  also
include learner support services and relevant academic staff that  would  be
retrained.

8.4.5 Recognition of Prior Learning

There has been a concern that prior learning  has  not  been  given  serious
attention in the FET Colleges, which  might  create  the  perception  within
surrounding  communities  that  these  institutions  of  learning  are   not
providing a service that they require, which is  to  empower  learners  with
skills. The Committee therefore recommends to the Department  that  the  FET
Colleges to be responsive to the needs of the community they  serve.  It  is
recommended that Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) should  be  prioritised
in order for members of the community to embrace the FET Colleges  as  their
own.

8.5   Separate Working Hours for FET Colleges

The integration of technical schools  into  FET  Colleges  necessitated  the
offering of new courses and the appointment of lecturers and  support  staff
on a temporary basis. While tuition in the FET Colleges is mainly  practical
and conducted in the workshops and partly  theoretical,  the  working  hours
are the same as in FET schools.  As the FET Colleges have  to  work  at  odd
hours, including overtime, the current  inflexible  working  hours  are  not
suitable. It is recommended that special working  hours  for  FET  educators
should be developed.  This  will  facilitate  the  recruitment  of  relevant
educators from industry who do not necessarily have professional training.

8.6   Management of Funds

FET  Colleges  utilise  the  funds  they  receive  from  the  Department  of
Education in the form of subsidies for staffing  and  infrastructure,  which
is problematic because these funds are earmarked for  operational  purposes.
The  Committee  suggests  that  it  becomes  critical  that  the  Provincial
Departments of Education should consider setting aside earmarked  funds  for
the maintenance of  infrastructure  in  the  FET  Colleges  and  that  these
institutions should not be funded based  on  the  number  of  registrations,
instead they should be funded on the production of quality  programmes  that
focus on the economic needs of the country.

8.7   FET College Legislation

It has been observed that with regard to governance  and  management,  there
are no clear defined roles of Principals  or  Rectors  of  former  Technical
Colleges  and  that  no  provision  is  considered  to  encapsulate  College
schedules  (trimesters  in  favour  of   school-oriented   practices).   The
Committee recommends that there is a need to strike a  balance  between  the
roles of  the  College  Council  and  management.  As  such,  the  Committee
suggests that it is of utmost importance  to  have  a  new  College-specific
legislation that excludes schools, but incorporates provision of staffing.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Education on Study Tour to Mali
   and Ghana, dated 8   March 2006:


  INTRODUCTION


The Portfolio Committee on Education having undertaken a study tour to Mali
and Ghana, reports as follows:



A Multi-Party delegation of five Members of the Portfolio Committee on
Education visited Mali and Ghana from 15 to 22 October 2005.





On the 17-18 October 2005, the delegation visited Bamako, Mali. On the 17
October 2005, they paid a courtesy call on the South African High
Commissioner, Dr Matshoma. Visited the Malian Minister of National
Education; had a welcome and working meeting with the office of the Rector
of the University of Bamako; visited the Faculties of Science and Technics,
Languages, Literacy, Arts and Human Sciences at the university of Bamako
and visited Brian Mulroney Primary School in Kati. On the 18 October 2005,
the delegation visited the Nelson Mandela Primary School in Hippodrome in
Bamako and the National School of Engineering. After having visited the
Nelson Mandela Primary School and the National School of Engineering, the
delegation was escorted by the Protocol Office to the airport in transit to
Accra, Ghana and stayed in Ghana from the 18-22 October 2005.


In Ghana, Ms Nokukhanya Matshikwe, 2nd Secretary Political in the Office of
the High Commissioner, led by the Protocol officials, welcomed the
delegation.
On the 19 October 2005, the delegation paid a courtesy call on the High
Commissioner, Mr Rapu Molekane; A courtesy call on the First Deputy Speaker
of Parliament, Honourable Freddie Blay MP; observed the Public Accounts
Committee considering budgets of Departments, entities; paid a courtesy
call on the Honourable Minister of Education and Sports, Mr Yaw Osafo-
Maafo, MP; Held a meeting with Mr Ato Essuman, Chief Director, Ministry of
Education and Sports and Mr Michael Nsowah, Acting Director General, Ghana
Education Service. On the 20 October 2005, visited Achimoto School; Met Mr
Paul Effah, Executive Secretary, National Council, Tertiary Education;
Visited Acting Chief Director of Regional Co-operation and NEPAD. On the 21
October 2005, the delegation visited Winneba Secondary School and the
University of Education, Winneba and held discussions with the Vice-
Chancellor and Members of the University Council.


B.   DELEGATION


The delegation was led by the Chairperson of the Committee, Prof Shepherd
Malusi Mayatula (ANC), accompanied by Ms Puleng Rosaline Mashangoane (ANC),
Mr Ben Mthembu (ANC), Mr George Gaolatlhe Boinamo (DA), Mr Alfred Mkhipeni
Mpontshane (IFP) and Mr Steve Itumeleng Morometsi, Committee Secretary.


C.   TERMS OF REFERENCE


The purpose of the study tour was to consult with the Ministers of
Education and Sport and consult on broad plans and goals of education.
Visit universities and assess their policies on access, funding, research
and throughput. Visit schools and assess the school policies on free
education, on exemption policies on school fees, the prevalence and impact
of HIV/AIDS on educators and teacher development. The roles played with the
realization of the Millennium Plan on “Education for All”. Their role in
incorporating the broad framework of NEPAD in their education policies and
the role of Parliamentarians in Forum of African Parliamentarians in
Education.


D.   FINDINGS


1.    COURTESY CALL ON THE SOUTH AFRICAN HIGH COMMISSIONER TO MALI

The delegation was welcomed by the High Commissioner Dr T Matshoma. He
briefed the Members and focused on the official opening of the office,
trade relations between South Africa and Mali, twinning programme between
Universities of Bamako and University of Pretoria and the Joint Project by
South African government and Malian government on the Timbuktu manuscripts.
The Embassy started in 2002 and was officially opened in 2003. In relation
to trade, Mali is the third largest producer of gold in Africa after South
Africa and Botswana. Anglo-Gold had entered into partnership with the
Ashanti-Africa mining co-operation and they had undertaken to de-racialize
the Administration, which is lily-white. To strengthen the relations
between Mali and South Africa, the former Minister of Minerals and Energy,
Hon P Mlambo-Ngcuka visited Mali in 2003. The Minister after having visited
the mines together with the Minister of Minerals in Mali said that for
South Africa to play a meaningful role in the development of mining in
Mali, there was a need to attract more skilled artisans to the country. She
undertook to pay more attention in that regard.

With respect to any relations between South Africa and Mali in the
education sector, the High Commissioner said that there was no formal link
between the two countries. However, Anglo-Gold had taken the initiative and
had sent ten (10) Malian students to study mining-related courses at the
University of Pretoria.
He further indicated that the Embassy and the Malian government had entered
into a joint mission and had identified two Malian officials who would be
trained in the English language at University of Pretoria for three months
to become more efficient in performing their official duties. The Embassy
is considering sending South Africans to be trained in French to benefit
both countries.

A significant occasion occurred when the State President of South Africa,
President Thabo Mbeki, visited Mali on a state visit in November. The visit
resulted in South Africa pledging to support Mali in preserving its
conservation. An amount of R13, 7 million was raised. The South African and
Malian Governments represented by the Minister in the Presidency, Dr Essop
Pahad, and the Malian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Malians Abroad, Mr
Lassana Traore, signed an agreement expressing the two countries’
commitment to undertake a government-to-government project aimed at
conserving the manuscripts at the Ahmed Baba Institute and at rebuilding
the library and archival infrastructure of the Institute.

The SA-Mali project has been declared an official South African
Presidential Project and has been endorsed by the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) as its first cultural project. The delegation
left for the Malian Minister of National Education.

Though the delegation had intended to visit the  Timbuktu  project,  due  to
the short period spent in Mali, the distance from Bamako  and  the  lack  of
regular flights, this part of the visit was left out.



1. COURTESY CALL ON MALIAN MINISTER OF NATIONAL EDUCATION,  HON  MR   MMADOU
   LAMINE TRAORE


The delegation arrived at the Malian Ministry of  National  Education.  They
were  welcomed  by  the  Minister,  the  Hon  Mr  Mamadou   Lamine   Traore,
accompanied by Ms Senegai, the Technical Advisor in the  Minister’s  office,
Dr Kaute, the Director-General of  National  Education  and  Mr  Djali,  the
Communication Advisor in the office of  the  Minister.  The  leader  of  the
delegation introduced members of his team and explained the purpose  of  the
visit.

2.1   Single Ministry of Education

The Minister briefed the delegation and provided a broad overview of the
educational system in Mali. There is only one Minister of National
Education in Mali. They used to have three Ministers of Education in the
past, but in 2000, the three Ministries were merged into a single Ministry.
The education system is divided into three categories, namely, Primary,
Secondary and Tertiary. At Primary school level a learner attends school
for nine years. At Secondary school level a learner attends school for
three years. At Secondary school level if a learner desires to further
his/her studies, at Tertiary level, he or she should have obtained the High
School Diploma.
In the first year of schooling learners are taught in French and as they
proceeded in their second year, they are taught in English. Over a period
of years, students are able to speak French and English fluently; 70% of
children attended school and education is free.
Due to cultural resistance, parents preferred to send boys to schools
rather than girls. The reasons for that were based on socio-economic and
cultural reasons.

2.2   Types of Higher Institutions of Learning

Two types of institutions exist in the higher educational system from  which
students  have  a  choice  to  further  their  studies.  The  first  is  the
University of Bamako and the second are the  technical  colleges  that  have
Faculties of Science and  Technics;  Languages,  Literacy,  Arts  and  Human
Sciences; Medicine, Dentistry and Law.

2.3   Prevalence of HIV/AIDS

The prevalence of HIV/AIDS pandemic in schools is not as high  as  the  rate
of HIV/AIDS in the country as compared to the Southern  African  Development
Communities. There are educational programs in place to address the  effects
of the virus.

2.4   Free Education

University education in Mali is  free  for  Malian  citizens.  Students  who
obtained best results are provided with a government scholarship.  The  100%
scholarship covers tuition, accommodation  and  books.  A  full  scholarship
amounts to 26 500 cfa per month for nine months. Each student  is  given  38
000 cfa once a year and this is the  highest  that  the  government  offers.
Regardless of the student results when registering for the first  time,  the
government allocates an  amount  of  5  000  cfa  for  registration.  Bamako
University has been given a budget of 4 billion cfa.

 2. WELCOME AND WORKING MEETING AT THE OFFICE OF THE RECTOR OF UNIVERSITY OF
    BAMAKO


The delegation was welcomed  by  the  Rector  of  the  university,  Ms  Siby
Ginette Bellegarde, accompanied by members of the  university  Council.  The
Rector  briefed  members  and  focused  on  the  tuition  fees,  number   of
registered  students,  number  of  faculties,  access  to   university   and
accommodation, registration of foreign students,  academic  development  and
through-put.

3.1   University of Bamako

The Rector reported that the university of Bamako was  the  only  university
in Mali.
The student population in the last semester  was  32  000.  In  the  current
semester the numbers  had  increased  with  10  000.  The  total  number  of
students registered in the Faculty of Science School is 12 000, made  up  of
10 000 in the Pharmacy and 2 000 in the Medicine Schools.

2.   Faculties

The University of Mali is made  up  of  two  Faculties  namely,  Faculty  of
Science  and  Technics,  which  offers  Medicine,  Pharmacy,  Dentistry  and
Technical Sciences, and Engineering. The other is the Faculty  of  Languages
referred to as  FLASH;  it  offers  courses  in  Literacy,  Arts  and  Human
Sciences.


3.   Gender Equity

The social stereotype and resistance from the  communities  with  regard  to
women  participation  played  itself  out  at  university  of  Bamako.   The
participation of women in this institution  is  in  the  ratio  30%  to  70%
compared to male counterparts in other universities. The university  employs
fewer women professors. There are only fifteen academics of  which  two  are
women. Even though gender equality at the institution is skewed, women  felt
discrimination at university is neither positive nor negative.

It has been reported that issues of gender equality has not been as high  at
universities as it is at schools. As women  proceed  further  with  tertiary
education, the women participation is very  low  at  administration  and  at
management level except at high school level. This is  mainly  caused  by  a
lower number of women who  passed  their  High  School  Diploma.  Those  who
manage to pass their High School Diploma proceed to study for another  four-
year tertiary education, often get high positions in the private sector.

4.  Budget of the University

The university receives its budget from the Department and 5%  from  tuition
fees. The budget received is used for equipment, and is usually not  enough.
A  student  who  did  not  get  a  bursary  and  proceeds  to  second   year
automatically gets a bursary. The budget for salaries and administration  is
derived from a special fund set  aside  for  maintenance.  Each  year  after
students have passed their High School Diploma, the office of  the  Minister
compiles a list of those who have obtained good  grades  and  satisfied  the
minimum requirements to be provided with a scholarship to study further.


5.   Scholarship

The scholarship that each student receives amounts to R26 500, which  covers
100% of the fees. About 50% of the bursary is often  allocated  to  students
who have obtained good grades and  are  staying  far  from  the  university.
There are some of students who are  provided  for  by  their  parents.   The
budget that is allocated to the university is often not sufficient to  cover
administration and maintenance. Thus the Minister has set  aside  a  special
fund that is used as contingency to cover administration and maintenance  of
equipment.

6.   Foreign Students

The university accepts foreign students and most of them are enrolled with
the Faculty of Sciences for Medicine and Engineering. Their registration
fees costs between R200 000 and 250 000 CDs. The university makes provision
to accommodate students in residences. The increasing number of current and
foreign students at the university is impacting on the institutional
infrastructure.

7.   Student Residences

The residential facilities in most cases are not enough to  accommodate  all
students. This situation forces students to share rooms; six students  often
share  the  double  rooms.  In  order  to  deal  with  this  challenge,  the
university admits between 2-3% of students into residences.

8.  Academic Development

The institution does not have clear mechanisms to develop academics  at  the
university. However  most  professors  have  received  training  in  Russia,
France, United States of America, Canada and  China  and  Northern  African,
for example, Morocco, Tunisia Algeria.

9.   Internet Facility

The university started an Internet Centre to train them and to  enable  them
to conduct research.

10. Business Programmes

The  university  does  not  have  Business  school  programmes,  but  offers
professional programmes through the Faculty of Science and Technics.

11. Challenges facing the university

    • Lack of adequate professors;
    • Lack of infrastructure
    • Lack of equipment


The University requested the Committee to assist in establishing
partnerships with South African universities. The partnerships are aimed at
encouraging student exchange programmes and to develop Indigenous African
languages.

 3. VISIT TO THE FACULTY OF LANGUAGES, LITERACY, ARTS AND HUMAN SERVICES,
    UNIVERSITY OF BAMAKO
At the Faculty of Languages, Literacy, Arts and Human Sciences (FLASH), the
Vice-Principal Mr Berthe’Salif welcomed the delegation. He briefed the
delegation around courses that are offered at the Faculty, the composition
of staff and academics, the total number of students.

4.1   Faculty of Languages, Literacy, Arts and Human Sciences

The Faculty of Languages, Literacy, Arts and Human Sciences falls under the
University of Bamako. The Faculty was established in November 1996 when
programmes were offered. The Faculty of Languages, Literacy, Arts and Human
Sciences has got 11 500 students with five different departments.
Departments at this institution include departments of teaching and
research, arts and literature, geography, social sciences, which includes
philosophy, educational science, sociology, anthropology and psychology. In
the social sciences school, psychology is the largest. Other departments
were History, Archeology.
All students are expected to learn one national language of their choice in
addition to English. In order to address the shortage of Professors
specializing in Linguistics, the faculty imports external Professors from
Senegal. As part of recruitment, the institution also uses the Francophone
Agency to identify Professors from Burkina Faso. This agency works closely
with UNESCO to track Malian Professors in foreign countries. They are
recruited to assist the institution for a period of three weeks.

   2. Structure of FLASH

FLASH has 52 staff members  who  occupy  the  Administration  and  Technical
Division, performing secretarial and technical tasks. It was  reported  that
in the previous semester the number of students was standing at 11 500.  The
student intake for 2005/06  is  expected  to  increase  by  5  000.  In  the
beginning, FLASH operated as  a  Professional  institution  specializing  in
Science and Technical courses.
   3. Academic Staff

The academic staff of FLASH is made up of 139 academics, of  which  134  are
men and 5 are women. The institution has committed  itself  to  address  the
gender imbalances.

   4. Foreign Students of FLASH

The institution admits foreign students from Gabon, Congo, Chad, Burkina
Faso, Ivory Coast and from Central African countries. Some students
received scholarships from their respective governments. The government
also subsidizes foreign students particularly those from Niger. They owe
the institution large sums of monies.

   5. Challenges facing the institution

The major challenge facing the institution is the large  number  of  foreign
students seeking admission. The university took a decision  to  accept  only
students with High School Diplomas for enrolment.  The  delegation  left  to
visit the Faculty of Science and Technics of the University of Bamako.

 4. VISIT TO THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNICS UNIVERSITY OF BAMAKO


The Vice-Dean, Prof Soulaymane Traore, welcomed the delegation and  gave  an
overview  of  courses  offered,  the  duration  of  study,  the  number   of
registered students, the number of academics and staff complements. He  also
highlighted the total number of doctorates obtained  and  the  countries  in
which academics were trained. The  Faculty  offers  Science,  Chemistry  and
Mathematics. The Faculty is made  up  of  80  permanent  and  150  part-time
academics. There are 2 042 students registered with  60  staff  members  who
provide administrative and  technical  support.  Out  of  the  80  permanent
academics, 50 have obtained their Doctorate Degrees and studied and  trained
in countries  such  as  China  and  United  States  of  America.  There  are
currently 9 doctoral candidates: 3 in Chemistry,  2  in  Mathematics,  1  in
Physical Science and 3 in Biology.

 5. VISIT TO BRIAN MULRONEY PRIMARY SCHOOL IN KATI (NORTH WEST OF
     BAMAKO)


At Brian Mulroney Primary School, the Directors  of  the  Academy  of  Basic
Education Service in  Kati  accompanied  the  delegation.  The  Director  of
Education Services gave a briefing, focusing mainly on  the  two  cycles  of
the education system, the number of learners, the  number  of  teachers  and
the role of the School Body. The Academy is made up of 1st and 2nd cycle  of
Education; first Cycle, Grades 1-6, and second cycle, Grades  7-9.  The  two
cycles run vertically.

6.1   First Cycle Education System

The delegation interacted with a first cycle classroom, a group of  learners
ranged from 9-11 years. The classrooms are  overcrowded.  All  subjects  are
taught in Bambara, which is the official mother tongue,  and  English  as  a
second language.

6.2   Second Cycle Education System

The delegation interacted with learners in a Grade 9 classroom. The class
had 87 learners which, the delegation was told, was one of those with fewer
learners. It was said that classrooms are often filled with a maximum of
100 learners. When a learner passes his/her exams, he/she is issued with a
diploma and proceeds to Secondary level. Subjects such as Mathematics,
Science, Geography and French are offered at the school. The number of
learners enrolled in the second cycle was 400 learners. The number of
teachers teaching second cycle was 11. Out of the 11 teachers, only 1 is a
female teacher. The school has a School Governing Body (SGB) that oversees
parents and teachers. The SGB is actively involved in the management of the
school.

 6. VISIT TO THE NELSON MANDELA PRIMARY SCHOOL


The delegation visited the Nelson Mandela Primary  School,  which  is  named
after  the  former  President  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela and was welcomed  by  the  Director  of  the  Academy  of
Learning, Ms Diallo Fadimala B Toure. The delegation was briefed  about  the
founders of the school, the composition of the different  schools,  subjects
that were offered in the official mother  tongue,  and  the  commitment  and
role of the Nelson Mandela  Foundation  in  assisting  the  school.  It  was
reported that the school was jointly opened by the former President,  Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela and Mr Alpha O Konare in March 1996. The school  premises
are made up of 4  Primary  and  1  Middle  Schools.  The  Middle  School  is
composed of Grades 7-9 that falls under 8 different Inspectorates for  Basic
Education. The Middle School has 5 Directors who are supervised by the  Head
Master of the school.

In order to differentiate between the  different  schools,  each  school  is
named using the letters of the alphabet, such as school A or B.  The  School
A has 450 learners with 6 teachers, out which 4 were males  and  2  females.
The educators teaching at the  Middle  School  were  provided  with  special
training courses. As a symbol of friendship between the Japanese and  Malian
schools, both entered into establishing a twinning programme.

Since 1980 the school had experimented  in  giving  lessons  in  Bambara.  A
concerted effort was made this year to teach the language from  Grades  1-6.
As an experiment, all learners in Grade 5 are taught  in  Bambara.  Learners
are divided into small groups and are encouraged to work as a team.  It  has
been observed that since the introduction of  Bambara  at  the  school,  the
numbers of learners had decreased because some  parents  had  removed  their
children from the school.

7.1   CONCERN RAISED BY MANAGEMENT OF THE SCHOOL

Due to the popularity of the school in the area, Management reported that
they were promised by the Nelson Mandela Foundation to keep contact with
them and consider the possibility of assisting them. They requested the
Committee to take up the matter with the Foundation.

7.2   COMMITTEE’S UNDERTAKING

The Committee undertook to make a follow-up on the commitment made by the
Nelson Mandela Foundation to assist in building additional classes at the
school.
With regard to  offering  subjects  in  the  mother  tongue,  the  Committee
requested that Management provide them with a  copy  of  statistics  on  the
results of the exams taken in Bambara.

 7. VISIT TO NATIONAL SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING


The Rector of the National School of Engineering and members of the
Academic Council welcomed the delegation. The Rector briefed members of the
delegation and provided an overview of the programmes offered at the
school. The briefing was followed by a tour of the school and some of the
laboratories.
8.1   Technical Colleges

The National Engineering School existed prior to the University of Bamako.
After independence the government adopted a Higher Education System
exclusive of university. The Higher Certificate preceded the university.
The government realized that the Higher Education system did not prepare
students adequately to learn the basic subjects at university. Due to the
system producing half-qualified students, the system was changed and
divided into the following four divisions:


    • Civil Engineering Unit specializing in  training  students  to  become
      engineers.
    •  Industrial  Engineering   Division   specializing   in   electronics,
      mechanics, and energy.
    • Mathematics Division specializing in Mathematics
    • Department of Geology specializing in mining-related matters.


   2. Level of Entry

In order to be accepted at the National School of Engineering, a student is
required to have studied for 2 years at university, and for another 3 years
at the Engineering school before one can qualify as an engineer. The
institution has accepted 400 students with an academic staff complement of
100. There are about 80 staff members employed on a permanent basis and 20
are employed on a part-time basis. Out of the 80 permanent academic staff,
3 are women. The number of women academic staff is only 3; the reason
provided for the low number of women academics was that families do not
allow girls to study for technical subjects.  An average of 80% of students
complete their studies and graduate.

   3. Virtual University

The delegation visited two classes, one was a virtual university  class  and
another was a computer networking  class.  The  virtual  university  offered
video conferencing classes electronically  through  a  Canadian  university.
For admission into the virtual  university  classes,  students  should  have
done and passed 2 years at university.  Based  on  the  performance  of  the
student,  they  are  selected  electronically,  and  then  they  submit   an
application to the Canadian university for admission. The admission  fee  to
study costs R200 000 CDs.  The  class  had  27  students,  17  were  English
speaking and 10 were  French  speaking.  The  second  class  the  delegation
visited was a computer networking class  where  students  studied  computer-
networking systems. To  specialize  in  computer  networking  a  student  is
required to have 1-year basic knowledge in computer science.

 8. STUDY TOUR TO GHANA



On the 18 October 2005, the delegation arrived in Accra, Ghana. They were
welcomed at the Airport by Ms Nokukhanya Matshikwe, the 2nd Secretary
Political and accompanied by officials in the Protocol Office of the
Speaker.


  1. COURTESY CALL ON  HIGH  COMMISSIONER  MR  RAPU  MOLEKANE  AT  THE  HIGH
     COMMISSION OFFICE, NORTH LABONE

On the 19 October 2005 the delegation paid a courtesy call to the office of
the High Commissioner, Mr Rapu Molekane. He warmly received the members of
the delegation and welcomed them to Ghana. The leader of the delegation
introduced the members of his team and outlined the purpose of the study
tour. After the introduction, the Commissioner briefed members of the
delegation and focused on the New Patriotic Party that came into power in
2004, the South African Ghana relations and the bi-laterals that existed
between Stellenbosch and Ghana universities.
The Commissioner told the delegation that the office was opened in 1996. In
2004 the New Patriotic Party was voted into power replacing the National
Democratic Congress. Free Basic Education was introduced together with the
new national uniform of brown and yellow. The relation between South Africa
and Ghana existed for the past 10 years and the cooperation was signed in
the field of defence. A well-established college for Senior Military staff
was built. South Africa and Ghana had also working relations in
peacekeeping missions. They have signed an agreement in establishing a
centre for peacekeeping. The two countries have not entered into an
agreement on Agriculture but had entered into negotiations on cultural
issues.

The joint bi-laterals on agricultural matters would be launched before the
end of the year. Except the avoidance of taxation agreement, the two
countries had general trade on aviation matters on a commercial basis. An
unofficial exchange programme exists between the University of Ghana Lagos
and University of Stellenbosch. The exchange exists in the field of study
of HIV/Aids. A Masters programme exists where academics from Stellenbosch
visited the university of Ghana and in return academics from Ghana visited
the University of Stellenbosch.
25 South African companies are in Ghana. Companies such as Checkers,
Woolworths, Stannic and Multi-Choice had put up shop in Ghana and South
African companies are doing well.

   2. COURTESY CALL ON THE FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT,  HON  FREDDIE
      BLAY

The delegation visited the First Deputy Speaker of Ghana Parliament and  was
profoundly  welcomed  by  the  two  Deputy  Speakers  to   Parliament.   The
Chairperson introduced members of the delegation and  provided  an  overview
on the purpose of the visit by the Committee.

The briefing focused around a broad exposition of the educational system in
Ghana. Basic Education in Ghana was free and learners and students were not
required to pay. In the new system, it is proposed that 2 pre-primary
school years will be added by 2007 followed by the current Primary School
phase where a learner is expected to spend 6 years, and then at Junior
Secondary School spend 3 years, followed by an expanded 4-year phase at
Senior Secondary level and proceed to enrol at tertiary level. In short,
the education system will change from a 6: 3: 3 year to a 2: 6: 3: 4 year
system. It is envisaged that in the long term, the 4-year degrees will be
done in 3 years. This will be due to the fact that by the time the students
reach university level, they will be more prepared and more matured. This
will also be cost effective as the cost of university education is higher
than that of Senior Secondary Schooling. Tuition at university would be
free and students contribute only by paying for levies.

The country also experienced the brain drain phenomenon. To retain
educators, the government is moving towards implementing a Human
Development Programme with emphasis on Science and Technology.

The delegation  was  allowed  to  observe  the  proceedings  of  the  Public
Accounts Committee when they were examining  the  audited  accounts  of  the
Departments  and  entities.  The  establishment  of  the   Public   Accounts
Committee is provided under Order 151 (2) of  the  Standing  Orders  of  the
Parliament of Ghana. The Order 165 (1) of the Standing Orders provides  that
the  Committee  shall  consist  of  not  more  than  25  Members  under  the
Chairperson of a Member who does not belong to  the  party,  which  controls
the Executive branch of Government.  Accordingly,  and  by  convention,  the
Leader of the Main Opposition Party of the  House  has  always  chaired  the
Committee. The primary responsibility of the Committee  is  to  examine  the
audited  accounts  of  sums  granted  by  Parliament  to  meet  the   public
expenditure of the Government, and such other  accounts  before  Parliament.
In terms of  its  functions,  the  Committee  has  the  powers,  rights  and
privileges of a High Court or a Justice of the High Court.
The Heads under which the  Auditor-General  reports  to  Parliament  are  as
follows:
    • Foreign Exchange receipts and payments of the Bank of Ghana;
    • The District Assemblies Common Fund;
    • The District Assemblies and Traditional Councils;
    • Public Boards and Corporations;
    • Pre-University Educational Institutions;
    • The  Ministries,  Departments  and  other  Agencies  of  the  Central
      Government and
    • The Consolidated Fund.

The delegation was further taken around the buildings  of  Parliament  where
they observed the old Parliament Building or the House of Parliament,  which
was built forty-three years ago. The number  of  Members  of  Parliament  is
approximately two hundred and thirty (230). There are less  that  10%  women
parliamentarians. The Majority Party held  hundred  and  twenty-eight  (128)
seats. The voting system is based on the  constituency  voting  system.  The
Constitution states that Ministers who are not members of Parliament  should
not be less than 50%. Eighty-eight (88) seats of members of  Parliament  are
made up of Deputy Ministers.

The challenge facing the Parliament of Ghana is that there are no  Committee
rooms and that Members do not have offices. There is no  dedicated  research
support for the Members. To convene a meeting, parties make use of  lobbies.
In order to address the shortfall  of  offices,  the  State  House  for  the
government department of housing  will  be  converted  to  offices  for  all
Members of Parliament.

   3. COURTESY CALL ON HON MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS, MR  YAW  OSAFO-
      MAAFO, MP

The Acting Director General Mr Clark welcomed the delegation and took them
to the office of the Hon Minister of Education and Sports, Mr Yaw Osafo-
Maafo. The Minister briefed the delegation on the Educational System in
Ghana and the New Proposed Structure of Education.
It was reported that currently Ghana operates a structure consisting of 6
years of Primary Schooling, 3 years of Junior Secondary School (JSS), 3
years of Senior Secondary School (SSS) and generally 4 years of university
education. The country offers Basic Education, which is defined as the
minimum period of schooling needed to ensure that children acquire basic
literacy, numeracy and problem-solving skills as well as for creativity and
healthy living.

9.3.1 Primary Education

The primary education, which covers 6 years after kindergarten, is aimed  at
consolidating the knowledge and skills acquired at  the  kindergarten  level
and forms as the foundation  for  inquiry,  creativity  and  innovation  and
inculcates good citizenship in children.
In  terms  of  the  report  of  “Education  in  the  21st  Century”,  it  is
recommended that at Primary Education level emphasis should be on  literacy,
numeracy and problem-solving skills. The creative arts are comprised of  art
and craft, music and dance, physical education and ICT.  The  educators  are
encouraged to offer the  subjects  as  practical  and  creative  activities.
Those children whose first home language  is  Ghana  are  encouraged  to  be
taught in it at the kindergarten and at primary level.

9.3.2 Junior Secondary School Education (JSS)

The Junior Secondary School constitutes a three-year post primary education
and provides opportunity for pupils to discover their interests, abilities,
aptitudes and other potentials. It introduces them to basic scientific and
technical knowledge and skills and prepares them for further academic work
and acquisition of technical/vocational skills at the secondary level. To
improve the quality of education at this level, teaching is strengthened
through improved supply of well-qualified teachers, especially for English,
Mathematics, Science and the Creative Arts.

9.3.3 Senior Secondary/Technical /Vocational Education

The  Secondary  education  is  provided   at   Senior   Secondary   Schools,
technical/vocational institutes  and  through  apprenticeship  schemes.  The
curriculum  at  this  level  is  diversified  to  cater  for  the  different
aptitudes, abilities, interests and skills of students to provide some  with
the  opportunity  for  further  education  and  training  while  others  are
introduced to a wide variety of relevant occupational skills.

To address the issue of developing the Technical, Vocational Education and
Training (TVET) sub-sector as alternative parallel stream, the government
should make a major shift in its state education policy in favour of the
TVET sub-sector. The Technical Teacher Training facilities at the
University College of Education of Winneba, Kumasi and Technical Teachers
Training College, Mampong are to be expanded to cater for the training of
more technical and vocational teachers.

9.3.4 Tertiary Education

The tertiary education embraces various types  of  post-secondary  education
programmes that offer training leading to  the  award  of  Diploma  and  /or
Degree.  There  is  one  National  Minister  with  three  Deputy  Ministers.
Tertiary education  includes  universities,  polytechnics,  and  specialized
institutions. Tertiary students receive loan funding  through  means  tests.
The state is finding it difficult to recover loans from  students  who  have
completed their studies.

To address problems of access, funding, staffing, quality and relevance,
the government should improve and expand significantly academic and
physical infrastructure and facilities in all state tertiary institutions
to enable them to deliver at optimum capacity. The working conditions,
including facilities for research and teaching should be improved to
attract and retain staff.  The tertiary institutions should set up well-
resourced quality assurance units to monitor academic and professional
programmes in the institutions. Also the universities should liaise with
industry and business to set up standards of competencies for skills
acquisition.

The objective is to create intellectually, spiritually, emotionally, and
physically well-balanced individuals with the requisite knowledge, skills,
values and aptitudes for self-actualization and for the socio-economic and
political transformation of the nation, and the Government of Ghana.

 9. MEETING MR ATO ESSUMAN CHIEF DIRECTOR, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
    AND SPORTS AND MR MICHAEL NSOWAH, ACTING DIRECTOR GENERAL,
    GHANA EDUCATION SERVICE

The delegation was welcomed  by  the  Acting  Director  General  Mr  Michael
Nsowah at the Education Service Building.  He  briefed  members  around  the
management and administration of Pre-Tertiary Education, the  management  at
the school level, at District and Regional level.  The  Management  of  pre-
tertiary education is based on a six-tier system  namely,  School,  Circuit,
District, Regional, National and Ministry of Education  level.  The  essence
of this arrangement was to ensure that all decentralized agencies and  units
are involved in the management of schools, to ensure effective delivery  and
supervision of pre-tertiary education.

10.1  Management at the School level
The school is the primary unit of management headed  by  the  principal  who
handles all the management issues. The principal is supported  by  a  number
of agencies, including the  School  Management  Committee  (SMC),  Board  of
Governors  and  the  PTA.  The  class  teacher  on  his/her  part   provides
leadership in  the  management  of  the  day-to-day  teaching  and  learning
environment.

10.2  Circuit level

At the circuit level, the Circuit Supervisor is in charge  of  the  Circuit,
which consists of a cluster of schools, numbering  between  ten  and  twenty
depending on the area of operation.

10.3  Regional level

The Regional Directorate of Education is responsible for the  co-ordination,
supervision and monitoring of the  management  functions  of  the  District,
Directorates of Education and Regional Education units in  order  to  ensure
good quality education in schools.

10.4  Ministry of Education

At the ministerial level, the Ministry of Education,  as  the  body  charged
with formulating educational policies, has the responsibility  for  ensuring
that educational policies and their implementation harmonize  with  national
developments.

10.5  The school organization

The current system of 6 yrs primary;  3  yrs  junior  secondary  and  3  yrs
senior secondary will change in 2007 to 2 yrs pre-primary; 6 yrs primary;  3
yrs JSS and 4 yrs SSS. From this year, levies have been  abolished  and  the
government pays capitation.

 6. Teacher training
The rural areas are faced  with  a  problem  of  untrained  teachers.  These
teachers are  given  on-the-job  training  through  the  Untrained  Teachers
Programme. There are 38 teacher-training colleges in Ghana.  These  colleges
have been upgraded from three-year to four-year  courses  offering  Diplomas
instead of Certificates. Teachers  Unions  cooperate  with  the  Department.
The teacher:pupil ratio is as follows: Primary 32:1; JSS, 22:1; SSS, 20:1

10.  Challenges

                ▪ Inability of teachers to go to rural schools.
                ▪ Low teacher salaries.
                ▪ HIV/Aids pandemic.


12.   VISIT TO ACHIMOTO SCHOOL

The delegation visited Achimoto School and was welcomed by the Deputy
Headmistress. She briefed the delegation and focused on establishment of
the school, learners of the school and the subjects the school offers.
Achimoto was established by British Missionaries in 1927. The school
produced most of the prominent leaders in the country. It had slightly more
girl learners than boys. The school is headed by one Head Mistress and 3
assistants who are not teaching but concentrated on the management of the
school. The school has about 80 teachers. The school is the best school in
the country. It employed the most experienced teachers who ensured that
they were highly motivated. The school enjoyed the support of parents and
members of the communities. The normal pass rate in the Senior Secondary
School averaged 80-100% pass rate and 95% of its students are admitted in
the universities.

The school is divided into four programmes namely, General Science,
Creative Arts, Vocational and Visual Arts and General Agriculture. The
total number of learners was approximately 1 585, with proximately 80 staff
members. The learners pay levies, which cover school fees, boarding and
food. The continuous assessment of learners continues every term and that
had an effect on acceptable discipline. The final year exams are common
throughout Ghana. The school is part of the West African Schools (ECOWAS).
The school teachers are accommodated in bungalows within the schoolyard.

  13. MEETING WITH ACTING VICE-CHANCELLOR, UNIVERSITY OF GHANA, LEGON


The delegation visited the University of Ghana, Legon. The Vice-Chancellor,
Prof C Gordon who is the Dean of International Programme, welcomed the
delegation. He provided an overview of the university. Currently the
university is amongst twenty (20) proven universities around the world. The
number of courses the university offered equipped more entrepreneurs to
become more marketable and information technology was at the thrust of the
vision of the university. The university is one of the oldest institutions.

Recently the university participated in the Peer Review Programme. The
Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research was requested by the
Governing Council of the African Peer Review Mechanism APRM-Ghana to
undertake studies into socio-economic development in Ghana with a view to
establishing Ghana’s performance in relation to national goals and
aspirations. The outcome of the exercise was required to be empirically
verifiable by an international team using acceptable methodologies. The
task was carried out which involved field surveys of 20 districts in all 10
regions of Ghana and several focus group discussions throughout Ghana.

Currently the university of Ghana had signed new agreements with  University
of Leeds and registered students  for  full  degrees.  The  number  of  both
Regular  Foreign  students  and  special  admission  students  continues  to
increase as mandated by the university of Ghana.  The  issue  of  access  is
quite interesting, because the daily graphics indicate that several  hundred
million dollars are of student loans that had not been paid back.

The residential fee is approximately $850 and the students are highly
subsidized. The real cost is 8-10 times what students paid. They depended
on the government for intervention to operate fee-paying students. The
university had administered foreign students according to the Strategic
Plan 2001-2010. A policy is in place to encourage access in output looking
at interacting with external bodies. Female access had positive spin-offs.
The aim is to increase the 3% number of females in admission policies. By
this mechanism or policy the institution wants to increase the population
of females to close to 43,4%. The institution is working towards getting
female population to an acceptable numbers.

As a way of increasing the number of females, the admission policy
developed a cut-off point for women lower to that for men in mathematics.
In every year, a Science and Maths workshop for girls is conducted to
encourage young women and this year boys were also included.
The courses in Maths and Science are very critical for the development of
female students. The university has established a Regional Centre for
Science Education for female learners.

It has a registered intake 30 000 students and this poses problems for
residential accommodation as the institution is modelled along the
Cambridge system.

The institution has exchange programmes mostly with European Universities.
There are considerations to have relations with other South African
Universities.

 14. MEETING WITH MR PAUL EFFAH, EXECUTIVE  SECRETARY  NATIONAL  COUNCIL  ON
     TERTIARY EDUCATION
Mr Paul Effah, who briefed members and focused on the core values of the
Council, the establishment of the Council and its objectives, welcomed the
delegation. The National Council for Tertiary Education’s values stem from
its co-ordinating role which requires it to be visionary, efficient,
professional, objective and unbiased in its dealings with all its
constituents. The Council will strive to treat all stakeholders with equity
and respect without ever compromising its responsibility to the sub-sector
and to the nation. In advising the Minister and other stakeholders, the
Council must remain objective and free from any external influence.

The 1992 Constitution of Ghana mandates for the establishment of a number
of bodies. Amongst those is the National Council for Tertiary Education
(NCTE), established by an Act of Parliament, Act 454 of 1993. The Act
enjoins the Council to advise the Minister on the development of
institutions of tertiary education in Ghana. It also seeks to enquire into
financial needs of the institutions of tertiary education, and advise the
Minister accordingly, to recommend to the Minister for purposes of the
preparation of the annual national education budgets. Block allocations of
funds towards running costs and grants towards capital expenditure of each
institution of tertiary education and indicating how the allocations are to
be disbursed.

The  Act  allows  for  recommendations  on  national  standards  and   norms
including standards and  norms  on  staff,  costs,  accommodation  and  time
utilization for approval of the Minister and to monitor  the  implementation
of any approved national standards and norms by institutions.

Further more it seeks  to  advise  Governing  Councils  of  institutions  of
tertiary education on suitable measures for generating additional funds  for
their institutions. Key to  the  action  plan  of  the  NCTE  is  to  create
attractive options within the tertiary  education  sub-sector  to  encourage
the development of new programmes involving the industry. To facilitate  the
development  of  a  clear  and  widely  accepted  definition   of   tertiary
education. The Act seeks to establish mechanisms for monitoring,  evaluation
and review of standards and norms.

15. MEETING WITH ACTING CHIEF DIRECTOR, REGIONAL CO-OPERATION AND NEPAD


The delegation was initially scheduled to meet with the Hon Minister for
Regional Co-operation and NEPAD, Dr Konadu Apraku, who could not make it.
The Acting Chief Director responsible for Regional Co-operation and NEPAD
instead welcomed it. To spearhead the conceptualization of NEPAD, the
government decided to create a Ministry for NEPAD to deal with matters
related to NEPAD. The major role played the Ministry for NEPAD is to co-
ordinate the activities of the structure with the Ministers of Education
and Agriculture. In the agricultural sector, the Ministers are responsible
for the implementation of a comprehensive agricultural programme.

The Ministry would also be going on an advocacy outreach programme in  Ghana
where they seek to explain what NEPAD is all about, how  the  principles  in
the NEPAD Framework could be synergized in the reduction  of  poverty.  This
would be achieved through creating  avenues  for  people  to  chart  forward
approaches as to how they could benefit through NEPAD. The country is  going
through the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) and that should be seen  as
a credible initiative. The Ministry had also co-ordinated the  NEPAD  agenda
through various Ministers on the ECOWAS side.  The  emphasis  is  placed  on
trade relations, free movement of people and signing of  regional  protocols
to be able to expand the interaction of different markets.  A  NEPAD  School
feeding scheme programme had been started on a pilot  basis.  The  programme
would be expanded across the country in 2006 to ensure  that  it  reached  a
maximum of two million children. A special Secretariat had been  established
to monitor the National Department of Planning Commission in the  office  of
the Manpower Minister. To be able to sustain the programme,  the  government
had put in place a National Health Insurance Scheme to have a social  safety
net. The school-feeding programme had been  located  and  co-ordinated  with
the involvement of key  Ministries  such  as  Health,  Agriculture  and  the
Minister responsible for Women and Children Affairs.

They would like to co-operate with some institutions in South Africa. They
tried to link with the Institute of International Affairs. They would like
to have educational exchanges with South Africa. These relationships should
be permanent and not once off.

  16. VISITING WINNEBA SECONDARY SCHOOL


The delegation visited Winneba Secondary School and was warmly welcomed by
the Head Mistress of the school and her staff members. She focused on the
establishment of the school, the subjects the school offered, the number of
learners and educators. Winneba was started in 1949 by AJ Hammond a Member
of Parliament in a private apartment in town with one chair. The school has
a staff complement of forty-four (44), composed of 40 males and 4 females
and an intake of 1 300 learners. The courses that are offered are Science,
General Arts, Business and Agriculture. The results were steady and
impressive. The pass rate for the last semester was at 79,5% in
Mathematics, and 83,1% in English. The achievement was regarded as being
remarkable for the school based on the background from which learners come,
which is not good. To sustain the performance of learners, the school
arranged extra classes for learners who are performing poorly. Most
teachers at the school took their examinations under the West African
Examination Council. Those teachers who performed exceptionally are cited
and awarded a “best teacher” award for their excellent performance.

The school has got a Science Resource Centre that offers tuition and
practical. It also has two qualified nurses who manage an outpatient ward
with 12 beds, six dormitories for 600 boys and five dormitories for 700
girls. The school has got a choir and most of the learners belong to that
choir. The school won the North West Choral Music Award and obtained top
position in the region.

The challenges facing the school are: The utility vehicle used for internal
usage had broken; the sanitation facilities are unacceptable; printing
machine to print examination papers had broken. However some of the former
students offer assistance through donations. The school has received 300
metal chairs.

On the other hand the school has received a contribution of R1, 4 million
from the Swedish government towards the establishment of the Internet
facility. The Lee University in the United States of America provided
practical teaching to thirteen students on mentorship programmes.

17.   MEETING WITH VICE-CHANCELLOR OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE OF EDUCATION OF
    WINNEBA

The delegation visited the University College of Education of Winneba and
was welcomed by the Vice-Chancellor of the university, Prof Niibi Ay-Boute.
Accompanying the Vice Chancellor were the Heads and Deans of the different
departments. The Vice-Chancellor briefed the delegation and focused on the
establishment, the roots, the vision and mission, the goals, the structure,
the faculties, mandate of the institution and the number of campuses
constituting the institution.

17.1  Establishment of Winneba

The University College of Education of Winneba was established in 1992 as
part of the educational reforms. The University College of Education of
Winneba is an advanced specialist teacher training college. By its set-up
it operates a multi-campus system. It was mandated to produce professional
teachers for Basic, Secondary and Teacher Training Colleges. The
institution is therefore expected to play an important role in the reform
programme.

It has three campuses, namely, Kumasi Campus, which emphasizes advanced
technical and business education. The other is the Ashanti-Mampong Campus,
which specializes in agricultural education. The third is the Winneba
Campus, which has three sites and produces teachers in areas such as
Science, Social Studies, Music, Art, Home Economics, Basic Education,
Special Education, Mathematics, English, French and Ghananian Languages.
The University College of Education of Winneba is a unique institution that
offers advanced teacher education, it was granted full university status
with effect from October 2002.
In 2004 the university became an autonomous institution in terms of Winneba
Act 672.

   2. The Vision and Mission

The University seeks to become the most excellent teacher education
university in Ghana, it is recognized as one of the best in Africa, and is
recognized worldwide as higher institution of learning. It serves as a
centre of excellence that inculcates in its products the requisite academic
ability and professional competencies, and imbues them with humanistic
values for teaching at the pre-tertiary level, to conduct research,
disseminate relevant knowledge and skills, and influence educational
policy.

17. 3 Goals of the Institution

The major goals of the university are to: improve Academic Excellence,
improve infrastructure, initiate Innovative Programmes, establish
partnerships, address Imbalances in Educational Provision and ensure
financial self-sufficiency.

17.4  The University in brief

The full-time students at the institution for the financial year under
review stand at aggregate level of 18 317, with a gender breakdown of 10
706 males, and of 7 611 female students. In terms of its budget allocation,
the university received ¢158 billion (US$17,5m) in 2005.

17.5  Students





17.6  Full –time Students












17.7  Faculty of Language Education

The Faculty of Language Education continued to focus on research and
teaching related to the improvement of performance in languages used in
Ghana. English as the official language of the country and the various
other Ghanaian languages like French, Akan-Nzema, Ewe, GaDangme and Gur-
Gonja are considered as vectors of education, culture and community
interaction.

17.8  Faculty of Technology Education

The faculty continued its primary functions of teaching and research in
Information Technology Education. The Faculty is making every effort to
reposition itself in order to respond to the rapid changes in information
technology and the information economy.
   9. Faculty of Agriculture Education

The Faculty teaches courses in Agricultural Education and Animal Science.
The faculty continued to provide training to an ever-increasing number of
students in addition to carrying out its other functions of research and
extension. The programmes offered are all areas, namely, Animal Breeding,
Meat Science and Technology, Microbiology and Immunology, Nutrition,
Pasture and Range Management and Physiology.

  10. School of Creative Arts Education

The Faculty of Creative Arts Education continued to attract a great deal of
patronage from students and research scholars. The school offered both full
time and short courses to a large number of students in the four areas of
Art, Music and Performing Arts, Enrichment Programme in Music and General
Music Diploma.

17.11 Faculty of Science Education
The Faculty of Science Education continued to play a major role in the
education of undergraduate students in the Science Faculty. The student
interest in the subjects is picking up and this is reflected in the
increased number of students registering for Health, Physical Education,
Recreation and Sports, Home Economics Education, Mathematics Education,
Science Education.

17.12 Distinctive Profile

The year under review was another good year in the life of the faculty.
Besides smooth academic and non-academic work in the faculty during the
period, its members were involved in a number of activities that sought to
strengthen its position as an enviable hub in Africa for PGD Guidance and
Counselling, PGD Education Student internship, Distance Education which
increased with female enrolment increasing to 60%, Applied Linguistic
Project studying 15 local languages and technical, vocational and creative
arts.
ν
17.13 Partnerships

The university had entered into legal links with outside universities and
institutions. Currently the university had signed agreements and
established partnership with Leeds University, UK, Lulea University of
Technology, Sweden, Lee University in Cleveland, Tennessee, USA, University
of Pennsylvania, USA, Arizona State University, West, University of
Jyvasklya, Finland, Ohio University, Athens, USA, Simon Fraser University,
Vancouver, Canada, Carnegie Corporation of New York and UNICEF.


  14. Improvement in Infrastructure


The university had seriously embarked on an epochal  drive  to  re-structure
and re-designate the university by upgrading it to a modern  university,  in
order to keep up with the  increasing  numbers  of  students.  A  number  of
infrastructure improvements were  noted,  namely,  new  Libraries  with  ICT
Laboratories were built at the Winneba and Kumasi campuses. In  addition  an
additional hostel for postgraduate students was  erected,  at  Winneba,  New
Science Laboratory at  Mampong,  Administration  Block  at  Mampong,  Sports
Complex at Mampong. Also  accommodation  was  built  for  staff  members  at
Kumasi, and Winneba campuses. New  lecture  Halls  at  Winneba  and  Mampong
campuses were erected.
 17. RECOMMENDATIONS


MALI

          o The Committee recommends that the Departments of Education and
            Foreign Affairs work out a system of promoting partnerships
            between South African Universities and those in Mali with the
            aim of developing and sustaining the indigenous African
            languages.

          o It is recommended that South Africa should consider taking
            lessons from Bambara, Mali and encourage schools to teach
            learners from grade 1-6 in their mother tongue and use English
            as a second language.


GHANA



         o The Committee recommends that the Department should consider
           introducing measures for the government to offer assistance for
           permanent exchange programmes through the Institute for
           International Affairs for student within the African countries.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
   Budget Vote No 25, dated 28 March 2006:

1.    Introduction
The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having considered
Budget Vote 25, reports as follows:
The Constitution of South Africa (Act No. 108 of 1996) recognises  that  the
Legislative Authority has  an  important  role  to  play  in  the  oversight
function in overseeing the performance of departments and public entities.

In terms of Treasury Regulations published  in  Government  Gazette  in  May
2002, strategic plans must be tabled in Parliament at least 7 days prior  to
the discussion of the budget Vote of the Department.

It is important for the Committee to ensure that strategic plans are  tabled
within the stipulated  period  because  they  provide  information  for  the
budget review process of the Portfolio Committee.

The budget and strategic plan form the  basis  of  the  annual  report.  The
Public Service Commission in its  report  “Evaluation  of  the  Department’s
Annual  Reports  as  Accountability  Mechanisms”  clearly  states  that  the
emphasis on measurable objectives, which should be  part  of  the  strategic
plan, is to create a clear contract  between  Parliament  and  the  relevant
Minister regarding specific deliverables for which the Minister can be  held
accountable.

This explains the importance  of  budgets  and  strategic  plans  and  their
necessity for departments to table them on time to  ensure  that  Parliament
is provided with information required for its oversight work.

On the 8th March 2006, the Department of Agriculture  and  entities  namely,
the  Land  bank,  National  Agricultural  Marketing  Council   (NAMC),   the
Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP), the Agricultural  Research  Council
(ARC), the Perishable Products Export Control Board (PPECB) and Ncera  Farms
tabled their  budgets  and  strategic  plans  for  2006/07  as  required  by
regulations.
Upon referral of these instruments by the National Assembly,  the  Committee
scheduled extended briefing sessions with the  Department  and  entities  to
present their budgets and strategic plans for the ensuing financial year.

On the 15th March, the Committee completed the budget hearings process of
the Department of Agriculture and all entities reporting to it.

2.     Programmes of the Department of Agriculture

The Director-General, Mr Masiphula Mbongwa, assisted the programme managers
who presented 2006/07 budget priorities as related to the strategic plan of
the Department. The following are the department’s key priority programmes
for the period 2006 to 2009 and targets for 2006/07:

2.1   Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme (CASP)

The aim of the programme  is  to  provide  post-settlement  support  to  the
targeted beneficiaries of land reform and other producers who acquired  land
through private means.  The implementation of  CASP  depends  on  provincial
departments, some of which do not have  capacity  resulting  in  significant
under-spending and rollovers. During 2006/07 some  management  members  from
National Department of Agriculture will be deployed to provinces  to  assist
in improving service delivery.

2.2   Micro-Agricultural Financial Institutions of South Africa (Mafisa)

The scheme was launched in 2005 in Limpopo, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal
provinces, and will be rolled out to other six provinces in 2006. Within
provinces, steering committees will be established to facilitate the
implementation of Mafisa. Institutions such as Land Bank, Uvimba Finance
and Ithala Development Finance will be participating in the scheme as
financial intermediaries, once their capacity for outreach has been
established. The target is to have 2 000 farmers awarded loans through
Mafisa.

2.3   Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment for Agriculture (AgriBEE)

The AgriBEE framework is the Department’s response  to  improving  equitable
access to and participation of  historically  disadvantaged  people  in  the
agriculture sector. The AgriBEE Charter will be  finalised  and  implemented
in 2006, after which  several  workshops  will  be  conducted  at  national,
provincial and local level to address issues relating to the  implementation
and monitoring of AgriBEE. Training workshops that are  aimed  at  promoting
awareness, understanding and clarification of the impact  on  and  relevance
of broad-based BEE for local municipalities will be undertaken  by  selected
service providers.

2.4   African Agricultural Development Programme (AADP)

The Programme has been developed  as  a  NEPAD  framework  for  agricultural
development in Africa. In 2006 the Department will  focus  on  strengthening
its relationship with African countries. It will see through  implementation
of NEPAD/Comprehensive Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP).

2.5   Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative (ASGISA)

The Department will develop detailed plans  for  identified  ASGI  projects.
The five key areas identified for maximising contribution  to  ASGI  include
livestock development, establishment of new and rehabilitation  of  existing
irrigation schemes, biofuels, land rehabilitation, as  well  as  development
of agricultural development corridors.

2.6   The activities of the Department are organised into five programmes

The organisational structure of the Department has been restructured and
its programmes have been reduced from nine to five. The purpose of the
restructuring is to strengthen the Department’s capacity to provide
oversight over implementation of national programmes and to focus on
priorities.

2.6.1 Programme 1: Administration

The programme provides the department with political and strategic
leadership and management, and also manages capital investments. The
allocation for 2006/07 amounts to R247 195 million as compared to R224 559
million for 2005/06. The allocation reflects an increase of 10,1%.

2.6.2 Programme 2: Livelihoods, Economics and Business Development

The programme promotes equitable access to the agricultural sector, the
growth and commercial viability of emerging farmers, food security and
rural development.  Facilitate market access for South African agricultural
products nationally and internationally by developing and implementing
appropriate policies and targeted programmes. Promote BBBEE in the sector.
Provide information for developing and monitoring the sector.  Programme
allocation for 2006/07 is R746 783 million compared to R695 074 million for
2005/06. The allocation reflects an increase of 7,4%.

2.6.3 Programme 3: Bio-Security and Disaster Management
The programme is responsible for managing risks associated with  animal  and
plant diseases and ensuring food safety. The  programme  also  develops  the
agricultural risk and disaster management  policy  framework  for  providing
early warnings and post-disaster support to farmers.  Under  this  programme
there are three sub-programmes. For 2006/07, allocation  for  the  programme
amounts to R245 939 million, a  decrease  by  35,8%  compared  to  R383  250
million for 2005/06.

2.6.4 Programme 4: Production and Resource Management

The programme focuses on creating an enabling environment for increased  and
sustainable agricultural production; and promoting sound management and  use
of land and  water  resources  through  appropriate  policies,  legislation,
norms and standards, technical  guidelines  and  other  services.  Programme
allocation for 2006/07 is R240 514 million compared to R212 361 million  for
2005/06. The allocation indicates an increase of 13,3%.


2.6.5 Programme 5: Sector Services and Partnerships


The programme manages and co-ordinates stakeholder and international
relations, education and training, and the Grootfontein Agricultural
Development Institute. It supports agricultural research and extension and
advisory services. The budget allocation to this programme amounts to R477
217 million for 2006/07 compared to R481 308 million during the 2005/06
financial year. This allocation also reflects a decrease of 0,8%.

Therefore, the total allocation to the Department for 2006/07 amounts to R1
957 648 billion compared to R1 996 592 billion for 2005/06. The budget
reflects a decrease by 1,9%.
3.    Land Bank

The Land Bank was established in terms of section 1 of the Land Bank Act,
1912 (Act No. 18 of 1912), which was repealed by section 53 of the Land
Bank Act, 1944 (Act No. 13 of 1944), which was again repealed by the Land
and Agricultural Development Bank Act, 2002 (Act No. 15 of 2002). The Bank
operates as a development finance institution within the agricultural and
agribusiness sectors. Provides a range of finance options to a broad
spectrum of clients in the sector, including entrepreneurs, women and
youth, through its network of 27 braches and 37 satellite offices.

The Bank recorded a poor performance in the past financial year. This
resulted from a number of factors that affected operations of farmers, such
as depressed commodity prices, the strengthening of the rand, which
impacted negatively on exporters and the unstable conditions that affected
farming produce. The poor performance manifested in a net loss of R541
million in 2005/06 compared to a R246,6 million profits reported in
2003/04.

For the turnaround Strategy, the Bank has established a Committee that
comprises officials from the bank, National Treasury and the Department to
oversee the turnaround of the financial position of the bank. The Bank has
embarked on a process to review its banking and financial systems.

4.    Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)

The Managing Director, Dr Linda Makuleni and the Chief Financial Officer,
Mr P. van Jaarsveld presented the overview of the OBP, budget and the
strategic plan for 2006/07.

The company is self-financing, including all operational and capital
requirements. It derives its revenue from the sale of vaccines and related
biological products. Over the years the company was able to achieve a
positive and sustainable growth in revenue, profits and cash flow. The
company reported an increase in sales, from 100 million doses of vaccines
in 2003/04 to 105 million doses in 2004/05, while sales revenue increased
from R69,9 million to R76,1 million for the same period. The sales are
expected to further rise over the MTEF period. The rise will support profit
growth from R4,9 million in 2005/06 to a projected R5,2 million by 2006/07.

5.    Agriculture Research Council (ARC)

The Chief Executive Officer, Dr Tau-Mzamane, presented the budget and the
strategic plan of the Council for 2006/07.

The focus of the Council had some recent initiatives primarily in  improving
the technology transfer capacity, the  development  of  the  ARC  technology
transfer academy, which is aimed at scaling up the capacity of  the  Council
Development Programmes. Some transformation initiatives that  are  aimed  at
addressing the needs of the resource-poor communities  include  training  of
rural farmers in crop harvesting and pest management strategies  to  prevent
serious losses.

Revenue comes mainly in the form  of  transfers  from  the  Department  with
another portion  derived  from  services  provided  to  external  customers.
Transfers to the Council amount  to  R386.6  million,  R405.8  million,  and
R425.3 million for the 2006 MTEF period.

Through realigning the research and development  business  divisions  and  a
country network of research institutes, the Council  has  positioned  itself
strategically to address agricultural imperatives of the country.

6.    National Agricultural Marketing Council (NAMC)

The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Ronald Ramabulana, assisted by the Council
members presented the budget and the strategic plan for 2006/07 financial
year.

The National Agricultural Marketing Council was established by the
Marketing Agricultural Products Act (1996), in terms of which the NAMC
provides strategic advice to the Minister on agricultural marketing to
ensure that improved market access by all participants, marketing
efficiency, optimisation of export earnings and the viability of the
agricultural sector.

To support this mandate, funding for the Council amounts to R12.7 million,
R13.3 million, and R14 million over the 2006 MTEF period.

The Council’s budget for 2006/07 financial year is R19.7 million allocated
to the Council to cater for administration, marketing and trade, enterprise
development statutory measures and economic research categories

For the period ahead, the council will be more involved in integrating
government programmes such as CASP, LRAD, and MAFISA, monitoring the input
of deregulation on the agricultural economy, and promoting development of
marketing skills for black farmers.

7.    Perishable Products Export Control Board

The Chief Executive Officer, Mr Neels Hubinger presented the budget and the
business of the Board.

The Board controls all perishable exports and provides quality
certification on products destined for export, and provides cold chain
management services for producers and exporters of perishable food
products, thus assisting to prevent losses. Following the opening of market
in China for citrus fruit, the PPECB introduced protocol on in-transit
handling to facilitate exports to China and another protocol was developed
for fruit exports to India.

The total revenue for 2004/05 amounted to R91.2 million, while expenditure
totalled R95.4 million, resulting in a net shortfall of R4.2 million. This
was mainly due to changes in the levy structures.

The 2006/07 budget allows for a surplus of R337 K made up of statutory
services shortfall, commercial services surplus and SA PIP surplus. The net
contribution of R1 million from Ancillary Services will be used to
subsidise the shortfall from Statutory Services.

The income of R108.7 million represents an increase of R6 million in 2006
mainly as a result of a positive price (levy) variance of R5.6 million on
inspection and sea services offset by a negative volume variance of R0.4
million on the same services. The expenditure of R108.4 million is R8.2
million up on 2006 with three expense captions contributing R7 million of
the increase.

8.    Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd

Ncera Farms (Pty) is a public company listed under schedule 3B in terms of
the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999) as amended. The
Department of Land Affairs is the sole shareholder. It is situated in the
Eastern Cape on the state-owned land of approximately 4 000 hectares, and
is dedicated to assist small and emerging farmers through various services
to the surrounding rural communities in the form of advice, extension
services, training etc.

Of the total amount available in the 2005/06 financial year an estimated
amount of R496 300 will not be spent. The under-spending can be attributed
to certain planned capital projects not being finalised in time and will
thus be rolled over to the 2006/07 financial year.

The expenditure budget for 2006/07 is made up of transfer from Department
of Agriculture R2 177 million, plus own revenue amounting to R798 000. The
main sources of revenue are the dairy (R646 000), beef herd (R20 000),
vegetables (R117 000) and sundry revenue (R15 000).

9.    Committee recommendations

The Committee made recommendations for each entity as follows:

9.1   Department‘s Budget and Strategic Plan for 2005/06

The Committee welcomed both proposed budget allocations and the strategic
plan presented. The Committee further encouraged the Department to put more
human and financial resources on the following areas:

    a)      Stepping up the intervention strategy to help in building
           capacity of the emerging farmers. Provincial departments of
           Agriculture should play a pivotal role in these areas.
    b)      Work in consultation with the Department of Health to monitor
           developments around the Genetically Modified Organisms debate.
    c)      Work on fostering synergies with the Department of Land Affairs,
           Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, Provincial and Local
           Government with respect to strategy alignment and coherence.
    d)      Ensuring that training and capacity building initiatives meet
           increasing demands for research capacity and advisory support
           services to emerging farmers.
    e)      Consolidation of intergovernmental relations initiatives to
           ensure that the department plays its role of oversight and
           support to provincial and local spheres of government.
    f)      Roll out the implementation of norms and standards of extension
           services and ensure that it plays a significant role in the
           monitoring and evaluation of performance of extension services.
    g)      Ensuring that there is a strategy alignment between national and
           provincial departments of agriculture.

The Committee further agreed that from the 1st April 2006, the Department
must report quarterly to Parliament on the progress made in implementation
and challenges thereof. The Committee felt that such trend would be of
assistance to the Committee and Department for any early intervention that
may be required.

9.2   Land Bank

The Committee welcomed the budget and the business plan for 2006/07
financial year and requested the Bank to consider the following issues:

     a)     The Land Bank needs to do more work on its strategy to compete
           with other commercial banks in South Africa.
     b)     The Committee was also concerned that there seems to be no
           aggressiveness in promoting the brand promotion of the bank.
     c)     The Committee felt that the bank must deal with the credibility
          gap as a matter of urgency.
     d)     The Management Bank must ensure that the turnaround strategy
          improves the organisational health.

The Committee further agreed that bank must provide the Committee with
break down of bursary beneficiaries across the provinces.

9.3   Onderstepoort Biological Products (OBP)

The Committee accepted both the budget and the business plan, and requested
the OBP to look into the following matters:

    a)      It is not clear to the committee how the vaccines are accessed
          by emerging black farmers who owned livestock;
    b)      The skills development programme and the strategy to retain the
          skilled personnel within the company;
    c)      The infrastructure development and maintenance of the existing
          facilities;
    d)      Strengthening relationship between the company and the
          Agricultural Research Council in addressing the challenges facing
          the country; and
   e) The OBP contingency plan to respond to the threatening bird flu facing
          the country.

The Committee noted the good work currently done by the OBP and reiterated
that the visit to its head offices will be rescheduled for the 2nd term in
the programme.

9.4   Agricultural Research Council (ARC)

The Committee considered the budget and the business plan for 2006/07
financial year, and requested the ARC to consider the following matters:

    a)      It appears to the Committee that the number of researchers and
           scientists seems to be problematic, and urges the management of
           the Council to look into the matter;
    b)      The comprehensive strategy of the Council to unlock the
           indigenous knowledge;
    c)      The Council to put the mechanisms in place for ordinary people
           to bring knowledge to the Agricultural Research Council.
    d)      To also provide the Committee with provincial co-ordinators in
           all the provinces.

9.5   National Agricultural Marketing Council

The Committee considered the budget and the strategic plan and highlighted
the following issues:

    a)      The strategy of the National Agricultural Marketing Council to
           strengthen the co-operatives on the ground so that people
           benefit needs to enhanced;
    b)      In terms of the strategic objectives of the council, the
           committee felt that time-frames must be specific;
    c)      Also, in relation to training, the number of people targeted
           must be quantified;
    d)      The transformation of the mohair industry needs to be attended
           to as a matter of urgency;
    e)      The citrus industry is still dominated by the commercial farmers
           and this status quo needs to change.

9.6   Perishable Products Export Control Board

The Committee welcomed the budget and the business plan for 2006/07, and
due to time constraints recommended that that PPECB must respond to all
questions raised in writing by Wednesday, 15th March 2006. PPECB complied
with the Committee directive.

9.7   Ncera Farms (Pty) Ltd

The Committee accepted the budget and the business plan of the Ncera Farms
(Pty) Ltd for 2006/07, and expressed the following concerns:

    a)      The training budget is not reflected in the overall allocation,
           and the relationship of the current training to National
           Qualification Framework.
    b)      The role of SETA and the Department of Education training
          curriculum for the community.
    c)      The management fees appear to be high in the expenditure column,
           and the committee is concerned whether there is a value for this
           expenditure.
    d)      The creation of the Service Centre, and the impact of the centre
          to the surrounding communities, the committee was concerned about
          whether they would benefit.
    e)      The committee is also concerned about the future of the company,
          in the event the Department moves out, whether the company will
          be able to survive.

10.   Conclusion

The Committee considered the budgets and strategic/business plans of the
Department and entities and concludes by reiterating its position that:

   a) Agriculture has a potential to assist in the fight for poverty
          alleviation.  It plays a critical role in producing food for the
          poor, especially in the rural areas. The challenge facing the
          agricultural sector is that of providing sufficient food for the
          nation. Beside food security, the other challenges facing the
          Department of Agriculture are widespread drought, outbreaks of
          animal and plant diseases, skewed participation in the sector and
          shortage of skills.

   b) Since 1994 the focus of the Department of Agriculture had to broaden
          access to the agricultural sector by providing access to those
          who were previously disadvantaged.

   c) Finalisation of the Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment for
          Agriculture (AgriBEE) framework and adoption of the AgriBEE
          Charter in 2006 will help to facilitate ownership and
          participation by   previously disadvantaged people within the
          entire agriculture value chain.


   d) The committee extends special appreciation to the Director-General of
          the Department, programme managers within the department and to
          all heads of associated entities for attending the budget
          hearings.
4.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs on
   Budget Vote No. 29, dated 28 March 2006:

1.    Introduction

The Portfolio Committee on Agriculture and Land Affairs, having considered
Budget Vote 29, reports as follows:

The Department of Land Affairs derives its mandate from Section 25 of the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Act, 1996 (Act 108 of 1996),
which protects property rights while placing an obligation on the State to
implement land reform. Therefore, the Department has the responsibility of
providing access to land and extend rights in land, with particular
emphasis on the previously disadvantaged communities. The increased
2006/2007 budget reflects to a greater extent the willingness by government
to address speedily the issue of land reform and redistribution, especially
restitution.

In the 2006 State of the Nation Address, the  President  indicated  that  in
the 2006/2007 financial year, the government will do the following:

   1. Review the willing-buyer, willing-seller policy;
   2. Review land acquisition models and possible manipulation of land
      prices; and regulate conditions under which foreigners buy land;
   3. Ensure that the land redistribution programme is aligned to the
      Provincial Growth and Development Strategies (PGDS) and the Integrated
      Development Plans (IDP) of municipalities and to attend to the proper
      use of the funds that have been made available for the productive
      utilisation of the land.

This directive has a significant impact on the budget of the  Department  of
Land Affairs, as more resources must be made available to attain  the  given
targets. The review of the willing-seller, willing-buyer approach is  likely
to ease the budget of the  Department,  as  land  will  be  available  at  a
reasonable price. In overall, this policy directive is  likely  to  have  an
impact on the pace of the land redistribution programme.

On the 7th March  2006,  the  Department  of  Land  Affairs  and  associated
entities namely, the Khula Land Reform Empowerment Facility, the  Commission
on Restitution of Land Rights, and the KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama  Trust  Board
tabled their budgets and strategic plans  for  the  2006/07  financial  year
before the Committee as required by Treasury Regulations.

Upon referral of the instruments by the  National  Assembly,  the  Committee
scheduled extended briefing sessions with the  Department  and  entities  to
present budgets and strategic plans for the ensuing financial year.

2.    Budgets and Strategic Plans for 2006/07

The Committee completed its budget hearings process on the  15  March  2006.
The Department of Land Affairs and its entities were  given  an  opportunity
to present their plans, targets and  challenges  for  the  coming  financial
year.


3.    Programmes of the Department of Land Affairs


The Director-General, Mr Glen Thomas assisted the programme managers who
presented their 2006/07 budget and priority targets as related to the
strategic plan of the Department. The following are key priority programmes
for the period 2006 to 2009 and targets for 2006/07 were mentioned as
follows:

3.1   Programme 1: Administration

      The  programme  provides  strategic  and  logistical  support  through
      executive and corporate services.


      The allocation for 2006/07 to this programme has increased  from  R288
      255 million for 2005/06 to R358 970 million for 2006/07.  An  increase
      is further anticipated for the 2007/08 financial year.

3.2   Programme 2: Surveys and Mapping

      The programme provides national mapping, aerial photography and  other
      imagery and national control survey systems, in  support  of  national
      infrastructure  and  sustainable   development.   It   also   provides
      professional and technical services in  support  of  land  reform  and
      other public services. The allocation to this programme has  increased
      from R81 255 million  for  2005/06  financial  year  to  R84  501  for
      2006/07.


3.3   Programme 3: Cadastral Surveys



      The programme provides control of all cadastral survey and cadastral
      spatial information services.


      The allocation for this programme has increased from R84 543 million
      for 2005/06 to R95 283 million for 2006/07 financial year.

3.4   Programme 4: Restitution

      The programme takes responsibility for settling land restitution
      claims in accordance with the provisions of the Restitution of Land
      Rights Act (1994), and provides settlement support to beneficiaries.


      The allocation for this programme has increased from R2.7 billion for
      2005/06 financial year to R3.3 billion for 2006/06. An increase is
      anticipated to R3.8 billion for 2007/08 financial year.

3.5   Programme 5: Land Reform

      The programme takes  responsibility  for  providing  sustainable  land
      redistribution programmes, tenure security for all occupiers  of  land
      in South Africa, public land information, and the management of  state
      land.


      The allocation for this programme has increased from R704 699  million
      for 2005/06 to R907 289 million for 2006/07 financial year.

3.6   Programme 6: Spatial Planning and Information

      The programme provides  for  national  land  use  management,  spatial
      planning and spatial information systems.
      The allocation for this programme has increased from R19  222  million
      for 2005/06 to R28 215 million for 2006/07 financial year.

3.7   Programme 7: Auxilliary and associated services

      This programme takes responsibility for augmenting the registration of
      deeds trading account and for acquiring vehicles for departmental use
      and departmental capital works, and provides for a contribution to the
      Public Sector Education and Training Authority.


      The allocation for this programme has increased from R10 219 for
      2005/06 to R12 052 million for 2006/07 financial year.


      The overall total allocation to the Department for 2006/07 is R4.8
      billion as compared to R3.8 billion allocated for 2005/06 financial
      year. It is anticipated to increase to R5.6 billion for 2007/08 and to
      R5.9 billion for 2008/09.


4.    Budget of Khula Credit Facility for 2006/07
      Khula Land  Reform  Empowerment  Facility  is  a  Section  21  company
      established by Khula Enterprise Finance Limited in 2003.  Its  mandate
      given by the Department of Land Affairs is to advance  money  received
      from donors for the establishment of commercially viable  projects  on
      redistributed land.

      The project submissions currently in progress are Smile Farmers Group
      Trust, Doringrug Development Trust, Endulini Development Trust,
      Welgelegen Dairy Trust.
      Its budget income for year 2005 was approximately R20 million, in 2006
      is R7.7 million compared to R7.8 million for 2007.

      In terms of its business plan, the company is gradually moving away
      from concentrating on specific provinces when responding to the
      Committee’s concerns such as inequitable provincial spread, portfolio
      mix and capacity building.


   5. Budget of Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for 2006/07


      This Commission was established in terms of the Restitution Act, 1994
      (Act No. 22 of 1994). Its mandate is to provide equitable redress to
      victims of racial land dispossession. It provides access to rights in
      land, including land ownership and sustainable development; and to
      foster national reconciliation and stability. It also improves
      household welfare, underpinning economic growth, and contributing to
      poverty alleviation.


      In the 2005 State of the Nation Address, the President extended the
      settlement of restitution by three years until 2008. Much more, the
      directive for government was to allocate additional resources over the
      next three years to cover outstanding claims in the land restitution
      programme. The Minister of Finance announced in the subsequent
      parliamentary speech a R6 billion increase to the restitution budget
      for the next three years.


      The budget of the Commission has been increased from R2.7  billion  in
      2005/06 to R3.1 billion in  2006/07  financial  years.  For  the  MTEF
      period the budget will amount to R9.7 billion. This  demonstrates  the
      political will to support Land Reform in South Africa.


   6. Budget of KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board for 2006/07

      The Ingonyama Trust was established in terms of the KwaZulu-Natal
      Ingonyama Trust Act, 1994 (Act No. 3 of 1994). The Act was amended by
      the National Act of 1997 (Act No. 9 of 1997). The KwaZulu-Natal
      Ingonyama Trust Amendment Act provided for the establishment of the
      Ingonyama Trust Board.


       Its core business is to manage its 2,7 million hectares of land
      throughout KwaZulu-Natal, for the material benefit and social
      wellbeing of individual tribe members.


      Ingonyama Trust Board fund income comprises income earned from leases,
      royalties and investments.The budgeted amount for 2006/07 is R14 151
      077 million, which makes up 86.2% of the total income budget.


      In addition to this amount, R2 242 000 million is received from the
      Department of Land Affairs as a transfer payment which makes up the
      remaining 13.80% of the total income budget.


      In terms of the disbursement policy of the Board, 90%  of  the  income
      earned from trading activities is to be utilised for  the  benefit  of
      the communities, and 10% of the income earned is to  be  retained  for
      Board expenses. The total budget amounting to R16.3 million is a  6.2%
      increase on the budget prepared for 2005/06.

7.    Committee observations on budgets for 2006/07

7.1   Department of Land Affairs
      The Committee considered and welcomed the budget and encouraged the
      Department of Land Affairs to consider the following issues:

7.1.1 Land Redistribution for Agricultural Development (LRAD) is a joint
      venture between the Department of Land Affairs and Department of
      Agriculture, yet the difficulty is who has the final responsibility of
      ensuring that provincial departments spend allocated money
      effectively;

7.1.2 To what extent is the inter-departmental integration being enhanced;

7.1.3 In the past years, it was indicated to the Committee that there were
      Sections of the Department still facing transformation issues due to
      lack of scarce skills, like land surveying - a skill currently
      available to whites. It is still not clear how the Department is
      planning to address this challenge;

7.1.4 For the Government to allocate resources efficiently, it is important
     for the Committee to ascertain and understand the impact of land reform
     programmes on the lives of the poor. However, the Committee still finds
     it difficult to understand how strong the monitoring and evaluation
     capacity of the Department is to carry out this work;

7.1.5 The level of co-operation between the Department of Land Affairs and
     the Department of Public Works on issues of State Land Disposal;

7.1.6 A strategy must be developed to ensure that land reform beneficiaries
     have direct access to support from Comprehensive Agricultural Support
     Programme (CASP) and Micro-Agricultural Financial Institutions of South
     Africa (MAFISA). It is encouraged that the awareness of the
     availability of such support must be upgraded;

7.1.7 Specific services and support by the Spatial Planning and Information
     programme to the land redistribution programme;

7.1.8 There is an estimation that the restitution programme may spend only
     R1.9 billion of the R2.7 billion allocated budget by the end of the
     financial yea. It is not clear to Committee whether the estimation is
     justified; and

7.1.9 The Committee notes there is grey area between the White Paper on
     Land Reform and the Constitution of the Republic. The Committee seeks
     clarity on this area.

     The Committee further agreed that with effect from the 1st April 2006,
     the Department will report on a quarterly basis to Parliament through
     interaction with the Committee on all issues relating to land affairs.

7.2   Khula Credit Facility

      The committee accepted the budget and the business plan for the
     ensuing financial year,
      requested Khula Credit Facility to consider the following issues:

7.2.1 It is not clear what mechanism is used to determine where funds
     should be allocated;

7.2.2 The relationship between Khula Credit Facility and the Land Bank is
     not clear yet - their goals seem to be the same;

7.2.3 The relationship of Khula and the community co-operatives needs to
     clearly defined; and

   4. The spread allocation of money still favours the Western Cape
      province.

7.3   Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for 2006/07

      The Committee  considered  the  budget  and  the  strategic  plan  for
      2006/07, and expressed the following concerns:


   1. The  Commission  reported  that  only  2  922  urban  claims  remained
      unsettled by December 2005. In view of the  challenges  posed  by  the
      rural settlement of community claims, the Committee is not sure  about
      the practical strategy of the Commission in place to ensure  that  the
      target of  settling  all  urban  claims  before  the  end  of  2006/07
      financial year is achieved;

   2. Government has often been accused for restoring commercial viable land
      to beneficiaries without any adequate support, the Committee is  still
      very  much  interested  to  see  a  tangible  post-settlement  support
      strategy;

   3. Depending on the nature of the settlement,  restitution  beneficiaries
      are  entitled  to  the  Settlement  Discretionary  Grant  (R3000   per
      household) and restitution Discretionary Grant (R1 140 per household).
      The concern is for how long has the amount of  these  grants  remained
      the same and when the Commission intends to review these figures?

   4. The President has  indicated  that  the  Government  will  review  the
      willing-seller, willing-buyer approach. In the context of restitution,
      the Committee is interested to know in  what  ways  will  that  review
      affect  the  strategic  plan  of  the   Commission,   especially   its
      medium–term targets;

   5. Whether the budget of the Commission addresses adequately the  funding
      for anticipated expropriation;

   6. Time and financial constraints that  expropriation  may  have  on  the
      settlement of the remaining claims; and

   7. The capacity  of  the  Commission  to  access  and  evaluate  business
      proposals developed by strategic partners for beneficiaries need to be
      closely monitored.

 3.  KwaZulu-Natal Ingonyama Trust Board


      The Committee accepted the budget and the business plan for 2006/07 of
      the Ingonyama Trust Board, and raised the following concerns:

   1. The benefits from the privatisation of forests and the impact of  that
      privatisation to communities;

   2. There is a need to  determine  who  benefits  most  in  terms  of  the
      employment opportunities when deals  are  entered  into  with  private
      companies;

   3. The Board must quantify the challenges posed by the implementation  of
      the Communal Land Rights Act  and  the  extent  to  which  traditional
      authorities benefit from the income grant should also be quantified.

8.        Committee recommendations

           The Committee recommended the following:

8.1   To revisit and reconsider the  issue  of  forestry  privatisation  and
     assess the
     impact thereof  in  relation  to  employment  opportunities  and  other
     benefits including ownership; and


8.2   To look whether the land in question (land being privatised) does  not
     fall under claimed land and how would this relate to the Communal  Land
     Rights Act, and the involvement of  the  traditional  authorities;  and
     that there must be a speedy implementation of the Communal Land  Rights
     Act, with  all  stakeholders  participating  for  the  benefit  of  the
     communities as well as the business entities.

9.    Conclusion

     For  government  to  achieve  the  30%  distribution  of  land  to  the
     previously disadvantaged people by 2014, the pace of land  reform  must
     be  accelerated.   So  far,  the  restitution  programme  is  the  only
     programme that shows a significant increase in pace, as more  resources
     are made available.


     For the  financial  year  ending  31  March  2007,  the  Commission  on
     Restitution of Land Rights (CRLR) target to settle a  total  of  8  651
     claims.  While the process settlement of  rural  claims  presented  the
     Commission with various problems, the major challenge will be providing
     adequate support to land restored to restitution beneficiaries.


     The target of the Commission is to ensure that all developmental  plans
     are in place within six months of approval of claim by the Minister, of
     which the Commission may not have the capacity to achieve this target.


     The target of the Department is to dispose of 41 143 ha of  State  land
     to the land reform programme before the end of the financial. In total,
     the land reform programme aims to make   224 777 hectares available for
     redistribution.

     The review of the ‘willing-seller,  willing-buyer’  principle  and  the
     review of land acquisition models will have a significant impact on the
     availability of land for redistribution, which will in turn affect  the
     land reform budget.

     The Committee extends special appreciation to the  Director-General  of
     the
     Department, programme managers within the Department, and all heads  of
     associated entities for making time to appear before the Committee.




-----------------------
                                   18,317

                                    7,611

                                   10,706

                                    TOTAL

                                     457

                                     94

                                     363

                                  Sandwich
                               (Long Vacation)

                                    5,398

                                    3,058

                                    2,340

                             Distance Education

                                   12,462

                                    4,459

                                    8,003

                                  Full Time

                                    Total

                                   Female

                                    Male

                                  Category

                                     889

                                     201

                                     688

                            Technology Education

                                     810

                                     269

                                     541

                                Creative Arts

                                    12462

                                    4459

                                    8003

                                    Total

                                    2517

                                    1103

                                    1414

                             Educational Studies

                                    2420

                                     853

                                    1567

                                   Science

                                    1999

                                     805

                                    1194

                                  Languages

                                   ?@W^Ïü

