---
title: 'National Assembly - 20 June 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2006-06-20
---

TUESDAY, 20 JUNE 2006
                                    ____




                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

House Chairperson Mr G Q M Doidge took the Chair and requested members to
observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                      PRESIDENT THABO MBEKI’S BIRTHDAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs R A NDZANGA: Chair, I hereby move without notice:

  That the House –


  (1) notes that on Sunday, 18 June 2006, President Thabo  Mbeki  celebrated
       his birthday;


  (2) further notes the commendable manner in which the President carries
       out his duties on behalf of our country and people, diligently
       contributing in the struggle to create a better life for all; and


  (3) wishes the President of the Republic a happy belated birthday and many
       more enjoyable moments now and in the future.

[Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, certainly the DA associates itself with the
motion without notice, but we do have a convention amongst the Whips that
it is the Chief Whip or the Deputy Chief Whip who will in fact propose
those motions on behalf of his or her party. I just want to draw that to
the attention of the Whips, and suggest that they get their act together
again.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): If that matter can be addressed by
the Whips.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, can I respond, please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Can I deal with this point first,
Chief Whip?

I heard you say, Mr Ellis, that there is no objection to the motion.

Agreed to.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please respond, Chief Whip.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, the tradition of this
organisation called the ANC respects the role of veterans. The birthday of
such an important person befits somebody of the stature of Ma Ndzanga.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: May I respond to that, please, Mr Chairman? Mr Chairman, we
discuss this kind of thing at the Chief Whips’ Forum and other bodies so
often. It is a question of communication. I would really say to the ANC if
they had communicated that to us, we probably wouldn’t have an objection,
but it is always done on their terms and that is the problem.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): I have already said that the
matter will be raised among yourselves in the Chief Whips’ Forum and be
addressed.

Let us go on to the next motion without notice.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Perhaps before that, let us
acknowledge the omission of the consultation part. We readily admit to
that.




                              WORLD REFUGEE DAY


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes that today, 20 June, marks World Refugee Day;


   (2)      further notes that in celebrating this day, the peoples of the
        world commit themselves to redoubling their efforts to foster peace
        and friendship amongst all humanity;


   (3)      realises that more still needs to be done to ensure conditions
        of peace and stability in all countries;


   (4)      recalls that this year also marks the 55th anniversary of the
        adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of the Convention
        relating to the Status of Refugees in 1951, and that this convention
        sets the parameters on how refugees must be treated and how they
        should relate to their hosts;


   (5)      commends our government, security forces, the African Union and
        other United Nations agencies on their efforts to secure peace on
        the continent; and


   (6)      calls on all South Africans to respect human rights and treat
        refugees with care and compassion.

Agreed to.


                            WORLD BLOOD DONOR DAY


                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr A N LUTHULI (ANC): Chairperson, 14 June has been designated World Blood
Donor Day. The ANC joins the international community in observing World
Blood Donor Day. This day aims to mobilise healthy individuals to become
regular, voluntary, unpaid blood donors, and calls for commitment from the
existing voluntary donors to continue to donate regularly to enable the
blood transfusion services and partner organisations to provide the highest
standards of care at every stage of the transfusion process.

Every pint of blood an individual person donates saves the life of a person
involved in a car accident, or a person who has undergone surgery.

We congratulate the SA Blood Transfusion Service on its progress with
transformation. The first matter in this regard is the appointment of the
first woman CEO, Dr Loyiso Mpuntsha. The second is the abolition of racial
classification of blood donors and products.

The ANC calls on all our people to join hands in the effort to save lives
by donating blood. Thank you. [Applause.]


       CONFLICT IN SOMALIA AND SOUTH AFRICA’S ROLE IN TROOP DEPLOYMENT


                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Chairman, the DA is deeply concerned by
reports, which have appeared very recently, of a catastrophic humanitarian
situation developing in Somalia. There is every indication that a major
confrontation is brewing between the militia run by the so-called Islamic
courts and troops loyal to the transitional government, and there are
prospects of an invasion by neighbouring Ethiopia.

While the DA welcomes the decision to lay the groundwork for a possible
deployment of peacekeeping troops or missions to Somalia, two critical
issues need to be resolved. Firstly, which side of the conflict has the
legitimate right to support from outside forces? Secondly, given the
apparent deep mistrust that the majority of Somalis have of foreigners, it
still needs to be determined whether a foreign force would serve to
heighten or lessen the conflict.

The South African government should therefore immediately announce what
role, if any, we as a country are to play in the proposed troop deployment,
and how advanced the plans are to deploy an African Union peacekeeping
mission.

I understand that this was discussed by the AU yesterday, and it would be
helpful if Parliament was enlightened by the government as to the
resolutions taken by the AU in this regard. Thank you. [Applause.]


            SOUTH AFRICA’S ECONOMIC GROWTH AND UNEMPLOYMENT RATES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Prince N E ZULU (IFP): Hon Chairperson, those engaged in the study of
economics have the challenge of advising South Africa why its economic
growth does not generate enough jobs in the market.

All manner of tricks have been tried, and are being tried with even more
vigour, but sufficient jobs do not result from such trials. The country has
a growth rate of between 4% and 5% currently, and the rate of unemployment
remains unchanged, or grows even bigger in some provinces. Indeed, it is a
challenge.

We are left to speculate on many things. Some people speculate that
economic growth is not taking place across all sectors, and therefore some
sectors carry the burden of providing jobs in nonperforming sectors.
Performing sectors are indeed job creators, no matter how small they are in
numbers, but the types of jobs they create are those that attract the use
of technology, which does not manifest itself in massive employment.
Sometimes such jobs require highly skilled employees to the extent that
foreign skills become necessary, and the rate of unemployment remains
static.

Many challenges can be further advanced in terms of why the country’s
economic growth does not satisfy the job market. It is said that in the
past 20 years there has been low or no infrastructure investment in the
country. If one casts one’s mind back 20 years, a bleak picture of
infrastructure investment reveals itself.

We ask why it is so. We ask if South Africa needs to be more visible and
have programmes that are more transparent so that those who are passionate
about South Africa’s economic growth translating into jobs and employment
may also put their shoulders to the wheel.

We appreciate the efforts of all stakeholders on the economic front ...
[Time expired.]

        MTN AND CELL C IMPROVE CELLULAR COMMUNICATION IN EASTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mnu N B FIHLA (ANC): Mhlalingaphambili, kwinkqubo yeembizo karhulumente
oxhuzula imikhala, okhokelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, abantu kwiphondo
leMpuma Koloni bathe kutsha nje babika, phakathi kwezikhalazo zabo, ingxaki
yokungakwazi ukusebenzisa oonomyayi babo kwiindawo abahlala kuzo.

Ngenxa yoko urhulumente uthe wathetha-thethana neenkampani ezithengisa
oonomyayi ukuzikhuthaza ukuba zizame ukuphucula unxibelelwano ngoonomyayi
kule ndawo. Sithetha nje ngoku iinkampani i-MTN no-Cell C zibhinqele
phezulu, izandla zinodaka, ziphucula unxibelelwano ngoonomyayi kulo
mmandla.

Umbutho wesizwe uchulumancile yintsebenziswano ethe yaboniswa zezi nkampani
ukusabela ikhwelo labantu bakuthi, kwaye sikhuthaza nezinye iinkampani
ukuba zizeke mzekweni. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr N B FIHLA (ANC): Chairperson, during the public hearings of the ANC-led
government recently, people in the Eastern Cape complained, among other
things, about the inability to use cellphones in their areas.

In order to overcome this problem, the government negotiated with certain
cellphone companies to improve their network coverage in these areas.
Consequently MTN and Cell C are now actively trying to improve the
reception in those areas.
The ANC is happy about the co-operation shown by these companies in
responding to our people’s call and we encourage other companies to follow
suit. Thank you. [Applause.]]


                    ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLIGHT OF REFUGEES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S N SWART (ACDP): Chairperson, the ACDP acknowledges the plight of
refugees globally on World Refugee Day. For many South Africans a refugee
and an illegal immigrant are one and the same. Refugees, like many
foreigners, specifically from other African countries, are often subjected
to the xenophobia that exists in our country. The ACDP is deeply disturbed
by this, considering the fact that so many other African countries opened
their doors to South Africans who fled their homes during the apartheid
era.

The ACDP does not support any illegal entry into South Africa. We do,
however, condemn in the strongest possible terms the ill treatment of
refugees and asylum seekers who have been granted this status legally by
the South African government.

Last year, when the ACDP asked the Minister of Social Development whether
there was a refugee relief fund available to assist refugees, we were
informed that there was in fact such a fund, but that it was not active
because the process of appointing the board had taken too long owing to the
complexity and dynamics involved around issues of gender and stakeholder
representation, and other management issues.

The ACDP asks: Is it humane to allow those who are in many cases escaping a
terrible fate by coming to South Africa to be dealt another blow owing to
issues such as representation? The ACDP calls on the Minister of Social
Development to furnish us with further details as to whether the refugee
relief fund is fully operational.

Furthermore, we call on government to do all that is possible to assist
with the plight of those who are destitute owing to war and other factors
in Africa. [Time expired.]


     PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO BE MADE ACCESSIBLE TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V C GORE (ID): Hon Chair, in a major step forward for mobility-impaired
people and wheelchair users in South Africa the Equality Court in Port
Elizabeth has recently ruled that the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development and the Minister of Public Works have unfairly
discriminated against people with disabilities with regard to providing
access to buildings.

In the judgment, the magistrate ordered that the building concerned become
accessible within a specified time period, and that the national police
commissioner and the area commissioner apologise in writing for their
attitude towards people with disabilities.

In a reply to a question posed by the ID in this House on Wednesday, 31
August 2005, the Minister of Safety and Security declared that the building
concerned was accessible to people with disabilities. The questions that
now need to be asked are whether the Minister deliberately misled this
House or was misinformed by his officials, and how many other police
stations that are supposedly accessible to people with disabilities are in
fact not?

This unfortunate situation has highlighted the fact that, in particular,
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, the Minister of
Public Works and the Minister of Safety and Security are not doing enough
with regard to disability discrimination. The ID therefore calls upon these
Ministers and the government to seriously reconsider their approach towards
people with disabilities and in future to ensure that all public buildings,
whether rented or owned, are fully accessible to people with disabilities.
I thank you.
                      POOR SERVICE AT MAMELODI HOSPITAL

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr M M S LEKGORO (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC’s parliamentary constituency
office in Mamelodi has in the past few months taken steps to probe
complaints by members of the community about the poor quality service
provided at the Mamelodi hospital.

The parliamentary constituency office found that the service is indeed not
satisfactory in a number of areas, such as attending to patients that need
emergency treatment, especially during the night. Old age pensioners and
other persons of an advanced age have reported that there are times when
they wait in queues for long hours to have a simple checkup for blood
pressure and to get new prescriptions.

There are reports of repeated occurrences of shortages of medication that
is prescribed by doctors in the same hospital. It is also apparent that the
payment policy of the hospital is implemented insensitively to the
indigent.

We call on the MEC for health in the province and the Mamelodi day hospital
administration to pay urgent attention to this situation. Our criticism of
the hospital does not suggest that everything is lost; there are many areas
in which the hospital provides excellent service.

We also wish to take this opportunity to commend the national and
provincial health departments for providing resources for the expansion of
the hospital in question. We believe that that will go a long way towards
dealing with the health challenges in the community. Thank you. [Applause.]


                 BAD CONDITION OF PUBLIC ROADS IN NORTH WEST


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr I S MFUNDISI (UCDP): Chairperson, much has been said and written about
the poor condition of roads in the country, but the greatest culprit in
this respect is none other than the North West province.

The condition of the N12, especially between Wolmaransstad and Christiana,
leaves much to be desired, to say the least. The Jekyll and Hyde antics of
the national Department of Transport and of the provincial department do
not help the public image of the government at all. The latter keeps saying
that the former is responsible for the upkeep of the roads, and vice versa.

The UCDP maintains that the legitimate objective of a government is to do
for a community of people whatever they need done, but cannot do at all in
their separate and individual capacities. Roads fall into this category. A
community of people cannot be left to maintain a public road.

The number of deaths that have occurred on the N12 in the recent past,
particularly between Wolmaransstad and Bloemhof, is a real cause for
concern. It is simply a matter of time before litigation is brought against
government.

We are aware of claims submitted to the North West provincial department of
transport because of damaged tyres and shock absorbers. The complete
disregard of the Batho Pele call to the Public Service cannot be
countenanced any further. The public needs good roads to ensure that the
economy of the country flourishes.

The UCDP calls on the ANC-led government, in both instances, to live up to
their contract with the people and make them good roads and a good life, if
they are unable to make them better. I thank you. [Applause.]


      PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL TO REMOVE FLOOR-CROSSING FROM STATUTE BOOK


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T D LEE (DA): Chairperson, at the weekend four major opposition parties
represented in this House, the DA, the IFP, the ACDP and the FF Plus,
launched a campaign to end floor-crossing. The campaign was launched
because, firstly, we recognise that floor-crossing in its current form
betrays the wishes of the electorate and lends itself to bribery and
corruption. Secondly, we know that two thirds of South Africans are opposed
to floor-crossing; and, thirdly, we would be failing in our duty as public
representatives if we ignored the wishes of the electorate.

We therefore urge every member of this House to support the Private
Member’s Bill that seeks to remove floor-crossing legislation from the
Statute Book. Let us show South Africa that narrow party-political
interests will never supersede the public interest in our country. I thank
you.


                       PROGRESS ON 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M DIKGACWI (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC is heartened by the confidence
Fifa and the broad international football community have displayed towards
our country and people. After meeting with the 2010 Local Organising
Committee, the Fifa president is quoted as having said that the event to be
hosted by our country in four years’ time will generate more money than the
German World Cup.

He added that he was pleasantly surprised by the amount of work already
done by the LOC. This confirms the information shared with the House by the
Minister of Sport and Recreation that South Africa has already met most of
the deadlines agreed to with Fifa eight months ahead of time.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Local Organising Committee, Danny
Jordaan, confirmed that the funding target of R13 billion for the 2010
World Cup, the biggest in Fifa’s history, had already been reached. Major
sponsors of the event have already deposited their millions into the Fifa
bank account to illustrate their confidence in our ability to organise the
event. The event is projected to create approximately 120 000 temporary and
permanent jobs.

The ANC calls on all patriots to roll up their sleeves and intensify their
efforts to make the coming event a memorable one. Thank you. [Applause.]

    JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE AND EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T E VEZI (IFP): Chair, the Joint Budget Committee has a complex and
broad mandate given to it by resolution of Parliament in 2004. The
committee is, among other things, mandated to exercise effective oversight
over state spending on the consolidated budget, aligning spending outcomes
with government priorities and ensuring that there is value-for-money
spending by all government departments.

The IFP welcomes the fact that the committee last year held hearings on
provincial spending on health, housing and education. We all know that the
provinces’ performance in service delivery is determined, to a large
extent, by their capacity to spend budget allocations. It is therefore
important that the budget committee continues to monitor and oversee
provincial spending in conjunction with the Select Committee on Finance in
the NCOP.

The IFP, however, is very concerned that some of the challenges facing the
committee have not been addressed effectively. Attendance at the meetings
of the committee is poor, and this seems not to be treated with the
seriousness it deserves. This should be rectified immediately.

We support the move for more interaction with the Portfolio Committee on
Finance and the Select Committee on Finance as there is no doubt that this
will broaden the knowledge base of members to effectively oversee
government spending. I thank you.

                 LEARNERSHIP PROGRAMMES IN THE WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J D ARENDSE (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC-led government is committed to
programmes to train young people through learnerships so that they can gain
skills and work experience in order for them to access jobs.

The recent initiative taken by the Western Cape government to train 1 000
young people in various skills is one such programme. The Western Cape
government has an amount of R35 million in learnership programmes. The
programme was launched on the eve of the 30th anniversary of the 1976
student uprising and in Youth Month. The programme is not only aimed at
providing skills but also promises participants sustainable employment
after 18 months of intensive training.

The ANC urges all South Africans to embark on similar programmes to give
the youth opportunities to make a contribution to our society. I thank you.
[Applause.]

     MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY’S COMMENTS ON CRIME IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)




Mnr R J KING (DA): Agb Voorsitter, die agb Minister van Veiligheid en
Sekuriteit begin al meer terugkrabbel na sy skokkende ontkenning van die
misdaadsituasie in Suid-Afrika. Na sy hopelose onvanpaste optrede in
reaksie op toesprake in sy begrotingspos hier, het hy die volgende dag,
steeds betower deur ondeurdagte toejuiging uit eie geledere, homself
herhaal in die Nasionale Raad van Provinsies.


Dit was al genoeg bewys dat ons agb Minister hom nie maar net per ongeluk
verspreek het en dalk polities ’n ligte “mistykie” gemaak het nie, maar dat
inderdaad elke woord wat Minister Charles Nqakula op 1 Junie in die hierdie
Raad geuiter het in werklikheid uit sy hart gekom het en uit ware
oortuigings spreek.

Om maar net aan die konsekwensies hiervan te dink laat elke wetsgehoorsame
mens sidder. Ek wil vir die agb Minister sê om nou in verbystering oor die
vloedgolf afgryse en kritiek wat hy ontketen het terug te deins en met flou
grappies oor “just a throwaway remark” salf te probeer smeer, sal geen mens
oortuig nie.

U sal iets dramaties moet doen, Minister, soos ek reeds in die
begrotingspos vir u gesê het. Geen woord wat u verder uiter sal u politieke
bas red of u beeld en politieke geloofwaardigheid kan herstel nie. Neem
asseblief dit wat u sien en hoor en waarneem ernstig op. Aanvaar dat Suid-
Afrika een van die mees gewelddadige lande ter wêreld is en dat misdaad
buite beheer is, en tree dienooreenkomstig op. Dit is die minste wat wat
enige selfrespekterende land en sy mense met reg van sy Minister van
Veiligheid en Sekuriteit kan verwag. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
member’s statement follows.)

[Mr R J KING (DA): Hon Chairperson, the hon Minister of Safety and Security
is increasingly backtracking following his shocking denial of the crime
situation in South Africa. After his highly inappropriate behaviour in
reaction to speeches during his Budget Vote here, and still mesmerised by
ill-considered cheering within his own ranks, he reiterated his statement
in the National Council of Provinces the following day.

That was sufficient proof that our hon Minister suffered no accidental slip
of the tongue and did not perhaps make a slight political error, but that
every word Minister Charles Nqakula uttered in this House on 1 June did in
fact come from his heart and that it indicated true conviction.

To simply consider the consequences hereof makes every law-abiding person
shudder. I want to tell the hon Minister that to shy away in bewilderment
from the wave of horror and criticism he caused and to try and be placating
with lame jokes about “just a throwaway remark” will not convince anyone.

You will have to do something dramatic, Minister, as I have already said to
you during the Budget Vote. No word you try to utter henceforth will save
your political skin or restore your image or political credibility. Please
take everything you see and hear and observe seriously. Accept that South
Africa is one of the most violent countries in the world and that crime is
out of control, and act accordingly. That is the least any self-respecting
country and its people can rightly expect of their Minister of Safety and
Security. I thank you.]
               NGUNI CATTLE BREEDING PROJECT IN NORTHERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs D G NHLENGETHWA (ANC): Chairperson, the ANC welcomes the allocation of
R4 million by the Industrial Development Corporation for the establishment
of the Nguni cattle breeding project in the Northern Cape.

The IDC has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Northern Cape
department of agriculture and the University of the Free State to foster co-
operation between the different stakeholders to ensure the success and
sustainability of the project. As part of the project, a number of
communities in the province will receive a consignment of 10 heifers and
two bulls to make up the new class of the Nguni herd over a period of five
years.

The MEC for agriculture and land reform in the Northern Cape, Comrade Tina
Joemat-Pettersson, stated that the introduction of the Nguni herds
presented the province with new economic opportunities in a sought-after
market with an allied clientele.

The ANC believes that this project will stimulate economic growth in the
area and will contribute significantly to creating jobs and reducing
poverty. I thank you.


                POVERTY ALLEVIATION PROJECT OUTSIDE MAFIKENG


                            (Member’s Statement)

Mme M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): Re le Mokgatlo wa ANC, re itumelela kabelo ya
R22 million go tsweletsa lenaneo la ditirelo tsa setšhaba kwa Modimola
gaufi le Mafikeng, kwa porofenseng ya Bokone Bophirima. ANC e ne ya re ka
ngwaga wa 2002, fa e ne e keteka dingwaga di le 90, ya tshepisa gore mo
dingwageng di le 10 tse di latelang, re lebile ngwagakgolo wa go nna teng
ga lekgotla la rona, re tla tsepamisa matlho le go oketsa maiteko mo go
fokotseng lehuma le tlala.

Kgosi Ronny Seane Tawana wa Modimola o rile fa a tshwaela a re, lenaneo le
le fokoditse tlala mo motseng wa rona mme le re tliseditse tshepo le
botshelo jo bošwa mo Modimola. Se setla ka go tlholwa ga ditiro di le 419
mmogo le katiso ya morafe, go fa batho kitso le bokgoni tseo di neng di se
teng. Seno se tlaa ba thusa go bona ditiro mo isagong.

Re le ANC, re sa boeletsa maikano a rona a go dira le setšhaba sa etsho, go
tiisa dikgolagano gareng ga Maaforika Borwa le go netefatsa gore batho ba
tshwaragane le puso mo go tliseng botshelo jo bo botoka go botlhe. Ke a
leboga. [Legofi.] (Translation of Setswana member’s statement follows.)

[Ms M J J MATSOMELA (ANC): As the ANC, we appreciate the R22 million fund
allocated to complete the public service programmes in Modimola near
Mafikeng in the North West province. In 2002 when the ANC was celebrating
its 90th anniversary, it promised that in the next 10 years it would focus
on reducing poverty and hunger.

In his comment, Chief Ronny Seane Tawana of Modimola commended the
programme for reducing hunger and bringing hope and a better life for all
in our village. This was as a result of 419 jobs created together with
training, which gave people knowledge and skills that are so much needed.
This will help them to get employment in the near future.

As the ANC, we are recommitting ourselves to serve our people, to
strengthen unity among South Africans and to ensure that they work together
with government to ensure a better life for all. Thank you. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): That was the last statement we
have time for this afternoon.

                         UNPARLIAMENTARY IMPLICATION

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon members! Mr Gore in his
statement asked the question whether the Minister deliberately misled the
House. The implication that the Minister deliberately misled the House is
not acceptable as it reflects on the integrity of a member of this House. A
word or expression is equally unparliamentary when it is put in the form of
a question. I therefore request Mr Gore to withdraw the implication that he
made that the Minister deliberately misled the House.

Mr V C GORE: Hon Chair, I withdraw the comment.

                                JOB CREATION
                            RESURFACING OF ROADS
                    REPORT OF THE JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chair, I would like to respond to three of the
statements, the first being by the hon Prince Zulu, the second by the
member from the UCDP, and the third by the hon Vezi. I’m sorry, but I
didn’t see who it was from the UCDP as I was writing, so please assist me
as we proceed.

Prince Zulu raised the question relating to job creation in the economy.
Firstly, it is very important that we, in the House, never propagate
untruths about the economy, because the economy in the year to September
created just over 630 000 new jobs. That growth is larger than the growth
of the population. It is, in fact, slightly larger than economic growth as
well. It is not that the economy is not creating jobs; it cannot be that
there is jobless growth in the economy. What is an issue is that you are
dealing with a huge backlog coming over a very long period.

The other point that the hon Vezi raised is that not all sectors will
respond equally, and I think that that is correct. But we must understand
that as jobs move from one sector to the other - clothing and textile jobs
are increasingly moving to countries like China and that is a global
phenomenon - we need to be there and ready, ensuring that we can create
jobs in other sectors.

A big, big problem in our economy is that the skills base coming through
the schooling system, after years of neglect, does not allow for rapid
absorption into the economy and that is the big, big problem that confronts
us. That is why Asgisa has such a strong focus on Jipsa to ensure that we
can recruit the skills, but, more importantly, that we can grow our own
skills.

In respect of the second issue, with regard to the road between
Wolmaransstad and Bloemhof, the N12, one of the problems is that road
reconstruction is sometimes held up by all manner of processes. In the
North West of the country generally - and, I think, it would cover that
area, but it would also cover areas even towards Upington - there were very
heavy rains this year and the number of potholes has actually increased
quite tremendously.

I am advised by the National Roads Agency that the battle that confronts
them is whether it’s worth just resurfacing the road or whether the road
has to be rebuilt, and rebuilding roads requires that they must go out to
tender for design and then for construction. So sometimes these processes
are held up unnecessarily. We are either going to have those kinds of
processes, for which we can then properly account for public finances, or
we are going to run ourselves into difficulties. It is a timing issue with
some of these things. I think that, very importantly, in that part of the
world, the very heavy rains in March and April of this year have caused
untold havoc to the road infrastructure.

I also appreciate the fact that the hon Vezi responded to the report of the
Joint Budget Committee. Of course I am saddened by his comments about the
poor attendance of members at the Joint Budget Committee, and let me
explain why. If you look at the report of the Joint Budget Committee and
look in particular at the approach of the Select Committee on Finance, led
by the hon Ralane, what is clear is that Parliament is exercising its
oversight role. It says:

  We have received your quarterly reports in terms of section 32 of the
  PFMA. In the case of the most recent report of the Joint Budget Committee,
  it is the third and fourth quarterly reports.
It goes on to say:

  We are unhappy about the following issues. Kindly explain.

That is Parliament at its very best, exercising its oversight
responsibility. And when members of Parliament are then less than diligent
in the exercise of their responsibilities, I think it leaves much to be
desired. That is something that we clearly must address, because the
legislation gives the power to Parliament, constructs the bridge for
accountability and, if it’s not being used, we in the executive can stick
our hands in our pockets, whistle and walk away. We plead with Parliament
then in the same spirit as the hon Vezi does: use the power that the
legislation gives you. Thank you, Chair. [Applause.]


       CONFLICT IN SOMALIA AND SOUTH AFRICA’S ROLE IN TROOP DEPLOYMENT


                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Chairperson, with regard to the matter of Somalia,
I think it is important that we must just remember the historical context
in that this is one of the so-called failed states that resulted during the
closing years of the Cold War.

Following that, the East African region of nations invited a number of the
various formations that were at war with each other inside Somalia to
engage in negotiations so that they could build the foundations to
reincorporate and unite the people. That action was guided by the fact that
the OAU and the African Union have persisted with the approach that
colonial boundaries should be maintained because if one does not stick to
them, we could unleash incredible conflicts everywhere on the continent. So
the approach of the African Union continues to be informed by the idea that
there is one Somalia.

Now the majority of those formations that were at war signed an agreement
that produced the transitional government in Kenya, and the AU continues to
support that effort. The return therefore of the transitional government
was and is supported by the AU with the understanding that that
transitional government will continue with the efforts of further uniting
and consolidating the nation of Somalis.

Nevertheless, as in the case of Burundi and in the DRC, there are always
one or two elements that will not be attracted to the idea of peace, and
this is the grouping that has declared a separatist position of Somaliland.
The AU - and we, of course, are bound as part of the AU - supports the idea
of Somalia. Therefore the transitional government is a body that really
deserves our support. The media may well report ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Minister, I can allow you a
few more seconds’ grace.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: Thank you, Chair. This is an education class and I
don’t know what to do with this matter. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! The Minister is going to
continue.

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE: It may well be that reports suggest that there is
an imminent attack and so on. That’s not correct. Ethiopia is cautiously
guarding its eastern borders, but there is no intention indicated anywhere
either in the AU or in the African Commission that Ethiopia is planning to
attack Somalia. In any event, as supporters with us of the transitional
government, they would find themselves attacking a transitional government
that we are supporting in order to put it in place.

With regard to the position of the SA National Defence Force, South Africa,
as part of SADC and as part of the Peace and Security Committee of the AU,
can only intervene in Somalia that is a decision of the African Union. We
have no independent decision in terms of this. We don’t act as an unguided
missile and just decide anyhow that we want to go there or whatever. But,
indeed, if there were a call on the AU, the African Standby Force, the SADC
brigade, would have to be mobilised to support the efforts of the African
Union to keep peace there.

      PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL TO REMOVE FLOOR-CROSSING FROM STATUTE BOOK
     PUBLIC BUILDINGS TO BE MADE ACCESSIBLE TO PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
     MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY’S COMMENTS ON CRIME IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, first of all with the hon Lee,
let me just say this: It’s always best to listen. The President of the
Republic of South Africa, who is also the President of the ANC, said in
this House that Parliament should discuss the issue of floor-crossing.
Parliament should discuss this issue, but if you have made up your mind
that floor-crossing is a betrayal, and then say we must support the Private
Member’s Bill, it means you have stopped listening.

So, what would be the point of the ANC engaging you in a discussion if you
have already made up your mind? [Interjections.] So, don’t make up your
mind now. Enter into a discussion. At the end of the discussion, Parliament
will produce a report. Okay? So, don’t betray your own intelligence.
[Interjections.]

On the second point: Mr Gore, I want to agree with you. We do face – and I
say this as the Minister responsible for people with disabilities - a
serious challenge with respect to ensuring that public buildings are more
accessible. But, you know what? You yourself must become more active in the
disability movement. Don’t just sit here in this House. I don’t see you
when the disability movement is active. This is because we can’t do this on
our own. We’ve got to do this in partnership.

Secondly, become more active in the portfolio committee. That is also set
up to deal with these issues, and I don’t see you there either. So, instead
of coming here and raising issues, also use the processes in Parliament
that you have to ensure that all of us work together to make sure that we
stick to government policies with respect to this particular issue.
[Applause.]

Concerning the last question, the Minister of Safety and Security has said
previously and he said so now in an interview again that when he said what
he said, he was referring to three Members of Parliament. [Interjections.]
Just listen. You know what? I don’t know what your parents do, but how did
you grow up? Were you always so rude to your parents? [Laughter.] So, just
listen, okay?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon, Minister, you are
running out of time.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Well, you must control them too. They must
not be rude if they want us to answer. [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please proceed, hon Minister.
Order!

Mr W J SEREMANE: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. Is it really
parliamentary to be mentioning people’s parents here, when they have
nothing to do with this? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Please take your seat, hon
Seremane. That’s not a point of order. Hon Minister, could you wrap up your
response?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: I don’t know how he thought he came into
this world. Maybe fell he off a tree if he didn’t have parents. [Laughter.]
[Interjections.] Or maybe somebody bit on an apple and you came out.
[Laughter.] So, the point I’m making ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! [Interjections.]
Order! Hon Minister, your time has expired.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: When you joined the DA from the PAC, did
you change politically and ideologically? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Minister, your time has
expired. Order! Just give me a minute, hon Mulder.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: No, the last time I said something to him
he never stopped crying.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Hon Minister Pahad, your
time has expired, Sir. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] Order, please!

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: No, Im going to finish this statement now
and say ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order, hon Minister! [Laughter.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, thank you very much, but hon
Seremane must explain politically and ideologically how he made the jump.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Order! [Interjections.]
Order, hon members! [Interjections.] Hon members, let me appeal to you: I
could not be heard at all over the intercom system. It’s ridiculous. Hon
Mulder?

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I just wanted to say that, with all due
respect, the Minister was going to react on a very serious matter with
regard to the remarks made by the Minister of Safety and Security, and
those backbenchers didn’t help us in getting the answer. We didn’t get it
at all. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, could you please ask the
hon Seremane to contain himself? He is losing control of himself.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! No, no! No response. We are
proceeding with responses from the Ministers. [Interjections.] Order!

                       PROGRESS ON 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP
      PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL TO REMOVE FLOOR-CROSSING FROM STATUTE BOOK

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Chairperson, I wanted to just
reaffirm what was said by the hon member about the need for ourselves,
first and foremost, to do away with the Afropessimism that continues to be
displayed outside these Chambers. We are now told about a spurious event in
term of which Fifa instructed South Africa to change the names of some
stadia.

My last meeting with the president and the secretary of Fifa was on 8 June.
There has been no such indication, and there can be no such indication.
Rather, changes regarding the copyrights of hosting the World Cup were
already agreed to in 2004. These do not include changing the names of the
stadia. So, I only want to urge our compatriots to begin to show self-
confidence, the same confidence that the world is beginning to have in us.

The SABC started broadcasting in Germany last week already, and you should
have seen the applause of the people in the stadium when they heard this
South African accent. They all rose up in excitement that South Africa was
participating already in the World Cup. [Applause.] That is the spirit that
we want to entrench.

I cannot sit down without agreeing with the Minister in the Presidency on
assisting members of this House as they make up their minds on floor-
crossing. I suppose I am entitled to do that, seeing that I was the Chief
Whip here in 1995 when the idea of floor-crossing came up, not from this
side of the House but from a Private Member’s Bill sponsored by Mr Eglin of
that side of the House. So, as we come full circle and as we make up our
minds on how to deal with this circle, I thought we should remind ourselves
of the history of floor-crossing. Thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]


     UNPARLIAMENTARY REMARKS MADE DURING SAFETY AND SECURITY BUDGET VOTE


                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Order! Before we proceed with the
first motion on the Order Paper, I would like to give the following ruling.
During Declarations of Vote on the Safety and Security Budget Vote on 13
June, the hon Adv T M Masutha raised a point of order in regard to remarks
made by the hon Mr P J Groenewald in his contribution on behalf of the FF
Plus. The hon Minister of Education subsequently also rose on a point of
order with regard to Mr Groenewald’s remarks.

I undertook to study the Hansard and return to the House with a ruling.
Having now had the opportunity to study the Hansard, I rule as follows: Mr
Groenewald said in Afrikaans, with reference to the Minister of Safety and
Security:

  You are undermining democracy in South Africa, and if you undermine
  democracy, you are nothing other than a political criminal. Your remarks
  clearly indicate that you are a racist; you are nothing more than that.


Mr Groenewald then repeats his statement by saying:

  I said that the hon Minister is a racist and I stand by that, because it
  is the truth.

As correctly pointed out by the hon Minister of Education, there have been
various rulings in this House on calling another member a racist, and it is
unparliamentary. As early as 1998, the former Speaker ruled that it is
never parliamentary to call another member a racist, regardless of the
context.

Similarly, the rules prohibit members from casting aspersions on the
integrity of, or imputing improper motives to other members. By calling the
hon Minister a political criminal, Mr Groenewald did exactly that. Such
accusations seriously undermine members in the performance of their duties
and they also undermine the image and effectiveness of Parliament itself to
function as the Constitution intends.

I now ask Mr Groenewald to withdraw both offensive remarks, namely that the
Minister is a racist and a political criminal. Hon Groenewald?

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chair, may I request a fair chance to address you on
this issue? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, I am requesting a
withdrawal from you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil vanuit die staanspoor sê ek
respekteer die integriteit van die Parlement, soos wat daar van alle
parlementslede verwag word, by uitstek van ’n Minister, om hierdie Huis se
integriteit te respekteer. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, from the outset I would like to say
that I respect the integrity of Parliament, as it is expected of all
Members of Parliament, particularly of a Minister, to respect the integrity
of this House.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I rise on a point of order,
Chairperson. Please let us not allow an opportunity for a speech. The
member either withdraws or refuses to withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon Groenewald, I am requesting
you to withdraw the offensive remarks.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, soos wat u my aangehaal het dat ek die
waarheid gepraat het, staan ek by die waarheid. Ek kan nie die waarheid
terugtrek nie. Ek weier om dit terug te trek. [Hon Chairperson, as you have
quoted me as I spoke the truth, I stand by the truth. I cannot withdraw the
truth. I refuse to withdraw it.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, if you are refusing to
withdraw the remarks, in terms of Rule 51, I ask you to withdraw from the
House. [Interjections.] Order!

The member thereupon withdrew.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) REGARDING SECOND SMALL BUSINESS TAX AMNESTY AND
                       AMENDMENT OF TAXATION LAWS BILL


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move the motion
printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the debate on the Second
   Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least three working days
   have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled, be suspended for
   the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate on Second Small
   Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws [B 15 – 2006]
   (National Assembly – sec 75) today.

Agreed to.

       SMALL BUSINESS TAX AMNESTY AND AMENDMENT OF TAXATION LAWS BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chairperson, hon members of this House, comrades,
colleagues and my fellow countrymen, the Small Business Tax Amnesty and
Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill is more than just any Bill that we have
brought before this House. It is a Bill that deepens our democracy, because
it deals directly with the democratisation of the tax regime.

Further than that, it also deals with the redistribution of the gains that
we have made, because it is only through a fair, a well- balanced and an
equitable taxation system that we are able to gain and increase our
revenues and, in that manner, contribute towards the development and growth
of our economy.

Small businesses play a key role in stimulating economic activity, job
creation and poverty alleviation; indeed, the very general principles of
living standards are improved. So many of our businesses have been
marginalised historically, and so many of them excluded from the economic
mainstream. When we look around at small houses, at shacks on the streets
and on the side of the road, we see so many small enterprises operating.

This Bill offers people that opportunity, that generous opportunity, as
long as they are not earning, or their turnover does not exceed R10 million
a year, to come back into the greater economic South Africa from which they
have been excluded for so long, because as long as they are excluded they
will not benefit fully within the economy.

But then there are also those small businesses that have not been excluded
from the mainstream, that operate from the garages of suburbs such as where
I come from – Sandringham in the Sandton part of the Johannesburg Metro.

In other parts of the country they operate almost economically underground,
and the reason for their exclusion from the tax system is one of choice,
choosing not to actually contribute to tax. People who fall into that
category I regard as refugees from the human spirit - attitudinal aliens.
They have made themselves attitudinal aliens from our economic democracy.
My appeal to such refugees is: take the opportunity now to regularise and
normalise your taxation.

As I said to begin with, this is the democratising of the tax regime - it
broadens the tax base, it facilitates the normalisation of tax affairs of
small businesses, and it also increases and improves the culture of tax
compliance. A culture of compliance will help us expand the public purse
and so contribute to the redistributive thrust of the revenue itself.

I know that the main contents of the Bill have received much media
coverage, and indeed in this very House the Minister spoke about the
contribution this Bill would make. What I would like to just talk about for
a moment are the political considerations. The task of democratising this
tax regime has been a major undertaking, which has been under way for a
number of years. This Bill simply seeks to continue that tax reform with a
special focus on small business.

Indeed, this is not the first time that amnesty has been offered. The first
time that that was done for those trying to avoid tax compliance, or those
who had no choice due to the historical situation, was in the case of
offshore funds being held illegally. As you know, what we received in
revenue there certainly has contributed to our redistributive thrust. It
was, indeed, highly successful. But what we also need to do now, of course,
when we do succeed in these measures, is to have the Minister come back and
report to Parliament. Indeed, the Finance committee was very happy to see
that this was not just a conversational commitment, but that it has been
built into the Bill itself.

In fact, the success of the amnesty must be reported to Parliament, and
these details will include the number of applications received, the number
of applications approved and denied, the number of new taxpayer
registrations per type, and all amnesty levies payable. I think that that
indicates, once again, the commitment of the Minister to parliamentary
oversight and the recognition of how much this leads to accountability.

When one talks and thinks of taxation itself, one is often reminded of
biblical stories about taxation. [Interjections.] That’s right. Well, I
must tell you, through the Chairperson, that the first house I bought I
found out had been used as a church, and I seriously thought of becoming a
member of the cloth so that I could also hold out my soup plate for a
collection. However, I’ve chosen to earn my wages in a different manner.

Indeed, it was very interesting to realise that during the biblical times
people then collected taxes for the very purpose of also trying to improve
the quality of people’s lives. However, what became very seriously a matter
of commission was that after the Napoleonic wars tax was collected largely
to defray expenditure of a military nature. More recently in Britain, tax
was largely imposed to ensure that, indeed, the wealthy retained their
income and the poor or the lower middle classes lost theirs.

The difference in terms of the tax regime in South Africa is that it does
seek to equitably gather the taxes, but also, of course, to redistribute
them. South Africa is a developmental state, and in a developmental state
it is very important that equity and development go hand in hand.

Another area which we must welcome on the part of the Ministry is that it
sought through wide consultation the views of people on the ground, in
business, in Parliament and in other areas as well. This led to a series of
revisions to ensure that the Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of
Taxation Laws Bill would achieve its goal.

Of course, this is a very generous amnesty. This generous amnesty actually
says, “By the way, even if you have been ducking and diving for several
years, we are not going to take that into account. What we are going to
take into account is the last financial year and up to R10 million
turnover.” Secondly, the one-off levy is going to be cut from 10% to 5% in
the Bill itself, and then there will be a sliding scale.

Now, National Treasury is appealing to all small businesses to come forward
that have found themselves outside the net. But if small businesses don’t
come forward, they can expect the full wrath of the law in this regard.
Taxi owners are also advised to come forward so that they too can be part
of the taxi recapitalisation process.

This tax amnesty is a message of hope that tax continues to be used as a
redistributive instrument for change and, certainly, we accept that small
businesses, the engine of a developmental economy - which is one in which
your core capital is people and, as we know, small businesses employ more
people than larger businesses - can become and are the engine of South
Africa’s economy. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you, hon Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, Minister Manuel het ’n belastingamnestie vir
die kleinsakeondernemings in die 2006 begroting aangekondig. Behalwe vir
die amptelike voordele, sal dit ook Statistieke SA se data meer volledig
maak vir ekonomiese beplanning; meebring dat die werklike BBP meer akkuraat
bereken word; duidelikheid oor werkskepping meebring; die Minister se
fiskale beplanning beter laat sinkroniseer met die ekonomiese werklikhede
en bedrog voorkom waar die werkgewer tans werknemersbelasting verhaal, maar
nie aan die ontvanger oorbetaal nie.

Die DA wil sekere struikelblokke uitwys wat die goeie bedoelings van
amnestie in die wiele kan ry. Daar is geen direkte aansporingsmaatreëls vir
amnestie-aansoekers nie. Inteendeel, deur te registreer as ’n
belastingpligtige, sal daar ’n onmiddellike las wees vir die applikant in
terme van arbeidswette waaraan voldoen moet word, wat verdere kostes inhou.
Navorsing toon dat die informele sektor belasting sien as die grootste
nadeel van registrasie en vind 24% van die informele sektor hulleself
veiliger buite die belastingnet.

Die voorskrifte vir amnestie is te akademies en besigheidsonvriendelik.
Indien die volle amnestieheffing nie betaal word binne ’n gegewe tyd nie,
of die applikant nie alle inligting openbaar of verkeerde inligting
verstrek, kan amnestie geweier word. Dit wil sê ’n amnestie aansoeker wat
onervare is met al die voorskrifte van belastingopgawes kan oortredings per
abuis maak, en dit skrik mense af.

Die amnestietydperk van 1 Augustus vanjaar tot einde Mei volgende jaar is
te kort, omdat dit ’n geruime tyd sal neem voordat die volle konsekwensies
van amnestie by die kleinsakeondernemings sal uitkom. Amnestie-aansoekers
het geen kultuur van boekhouding of die nakoming van belastingprosedures
nie en sal hulle ’n administratiewe eenheid moet skep terwyl dit ook tyd
sal neem om dokumentasie en inligting bymekaar te kry.

Die huidige belastingvoorskrifte vir kleinsakeondernemings is te tegnies en
ingewikkeld, wat ook dien as rede dat baie entiteite tans nog buite die
belastingnet bly. Tyd is nodig vir behoorlike opvoeding ten opsigte van al
die soorte belasting wat uiteindelik betaal sal moet word.

Die staat onderneem ’n taxi-herkapitaliseringsprogram waar die staat ’n R50
000 slopingstoelaag per taxi verleen, maar om daarvoor te kwalifiseer moet
taxi-eienaars ’n belastingsertifikaat toon. Gegewe die amnestieheffing en
belasting wat dan betaal sal moet word, tesame met ’n nuwe motorpremie, sal
taxi-eienaars eerder buite die net bly.

Die vraag is ook hoe lank dit gaan neem om amnestie aansoeke te verwerk.
Deur ’n aansoek in te dien word amnestie voorlopig verleen, maar indien die
applikant nie spoedig ’n antwoord ontvang nie, kan hy die volgende jaar se
belastingopgawes weerhou, wat verdere probleme skep.

Die moontlikheid dat amnestie geweier word kan ook aansoekers afskrik.
Onvolledige aansoeke kan die resultaat wees van onkunde om belastingopgawes
behoorlik te voltooi. Indien die ontvanger navrae rig vir meer inligting,
kan amnestie dan geweier word. Dan beteken dit dat die ontvanger ook vyf
vorige jare se uitstaande belasting kan eis, plus rente, plus boetes, plus
nog moontlik strafregtelike vervolging ook kan instel, en dit skrik mense
af.

Gegewe die huidige kleiner winsmarge van kleinsakeondernemings, behoort
geen heffings op die belasbare inkomste van die 2006-jaar gehef te word as
vereiste vir amnestie nie. Die argument dat geen heffing ander
belastingbetalers sal benadeel, hou nie water nie. Spesiale rekenkundige
hulp behoort aan amnestie-aansoekers gegee te word om die
belastingadministrasie te vergemaklik.

Die jongste wysigings wat die Minister verlede week aangekondig het kan lei
tot verwarring. Die wysigings behoort tog duidelik en vinnig bemark te word
om foutiewe aansoek vroegtydig te vermy. Selfs in een van die
Sondagkoerante eergister is verkeerdelik na die amnestietydperk verwys as 1
April 2004, in plaas van einde Februarie 2005.

Ten slotte, steun die DA die Minister in sy poging om alle potensiële
belastingpligtiges wel uiteindelik in die belastingnet te kry. Die DA steun
die wet. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, in his Budget Speech of 2006 Minister Manuel
announced a tax amnesty for small businesses. Besides the official
advantages, it will also ensure that the data of Statistics SA is more
complete for economic planning; result in the actual GDP being determined
more accurately; provide more clarity regarding job creation; result in
better synchronization of the Minister’s fiscal planning with the economic
realities, and prevent fraud committed by the employer who currently
deducts tax from the employee but fails to pay it over to the Receiver.

The DA would like to point out certain obstacles that could hamper the good
intentions of the amnesty. There are no direct incentives for amnesty
seekers. On the contrary, by registering as a taxpayer there will be an
immediate burden on the applicant in terms of the labour laws which have to
be adhered to, which involves further costs. Research has shown that the
informal sector regards tax as the biggest disadvantage of registering and
that 24% of the informal sector feel safer outside the tax net.

The regulations for amnesty are too academic and business-unfriendly. If
the amnesty levy is not paid in full within the prescribed period, or the
applicant fails to disclose all relevant information or provides incorrect
information, amnesty can be denied. That means that an amnesty seeker who
is inexperienced in terms of all the regulations regarding tax forms could
inadvertently default, and that drives people away.
The amnesty period from 1 August this year to the end of May next year is
too short as it will take a considerable time for the full ramifications of
amnesty to reach small businesses. Amnesty seekers do not have a culture of
bookkeeping or completing tax procedures. They will have to create an
administrative unit, whilst it will also take time to gather documentation
and information.

The current tax regulations for small businesses are far too technical and
complicated, which is another reason why many entities currently still
remain outside the tax net. Time is required for proper education relating
to all the types of taxes to be paid ultimately.

The state has undertaken the taxi recapitalisation programme in which the
state provides a scrapping fee of R50 000 per taxi, but in order to qualify
for this taxi owners have to produce tax certificates. Given the amnesty
levy and tax that will then have to be paid, together with a new car
premium, taxi owners would rather stay outside the tax net.

The question is also how long it will take to process the amnesty
applications. By submitting an application, amnesty is granted
provisionally, but unless the applicant receives a speedy reply, he may
withhold the following year’s tax return, which creates further problems.

The possibility that amnesty could be denied, could further scare off
applicants. Incomplete application forms could be the result of a lack of
knowledge with regard to completing tax forms properly. In the event of the
Receiver requesting further information, amnesty could then be denied. That
means that the Receiver can demand outstanding taxes for the past five
years, plus interest, plus fines, and possibly lay criminal charges as
well, and that scares people off.

Given the current smaller profit margins of small businesses, no tax should
be levied on the taxable income for the year 2006 as a prerequisite for
amnesty. The argument that no levies will disadvantage other taxpayers,
does not hold water. Special accounting assistance should be given to
amnesty seekers in order to facilitate tax administration.

The latest amendments that were announced by the Minister last week, could
lead to confusion. Surely the amendments should be marketed explicitly and
promptly to prevent erroneous applications timeously. Even one of the
Sunday newspapers two days ago referred in error to the amnesty date as
being 1 April 2004, instead of the end of February 2005.

In conclusion, the DA supports the Minister in his efforts eventually to
secure all potential taxpayers within the tax net. The DA supports the Act.
[Applause.]]
Mr T E VEZI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the main purpose of this Bill is to
provide a small business tax amnesty in respect of the voluntary disclosure
of a failure to comply with the applicable tax laws. The Bill also amends
various tax laws to provide for enactment of announcements made by the
Minister of Finance during his 2006 Budget Speech.

Many small businesses operating informally were excluded from the economic
mainstream, thus remaining outside of the tax system. These businesses are
now keen to regularise their tax affairs, but an obstacle is their past
noncompliance and the resultant potential tax liabilities, penalties and
interest.

It is the IFP’s wish that there be no problems of violence when the taxi
industry is also drawn into the net. We say this because there are still
unresolved issues in the taxi industry. Our concern is that while the
Minister and his team bring millions into the coffers, organised crime is
also busy drawing money out. The war against poverty must be waged on all
fronts, we agree. Corruption, as the President has often pointed out, is a
very worrying factor.

While we support the President in his peace efforts, we are alarmed by the
number of so-called asylum seekers who are involved in organised crime in
this country. The Department of Home Affairs needs to be assisted by all
Members of Parliament in trying to close the loopholes which are being
opened. The IFP supports this Bill. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr A HARDING: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ID believes that this Bill will go
a long way in broadening the tax base, normalising the tax affairs of small
businesses and improving the culture of compliance. Most of the businesses
affected by this Bill operate informally, and have been historically
marginalised and excluded from the economic mainstream. The ID supports
this piece of legislation.

However, we do have some concerns. We believe that the turnover limit of
R10 million should be increased to R14 million to be in line with the new
threshold limit set for business tax relief. This will result in more
businesses claiming amnesty and will ultimately bring more taxpayers into
the tax net.

Another concern we feel must be addressed are the implications in terms of
the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, and we suggest that a specific Fica
exemption be granted as one of the provisions of the amnesty legislation.

The prohibition of carrying forward losses in previous years is
problematic, considering that many of these businesses operate on small
margins, but we acknowledge that a blanket provision may also lead to
abuse.

While many small businesses may be eager to use this opportunity to
regularise their tax affairs, it is true that a lot of them will not be
able to cope with our complex tax legislation. This will increase their
dependence on tax advisers and practitioners, and the resultant cost of tax
compliance will increase their operational costs.

We also suggest that the returns and the frequency will add to tax
compliance and that the length, relevance and quantity of information be
considered for small businesses. The ID supports this Bill. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the ACDP supported the
tax amnesty for offshore funds held illegally and, similarly, supports the
provisions of this Bill that allows tax evaders to regularise their tax
affairs.

We believe it is long overdue and will bring a large number of tax
offenders into the net, thus increasing the spread of taxpayers. This, in
the long term, should result, we trust, hon Minister, in a reduction of the
tax rates.

The ACDP encourages all small businesses that have not regularised their
tax affairs to make use of the generous provisions of this amnesty. This is
a once-off offer to come clean that should not be missed. In the words of
Rhodes University tax professor, Professor Lester, “with the stroke of the
pen, you will be transformed from a tax leper to a fine, upstanding member
of society”. If only it were that simple to become such an upstanding
member of society. However, at the very least, as far as one’s tax affairs
are concerned, one can become legal and not have to be wary of tax
inspectors. The ACDP will support this Bill. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, the MF views the small business tax amnesty
as a sure way to bring small businesses in line with Sars requirements.

The MF hopes that small businesses will seize this opportunity, instead of
facing heavy penalties. This should normalise the tax compliance culture.
We do, however, feel that there are many businesses that have been
registered and face discrepancies, which they have been penalised for. In
all fairness, we suggest amnesty in this regard too, which will further
normalise tax compliance.

In view of the tax amnesty relief, the MF finds all provisions well devised
to administer the process. As a separate unit at Sars will handle the small
business tax amnesty applications, enquiry is extended into transparency,
accountability and oversight of this process.

The amendment of tax laws has been adequately dealt with. The MF supports
the Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill.

Mnu S E ASIYA: Sekela Somlomo ohloniphekileyo, baphathiswa
abahloniphekileyo, malungu ale Ndlu ahloniphekileyo nakumaqabane. Ndibulela
elithuba ndilinikiweyo lokwenza le ntetho kule Ndlu nombandela woxolelo
kwirhafu. Olu xolelo kwirhafu lwenzeka kanye ngethuba apho sibhiyozela
iminyaka engama-30 apho amaBhulu asePitoli agwinta ulutsha eSoweto,
kwaMashu, eNew Brighton eBhayi nakwaLanga ngokunjalo.

Ikomishoni yababuthi berhafu, ngamava ayo okusebenzisana noosomashishini
abakhasayo nabancinci, kufunyaniswe ukuba uninzi lwabo ababhalisanga okanye
abandandalazisanga inkcukacha zabo malunga nalo mthetho uthiwe thaca kule
ndlu. Sibongoza amalungu ale Ndlu ukuba awamkele lo mthetho njengomthetho
ozakwenza oosomashishi babhalise kwikomishoni ngaphandle kwedyudyu noloyiko
lokungena emgibeni wokujeziswa. Kukho izigrogriso zokuba wakubhalisa
uzakujeziswa kuthinjwe yonke into othe wayizuza ngaphambili. Ndifuna ukuthi
ngamampunge lawo.

Mandigxininise ukuba eli cham alinakuxhanyulwa ngabo baneencwadi
ezisaphengululwayo nezinekhwiniba. Xa ubani enengeniso engama-35 amawaka
erandi akazukuhlawula nondancama kwirhafu kweli lizwe. Xa unengeniso
ingaphezu kwama-35 amawaka ubani wohlawula ipesenti ezimbini kwirhafu.
Oosomashishini bacelwa ukuba bagxalathelane benze imitsi yenkawu
ukusebenzisa eli thuba.

Esi sisigaba sesibini kuxolelo lwerhafu lusenziwa ngurhulumente olawulwa
yinkongolo. Esokuqala isigaba kwakunikwe ithuba oosomashishini abarhweba
ngaphandle kwemida yeli. Abaninzi balithabatha eli thuba beza ngaphambili.
Lo nto yenza ukuba kubekho uchatha kwingxowa kazwelonke.

Xa ndiphawula ngerhafu ndifuna ukuthi thaca kwasekuqaleni apha kule Ndlu
ihloniphekileyo ukuba wonke ubani okanye usomashishini kuyimfuneko ukuba
ahlawule irhafu nokuba yeyaluphina uhlobo. Kule njika langa intetho
izakujolisa kuxolelo kwirhafu oluthe lwacetywa lwathiwa thaca kule ndlu
nakwikomiti. Siye sayihla amahlongwane savumelana ngamxhelo mnye sasamkela
isiphakamiso eso.

Abanye oosomashishi ncakasane babephakamisa ukuba lunyuswe oluxolelo
kwirhafu luye kuma kwizigidi zamashumi amawaka erandi. Ikomiti nesebe kunye
nekomishoni yababuthi berhafu sithi le nyhweba yenzelwa ukuba ixhanyulwe
ngoosomashishini abancinci hayi oongxowankulu. Xa uninzi lwabantu
noosomashishi bethobela umthetho bahlawule irhafu lonto ithi iinkqubo
zophuhliso zikarhulumente wesizwe aziyi kusilela koko ziyakwanda.

Kule veki iphelileyo besibhiyozela umhla we-16 kweyeSilimela 1976. A
baninzi bebezama ukucinga ukuba babesenza ntoni kwaye kwakusenzeka ntoni
kanene ngaloo mhla. Ingaba sikhe sathatha umzuzwana sicinga ngobume berhafu
ngela xesha. Ngaloo nyaka irhafu yookopolotyeni ibingama-43 ekhulwini.
Irhafu ebihlawulwa ngabantu abamivuzo iphezulu ibingama-66 ekhulwini.

Urhulumente okhokhelwa ngumbutho wesizwe i-ANC, ongafuni kujongana
ngezikhondo zamehlo noosomashishini abancinci nabakhulu uye weza nale
nyhweba yoxolelo kwirhafu ukuze kungabikho ngquzulwano phakathi kwababuthi
berhafu nabantu boMzantsi Afrika. Umyalezo kwikomishoni yalapha ekhaya uthi
unondyebo kandlunkulu uyenzile indima yakhe, ngoku icekwa lilele kuni
boosomashishini. Yenzani eyenu indima nize ngaphambili.

Ikomiti eyongameleyo ithe xa igoca goca isebe nekomishomi kwacaca mhlophe
ukuba kuninzi ekufuneka kwenziwe ukufundisa oosomashishini ukuze
bangaziboni njengabafakwa emgibeni. Ndinethemba lokuba ikomishoni xa iza
kwenza ingxelo kwikomiti iza kucacisa ukuba ngobani ababasebenzisana nabo
kolu xanduva lungaka. Kule mfundiso kufuneka babone ukuba kuyifuneko kwaye
kulilungelo labo ukurhafa nokungarhafi xa kufanelekile. Umceli mngeni
kwikomishoni ngoku kukhangela ukuba bangaphi na oosomashishini abafuna
ukubafaka kulo mnatha.

Siyikomiti eyongamele eli sebe kufuneka siyakhele umkhanyo le nkqubo kuba
isininzi saba bantu sithetha ngabo ngeli lixa ngabantu abangazange baye
esikolweni sezoshishino kwaye bondla iintsapho zabo abathathi ntweni.
Ngokutsho andifuni ngathi ndiyalawula koko ndiyazi ingathatha ithuba
esingangonyaka. Ndiyazi mphathiswa ukuba lo mhlaba sizakunyathela kuwo
uthambile ufuna ubuchule kuchulwe ukunyathela. Nathi kufuneka sibaze
iindlebe sivule amehlo njengekomiti eyongamele eli sebe. Sibongoza
njengombutho wesizwe ukuba le Ndlu ibekekileyo iwamkele lo mthetho uthiwe
catha apha. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa speech follows.)

[Mr S E ASIYA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members of the House
and comrades, I am grateful for this opportunity I have been given to
present this speech to this House on the issue of tax amnesty. The tax
amnesty came at a time when we commemorated the 30th anniversary of whites
from Pretoria brutally killing the youth from Soweto, KwaMashu, and New
Brighton in Port Elizabeth and also in Langa.

The commission of tax collectors, through its experience of working closely
with small and up-and-coming businessmen, has noticed that most of them
have not registered or have not disclosed their details according to the
Bill that has been presented in this House. We appeal to the members of
this House to support this Bill, as it will enable businessmen to register
with the commission without fear or the threat of falling into the trap of
being penalised. There are rumours that people will be penalised and have
their belongings that they have collected seized once they register. I want
to say that that is not true.
Let me stress that this opportunity cannot be made available to those whose
books are still audited and have qualified reports. If a person earns R35
000 per annum, that person will not pay even the minimum tax in this
country. If the earnings are more than R35 000 the person will pay 2%
towards tax. Businessmen are requested to act quickly and make use of this
opportunity.

This is the second phase of tax amnesty offered by the ANC-led government.
In the first phase the opportunity was given to businessmen who trade
outside the borders of this country. Most of them grabbed that opportunity
and came forward. This contributed positively to the National Treasury.

When I comment about tax in this honourable House, from the outset I want
to say that it is necessary that every person or businessman is
appropriately required to pay any type of tax required. This afternoon’s
deliberations will focus on the planned tax amnesty tabled in this House
and to the committee. We scrutinised it thoroughly and unanimously agreed
to support the proposal.

Some businessmen even suggested that the ceiling for this tax amnesty be
raised to millions of rands. The committee, department and the commission
of tax collectors say this gesture is extended only to small businessmen
and not to the capitalists. When the majority of people and businessmen
abide by the law and pay tax, government’s development programme will not
fail but will prosper.
Last week we were commemorating 16 June 1976. Most people thought of what
were they were doing and what happened on that day. Did we for a moment
think about the nature of tax during those days? During that year the co-
operative tax rate was about 43%. The tax paid by people with high earnings
was about 66%.

The ANC-led government, who do not want to be at loggerheads with small and
big businessmen, provided this golden opportunity of tax amnesty, so that
there should be no conflict between tax collectors and South African
citizens. The message sent by the National Treasury to the commission is
that Treasury has played its role and that the ball is now in the court of
businessmen. Make your mark and come forward.

When the portfolio committee interrogated the department and the
commission, it became clear that a lot needs to be done to train
businessmen, so that they do not feel that they are being led into a trap.
I hope that when the commission presents its report to the committee it
will indicate the people who co-operated with them in this huge
responsibility. From this lesson they must see that it is necessary that
they pay tax and that it is their right to pay, or not to pay tax if that
is appropriate. The challenge to the commission is to check how many
businessmen they want to bring into this net.

As a portfolio committee in this department, we must carefully observe this
programme because most of the people we are referring to have no formal
education in business and they work to provide food for their children;
they are poor.

I do not want to appear to be making a ruling by saying this, but it will
take about a year. Minister, I know the area we are approaching is a
sensitive one and we need to tread very carefully. We must listen carefully
and be attentive as a portfolio committee in this department. As the
African National Congress, we appeal to the House to support this Bill
presented before us. Thank you.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. I’d like to
thank all the parties for supporting the Small Business Tax Amnesty and
Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill. There are a few issues that are worth
commenting on.

Dankie aan die agb Van Dyk vir die ondersteuning, maar jy doen dit met so
’n swaar hart. Jy is so treurig oor die steun, maar ons los dit maar vir
nou. [Thank you to the hon Van Dyk for the support, but you give it with
such a heavy heart. You are so lacklustre about the support, but we’ll
leave it there for now.]

In respect of the hon Vezi regarding the taxi industry: clearly, you are
not going to be able to resolve all the issues with the tax amnesty, but it
is a very important start. Hon Harding, the R14-million threshold for small
business kicks in in the 2007 year and the R10 million is in line with the
applicable maximum rate in the year in the question.

In respect of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, there will be a waiver
for advisers, but I have said before, and it is worth repeating, that the
tax amnesty does not render the evil gains of criminals lawful. If people
have acquired wealth by foul means, you can’t by a tax amnesty now allow
them to regularise their affairs. They remain outside of the system, and I
think it is important to recognise that those who have broken the law must
feel the full weight of law enforcement, especially those who dispense
chemicals into townships that poison the heads of young people.

Finally, a number of members have spoken to this: clearly, we would like to
be in a position in which all our tax laws were simplified quite
extensively. It is work in progress. It is also important that we don’t
adopt this “ag foeitog” approach [“ah, shame” approach] in respect of small
business.

This is because there is actually a much higher level of sophistication and
savvy than what we give small business credit for. Some have fallen into a
situation now in which their tax affairs are not in order. But, from our
own engagement, I am quite impressed with the amount of savvy and street
wisdom that obtains and I am pretty sure that small businesses will know
that it is in their interests to regularise their affairs.

Thank you very much for the support. We ask that the matter now be taken to
the next stage.  Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.


       SMALL BUSINESS TAX AMNESTY AND AMENDMENT OF TAXATION LAWS BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

    SECOND SMALL BUSINESS TAX AMNESTY AND AMENDMENT OF TAXATION LAWS BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

  THE NEED FOR SOUTH AFRICA TO UNDERGO A SKILLS REVOLUTION IF IT IS TO MEET
                             THE GOALS OF ASGISA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker.


Professional skills are critically needed as the country moves into a
higher economic gear and one of the most fatal constraints to shared growth
is the lack of skills – nothing short of a skills revolution will extricate
the country from the skills shortage crisis it faces.

These are the words of the Deputy President, speaking at the launch of the
Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition on 27 March. “That fact”,
she went on to say, “should be admitted with emphasis”.

The DA welcomes the Deputy President’s refreshing candour, absolutely
concurs with her assessment of the situation and thanks Parliament for
agreeing to debate this important matter this afternoon.

South Africa needs to undergo a skills revolution if it is to meet the
goals of the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa. My
colleague the hon Van Dyk will speak to the need to address the current
legislated racial bias that prevents thousands of skilled South Africans
from applying for or being placed in those skilled positions that are
currently vacant. Suffice for me to say, that starting a skills revolution
also means stemming the flight of scarce and crucial skills out of the
country and welcoming back individuals who have left the country because of
the fact that affirmative action quotas prevent them from getting work and
contributing to our country’s economy.

Every skilled position filled results in the creation of eight further jobs
– so if we fill the 500 000 skilled vacancies, we can create up to 4
million new jobs and be well on our way to meeting government’s goal of
halving unemployment. These skilled individuals can, in turn, mentor, train
and teach the as yet unskilled employees. Everybody wins.

But to do this with a skills revolution that will truly deliver the skills
and jobs, economic growth must be the non-negotiable priority above racial
preferencing. If we continue along the current path, racial transformation
will continue to occur only among South Africa’s small elite at the expense
of economic growth, jobs and ultimately the unemployed masses.

Twelve years after the introduction of the RDP, the fundamental problem
remains the same, namely wide-scale unemployment of up to 40% of the
workforce, with much of it caused by a huge skills deficit. Recent HSRC
skills surveys show that fewer than 40% of school-leavers currently find
jobs.

There have been some successes within the Seta systems, but by and large
they have been an expensive failure. They have not nearly met their
learnership targets and, in the few exceptional Setas where they have done
so, only a very small percentage of learners have actually gone on to find
work. Even with the Minister of Labour’s intervention in 2004, arising from
the extremely poor performance of the Seta system, the situation has hardly
improved.

The DA’s solution to the skills crisis is to make companies and private-
sector bodies, which have the analytical, logical and managerial ability to
develop skills far more effectively than the Setas, the engine rooms for
the skills revolution. The combined decentralised action of thousands of
South African businesses will result in an economy-wide responsive,
efficient training environment - a true skills revolution. If the entire
existing budget for Setas were channelled into such an initiative, the
amount left over would easily fund a nationwide tax rebate equivalent to
one third of tertiary institution fees for four years of successful study.

Combining such a scheme with a tax deduction of 150% of the first R2 000
per month of every employee’s salary would create a situation in which
businesses are incentivised not only to employ more workers, but to train
and develop them to meet the future skills needs of the businesses and of
South Africa.

Solving a problem of this magnitude also means clearly delineating
responsibilities between the Department of Education and the Department of
Labour. Yet it seems that these two departments have been involved in a
turf war over who has responsibility for what. And the result has seen
schools across the board producing matriculants who cannot do simple maths
or spell. Yet maths and science are two key subject areas that learners
require if we are to effect a skills revolution.

Concerns raised by Professor Jonathan Jansen, Dean of Education at the
University of Pretoria, echo the very concerns raised by two Seta CEOs at
last month’s Labour portfolio hearings on youth unemployment, concerns
denied and shouted down by some members of the portfolio committee. They
are that the current education syllabus produces learners who lack the
basic skills of reading thoughtfully, writing accurately and speaking
fluently, as well as the basic ability to work with numbers.

The SA Democratic Teachers Union has come out in full support of Jansen’s
suggestions. I think that the Portfolio Committee on Labour needs to look
at these concerns again and see how this lack of basic skills makes it
extremely difficult, if not impossible, for matriculants to find or create
ordinary jobs, never mind highly skilled positions.

The Deputy President agrees. Last week in Parliament she conceded that
there is still a big gap between the skills taught in schools, colleges and
universities and those required in the workplace. Again, the DA wishes to
acknowledge her frankness and to support her views.

Employers spend considerable sums giving basic training to matriculants
before they can be given tasks that they should, by that time, be able to
figure out for themselves. Universities confirm that first-year students,
often with good school symbols, lack the knowledge and skills to meet the
educational demands of higher education, including the inability to do
basic library research, work within a diverse team and solve the sort of
problems they may meet.

This problem of inappropriate education is as bad in the formerly white
schools as it is in the badly equipped black schools, although in poor
schools bad syllabi are compounded by teachers who lack sufficient
knowledge and sporadic school attendance.

In the time left to me at the end of this debate, I shall summarise and
conclude on this very important issue. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L ZITA: Chairperson and colleagues, over the past 12 years the ANC-led
government has laid the foundation for stable yet progressive rule. In this
decade and beyond, we have surprised even ourselves on the ability to keep
a positive and stable macroeconomic stance whilst addressing the demands
for social protection and the pursuit of pro-poor policies.

Some might undervalue the importance we ascribed to stability, but we
understood that only in this context would we be able to create the
conditions for sustained social transformation in our society. Today the
public rating of our government is the highest in decades. Indeed, it is
not the fecundity of our imagination speaking when we say that, to the
majority of South Africans across racial and class divides, there is a
palpable feeling that today is better than yesterday and that tomorrow will
even be better.

However, despite these achievements, in areas such as housing, water,
electricity and social protection, a lot still needs to be done. Our levels
of unemployment are narrowly estimated to be at 27% whilst in an expanded
form are estimated to be 40%.

According to the Labour Force Survey in September 2005, over 34% of those
employed were earning under R1 000 per month. Together with those who were
earning between R1 000 and R2 500, they constituted 60% of our labour
force. To restate this: 60% of South Africans, the majority of whom are
African, earn less than R2 500 per month.
This should be contrasted with the R52 million that Whitey Basson from
Checkers, the R42,7 million that Steve Ross from Edgars and the R19 million
that Phuthuma Nhleko from MTN get every year. Therefore, we not only have a
problem of high unemployment, we also have a generalised situation of low
wages and unacceptable levels of inequality in our society.

Asgisa talks to this reality. Firstly, Asgisa seeks to address the causes
of this sad situation. You cannot find a solution to a problem if you have
not clearly determined the ailment. The problems of our economy derive from
it being an enclave economy, with a limited manufacturing base and a
limited domestic market dependent on primary exports, undergirded by the
overdetermination of historically institutionalised racism.

This historically racist and enclave economy, designed for a minority of
South Africans, has failed to meet the needs of a postapartheid society
with unrestricted labour mobility and the demands of a globalising economy.
As a result of this, a number of binding constraints are evident.

There is a tendency towards volatility of the currency, an expensive and
ineffective national logistics system, a shortage of suitably skilled
labour reinforced by the costs of apartheid geography as well as barriers
to entry, limits to competition and limited new investment opportunities,
with a regulatory environment which burdens small and medium-sized
enterprises, and challenges in state organisation, capacity and leadership.

The Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa is about
increasing the pace of growth whilst simultaneously sharing the basis and
the proceeds of that growth. To effect both the sharing and the growth, the
Asgisa programme locates the democratic state at the helm of an
accumulation process that seeks to catalyse the broader economy on a
renewed and sustained wave of investment. Beyond this objective of
investment it seeks to create an enabling environment that fundamentally
improves the conditions for doing business in South Africa. To effect this,
the government seeks to invest R370 billion over the next three years in
electricity, transport and communications infrastructure.

Beyond this stimulating role, these investments are also designed to
improve the environment of business. There are also specific sectoral
initiatives that the Asgisa programme seeks to focus on. They include
business process outsourcing and tourism in the service industry. In the
manufacturing industry the priority sectors are biofuels, chemicals, metals
and metallurgy; agroprocessing; wood, pulp and paper; clothing and
textiles, and durable consumer goods.

Thirdly, the government seeks to consolidate and have an effect on the
second economy interventions by bridging the links between the first and
the second economy, as well as strengthening sustainable livelihoods.

As the ANC we want to underscore the fact that for us the Asgisa programme
has to be the anchor around which every policy of government and the
private sector is measured. Every programme of government should be
evaluated on the extent to which it advances accelerated and shared growth.
From the point of view of Parliament this will be the angle from which we
do our oversight work.

All of these interventions will be unrealisable without the appropriate
skills to realise them. To this extent, we agree as the ANC with the topic
of this debate. Indeed, nothing less than a revolution will be needed to
realise the acquisition of skills.

We endorse Jipsa, the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition. We
endorse, in particular, the resoluteness and creativeness that the
government has put into this question. The attempt to identify in precise
terms what skills shortages we have will go a long way in helping us to
solve this challenge.

It is our view that whilst this process should be led by the government,
society should position itself to respond to these identified sectors. If
engineering or IT skills are needed, training institutions should position
themselves to respond to these needs. To ensure that this societal
positioning achieves the desired results, measures will have to be pursued
to ensure that the skills that people are trained in are of the appropriate
character and level. There should therefore be appropriate quality control
measures.

We also believe that what we are dealing with here is a moment of epochal
dimensions for our country. Epochal circumstances demand epochal means. If
we have serious skills shortages, why should we not continue training even
in the evenings? Why should we not recruit enough trainers to ensure that,
just like factories that have to have night shifts to meet greater demands,
we also have such shifts for skills training?

As the ANC we believe it is important that we maintain the momentum of a
plough-back initiative to everyone who has something to offer with regard
to skills. Appropriate incentives should be looked at to ensure that South
Africans outside the country come back. We need to ensure also that beyond
material incentives a volunteer movement for skills is mobilised. We need
to establish, amongst other things, a register of retired maths teachers
who can be mobilised for the challenge of skills. The same can be said for
language teachers, retired plumbers, electricians, etc. Our society needs
to heed the perennial call of the Congress of South African Students,
Cosas, which says: “Each one teach one.”

Without undermining development in other African countries, we need to
position our country as a destination of choice for skilled Africans on the
continent and for those in the African diaspora. To this extent we will
have to fight the demon of xenophobia.

More importantly, it will be critical that all levels of government and
their respective business and labour counterparts co-operate in
establishing their localised Asgisa initiatives, including a skills plan.
Every municipality in our country should have the skills and the resources
to effect this.

It is important to indicate to Mr Lowe that it is not correct to
counterpose the need to involve all South Africans in the skills challenge
and the challenge of black economic empowerment and affirmative action.
These things reinforce each other. You cannot say that one is more
important than the other. Yes, we need to invite people to come and
contribute with their skills, but we must also continue with the challenge
of transforming the skills profile of our society. It cannot be correct
that only whites are engineers; it cannot be correct that only whites are
IT operators. We have to ensure that everyone participates in all the
critical skills our society needs.

Secondly, with regard to the setas, I think that indeed the Setas are a
challenge and all of us would acknowledge that. More can be done to ensure
that there is convergence between what the setas are offering and what the
industry needs. These are challenges that we need to look at and address.

I would challenge business to come up far more energetically and decisively
to participate in the Seta process to ensure that they themselves indicate
the critical skills that they are missing so that there is confluence and
convergence between the market needs and the supply of those skills in our
society.

Only with this level of mobilisation will we be able to ensure that the
ambitious programme of Asgisa is able to meet the 6% growth rate and halve
unemployment by 2014. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince N E ZULU: Hon Chairperson, the overriding goal of Asgisa is to drive
the country’s economic growth to sustained levels of 6% per annum in order
to accelerate delivery on absolute needs and broader social development.
This needs to happen faster and better in order to avoid a future full of
uncertainties for South Africa.

By now it is common cause among government, the business sector and other
role-players that South Africa suffers from a dire shortage of skills in
various fields, such as engineering, science and medicine. To that end, the
government launched Jipsa as a short-term measure to acquire the priority
skills the economy needs to expand and grow. We welcome this move.

However, Jipsa will only address short-term needs and the country needs a
complete rethink on skills development for the future. There are many facts
about the skill shortage that can be mentioned and I want to highlight just
two. Hon members would be aware that Eskom is planning a massive expansion
programme to increase electricity supply, which is already under some
pressure due to growing demand. But, two years ago when Eskom looked for
400 qualified engineers in the electricity field, it could only find 160
such engineers in the country after a search that lasted more than a year.

The mining industry, one of the most important sectors in the economy,
relies heavily on artisans. But, of the 51 000 artisans in South Africa, it
is expected that about 70% will leave the industry in the next five to six
years due to natural attrition as the average age is around 54. That means
the industry will have to train between 10 000 and 12 000 artisans every
year, but currently there are only 1 695 learners in artisan training. This
paints a very bleak picture.

These examples show the depth of the skills problem in our country. But
what is even more shocking is the fact that the majority of learners who
come through our school education system are simply not ready to be taken
up into training programmes, learnerships and higher forms of education,
because their basic skills such as reading, speaking and writing are not up
to the mark.

We can talk about the need for a skills revolution, yes, but what we really
need is an education system that produces learners who already have the
basic skills to enter seamlessly into training programmes and skills
development learnerships.

While we agree that a skills revolution is necessary, the IFP feels that an
education revolution will serve our country’s long-term interests and
economic development more. Thank you.

Mr H B CUPIDO: Chairperson, if a skills revolution will ensure that poverty
and unemployment rates are halved by 2010 or 2014 and that a 6% growth rate
will be achieved, it becomes more imperative that all role-players
consistently demonstrate their visible commitment to such a skills
revolution and provide the South African public with ongoing evidence of
measurable results.

The identification of scarce skills is an appropriate place to start, and
this first phase of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition,
or Jipsa, has been proceeding remarkably well. The logical next step would
be to focus on those institutions at which South Africans can acquire these
skills and it is at this point that some critical issues arise.

By the time our learners reach the tertiary educational level, their
capacity to acquire skills has, to a large extent, already been shaped by
the preceding school years. In recent times, there has been a tendency to
lower the standards of education in order to boost pass rates. This
lowering of standards significantly impairs learners’ preparedness for the
acquisition of further skills.

A further area of concern is the removal of formalised trade tests for
artisans. The ACDP is of the opinion that the setting of standards for our
technical skills groups must not be adversely affected by the absence of
these trade tests and that integrity must be maintained in the
certification of our artisans.

The ACDP supports the idea of a skills revolution as the primary vehicle
for accelerated and shared growth. [Time expired.]

Mr M J G MZONDEKI: Chairperson, let me start by sharing with the members an
article that appeared in Enterprise magazine in June 2006. This article on
some of the work that is done by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund is about
encouraging young girls and boys to embark on business.

This article says that that the fund’s Umsobomvu in-school entrepreneurship
programme has inspired a Limpopo-based schoolgirl to invest her pocket
money in a vegetable and fruit business in her village. This girl, Reneilwe
Kabe, 15 years old and a Grade 10 pupil at Machedi Secondary School in
Garankuwa village near Polokwane, was the winner of a business plan
competition held by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund in collaboration with the
Maths Centre and National Foundation for Teaching Entrepreneurship. She’s
off to New York as we speak to represent South Africa’s youth at the 26th
National Foundation Annual Programme Partner Retreat Conference.
[Applause.]

The entrepreneurship programme was modelled on the NFTE programme, which
was brought to South Africa from the US by Umsobomvu. This young
entrepreneur was introduced to farming by reading her father’s books on
gardening. She uses her pocket money to buy seeds, and her parents assist
her to purchase the fertilisers and pesticides. We are told that her
business is flourishing. Her markets are the health clinics in the area as
well as the pension paypoints. She says that the aim of her business is to
provide the poor rural community with easier access to fresh fruit and
vegetables. She says, “Starting my own business has brought me closer to
health issues and the importance of healthy food and a balanced diet.”

The article goes on to say that this programme by the Umsobomvu Youth Fund
has also benefited the community. The Umsobomvu programme manager,
Thembisile Khoza, says that the programme has already been introduced to
the Department of Education and is in line with the national government
strategy of outcomes-based education. Khoza explains that the in-school
entrepreneurship programme has begun to bear fruit for the entire community
and not just for children and teachers.

I think we can take a few lessons from this in that if all of us begin to
identify these little programmes that are intended at skilling people from
very young ages, I am sure we can go a long way in meeting some of the
challenges that we have. I wish I could see more young boys and girls
getting inspired in the same way that Reneilwe did. If we did so, I’m sure
that many of them would not be queuing looking for jobs. They would be busy
preparing their recruitment policies. I also wish that Members of
Parliament could identify more of these programmes in order for us to sell
more of them to the rest of the country. I wish Reneilwe every success in
her endeavours.

The report of 2003 on the state of skills in South Africa summarises the
key features of the South African labour market as follows: unemployment
remains the key challenge for transformation for the South African labour
market. It says that providing training especially to African unemployed
youth could enhance their prospects of accessing the labour market. Such an
intervention can also promote social cohesion and build the skills base
from which accelerated growth and development can be launched.

The proportion of African workers with relatively low educational levels
remains large and should form a focal point in attempts to link skills
development and equity, and my colleague Langa Zita has alluded to the fact
that we need to combine these two. We can’t talk about skills development
and not talk about employment equity.

The African workers remain underrepresented in certain high-skill
occupations and this should also form a focal point in linking skills and
equity where training can assist and offer a chance for promotion and
mobility in the workplace.

I would like to focus my speech on the role of the employers and the
employees in skills development and training in the workplace. The Labour
Relations Act provides for a workplace forum, which is a structure that
allows for consultation between the employers and the employees. The forum
deals, amongst other things, with the restructuring of the workplace,
including the introduction of new technology and new work methods,
education and training and other matters of consultation. There is no doubt
that when such restructuring takes place, when new methods are introduced,
new skills are also needed.

The employers have a prerogative to produce a skills audit, which reflects
the skills in that company. The workers must also ensure that indeed the
skills audit is a true reflection of the workplace and, again, my colleague
Langa Zita did say that the workers have a role to play in ensuring that
the skills we are given are the skills that we indeed need as workers.

I earlier referred to the need for a link between skills development and
equity. The Employment Equity Act provides for a code of good practice in
the preparation, the implementation and the monitoring of employment equity
plans. The process needs to include proper communication and awareness in
terms of all stakeholders. This includes the workers and the employers. The
unions or the workers need to ensure that through their representatives the
plans indeed address the inequalities in the workplace.

The ANC believes that through the strengthening of this process workers can
get an opportunity for mobility and promotion. Workers can be trained and
reskilled instead of being retrenched. Programmes such as the Abet
programme need to be properly communicated among the stakeholders so that
concerns, such the cost of training and loss of production time – again,
Comrade Langa Zita did talk about where we could even extend training after
hours - can be discussed and resolved by all the stakeholders.

I want to talk about the role of employers in assisting new entrants to
acquire work experience. There are good examples of companies that go out
of their way to orientate new graduates who have no experience and to place
them in mentoring programmes for management positions.

South Africa needs many more such companies so that together we can reduce
the number of graduates on the streets. My personal experience is that many
employers are reluctant to give such experiential training; they want to
have ready-mades. We further applaud the government’s commitment to
skilling the nation through various programmes such as the learnerships and
apprenticeships.

Again, regarding the problem of the Setas, we appeal to all stakeholders to
deploy people who can add value to the Seta boards, so that the Setas can
function even better. Currently, there is an outcry that the Seta boards
are not strong enough because there is reluctance by some stakeholders to
place their key and senior staff on these boards. We need strong boards
that can influence the work of the Setas.

The role that is played by Ditsela, which is the Development Institute for
Training, Support and Education for Labour, is highly appreciated. Ditsela
was created to help build the labour movement’s education and
organisational capacity. Hence, we said that we need a very strong labour
movement that can engage with the new challenges that we all face,
especially in the skills area.

Finally, we welcome Jipsa and we would like to quote the Deputy President
during the launch of Jipsa earlier this year. It is unfortunate that I am
quoting from the same book my colleague Lowe quoted from:

  Nothing short of a skills revolution by a nation united will extricate us
  from the crisis we face. We are addressing log jams, some of which are
  systemic and therefore in some cases entrenched, even in the
  postapartheid South Africa. The systemic nature of some of our challenges
  undermines our excellent new policies, at least in the short term, hence
  the need for interventions such as Jipsa to enhance implementation of our
  policies.


  Only if we have a nation that is united in partnership can we reverse the
  trend with regard to skills and give our policies a chance to succeed in
  the medium to long term.

Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]


Mr W D SPIES: Hon Chairperson, according to traditional economic thought,
the country’s most important resources are its mineral wealth and its
infrastructure. This is still true, but as the information revolution has
forced the global economy away from large infrastructure and resources
towards knowledge and skills, skills are increasingly becoming an important
commodity. That is why the challenge is for any country not only to enable
its population to acquire skills, but also to retain those people once they
have acquired the skills that they need.

Skilled people are therefore any country’s most valuable asset. Economist
Dr Pieter Haasbroek of Barloworld calculated that for every one
professionally skilled person leaving the country, up to eight job
opportunities are taken with him or her. The exodus of skilled South
Africans is therefore a determining factor in the current unemployment
crisis in the country.

The FF Plus commends the statesmanship, or rather stateswomanship,
displayed by the Deputy President when she accepted the challenge of our
party to have certain skilled and desperate white South Africans screened
and appointed by the Development Bank of Southern Africa. In this regard,
the FF Plus on behalf of Zanda van Rooyen, Esias Pieterse and Chris van Zyl
wishes to thank the Deputy President for giving them the opportunity to
offer their skills towards the improvement of local government.

But these people are just a drop in the ocean compared to the hundreds of
thousands who have already had to leave the country in order to earn a
living elsewhere. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr I S MFUNDISI: Chairperson and hon members, there is a great need for a
philosophical, ideological, educational and psychological overhaul of the
mindset if this country is to ensure that we have the required skills. Our
education system has to be assisted to transform itself to the point of
producing graduates of the new age of hope who will grapple with the
challenges of information technology. Our universities should revert to
internships so that when graduates leave university they have had first-
hand experience and potential employers have noted them already.

Affirmative action should be put under the microscope to examine the extent
to which it is doing what it is meant to do in terms of the Constitution.
We have to guard against reversing the evils of the past as no two wrongs
make a right. To mind comes the unpleasant situation in the Department of
Home Affairs in which the accounting officer, in his own words, admitted
that he had no idea whatsoever what the department was about when he was
appointed to the post. The floundering in the National Intelligence Agency
is another example of people appointed not because there were suitably
skilled but because they had a responsibility to belong to some or other
political party.

The rank-and-file members of the public put it beyond doubt when they told
the President at an imbizo in Namaqualand that placement in jobs depended
on political affiliation and not skills. We hope that the words of
President Mbeki that people should be arrested who appoint people on the
grounds of political correctness and not ability will ring a bell to
revolutionise meeting Asgisa goals. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Voorsitter, die kern van die debat is baie eenvoudig:
ons het ’n tekort aan geskoolde arbeid in Suid-Afrika, terwyl die
beskikbare geskoolde werkers ook nie die arbeidsmark betree nie, vanweë
regstellende aksie in die openbare sektor en statutêre voorskrifte vir die
privaatsektor. Ek wil dit duidelik stel dat regstellende aksie nodig is om
die ongelykhede van die verlede reg te stel, maar die probleem lê by die
proses waarmee die regering dit implementeer en dit bots direk met Minister
Manuel se goeie bedoelings met sy fiskale beleid om die ekonomiese
groeikoers te verhoog.

Regstellende aksie dwing sakeondernemings dat die rassesamestelling van
werkplekke die bevolkingsamestelling moet weerspieël. Dit maak dat
sakeondernemings eenvoudig nie hul produksieprosesse uitbrei nie of dat
hulle arbeid met masjinerie vervang – tot nadeel van werkskepping.

In die openbare sektor bepaal regeringsbeleid dat regstellende aksie
toegepas word. Produktiwiteit word in die meeste gevalle buite rekening
gelaat en word comrades, vriende en familie aangestel. Geskooldes van alle
rasse word oor die hoof gesien. Baie aansoekers word met vervalste skool-
en nagraadse sertifikate aangestel, maar die ekonomie is wreed genoeg om
ongeskoolde arbeid se swak produktiwiteit baie gou te openbaar. Daarom lees
ons daagliks van die swak finansiële en administratiewe bestuur van die
openbare departemente op al drie vlakke van regering.

Die gevolg van regstellende aksie, wat die beginsel van gelyke regte en
geleenthede minag, maak dat jong geskoolde arbeid die land verlaat. Volgens
Solidariteit is dit so dat vir elke 1 000 geskooldes wat die land verlaat,
word 70 000 ander Suid-Afrikaners sonder ’n inkomste gelaat. Hierdie
emigrasie, tesame met die tekort aan ambagsmanne omdat die opleiding so
swak is – en die agb Mark Lowe het daarna verwys – bring mee dat die
gemiddelde ouderdom van ’n Suid-Afrikaanse vakman nou 54 jaar is. Wanneer
hierdie kundiges oor ses jaar aftree, gaan Suid-Afrika ’n krisis belewe
soos nog nooit tevore nie en dit kan gevare vir Asgisa inhou.

Die regering moet een ding besef en dit is dat regstellende aksie nie
oornag geïmplementeer kan word nie. Dit moet oor tyd gebeur, sodat die
onderwysstelsel en tersiêre opleidingsinstansies, asook die proses van
indiensopleiding in die werkplek, arbeid beskikbaar kan stel van ’n hoë
standaard. In dié tyd moet die ekonomie sy bestaande geskoolde arbeid van
alle rasse benut, maar die blindelingse, volgehoue, ongrondwetlike
implementering van regstellende aksie deur die ANC-regering voorkom hierdie
proses.

Dan betoog die VF Plus die afgelope week voor die Internasionale
Arbeidsorganisasie van die VN dat net diegene wat na 2 Februarie 1990
gebore is, van regstellende aksie vrygestel moet word. Wat van al die ander
bruin, swart en wit mense wat wil werk en wat voor 1990 gebore is? Die VF
Plus vra met ander woorde nou dat net diegene wat 16 jaar en jonger is, van
regstellende aksie vrygestel word, maar studente wat tans die mark betree,
is in 1983 en 1984 gebore. Wat van hulle? Gooi die VF Plus hulle nou weg?
Het die VF Plus dan nou skielik geen gevoel meer vir ander blankes nie? Wil
die VF Plus hê hierdie afgestudeerde studente en die huidige bestaande ouer
geskoolde wit arbeid wat reeds sedert 1994 deur regstellende aksie benadeel
is, dat hulle dan nou ook die land moet verlaat?

Die DA vra ’n sonsondergang vir die eensydige regstellende aksie waar alle
rassegroepe nie in berekening gebring is nie. Ons moet nou ophou om nog
heeltyd van ’n Nuwe Suid-Afrika te praat, wat daaglikse voorgesette
regstellende aksie vereis. Suid-Afrika is nou twaalf jaar oud. Suid-Afrika
is nie meer nuut nie. Ons is nou ’n gewone Suid-Afrika en al wat Asgisa nou
nodig het, is dat die gewone Suid-Afrika sy arbeidsmark moet oopmaak vir
alle geskooldes van alle rassegroepe, waar die produktiwiteit van die
applikant die maatstaf moet wees vir sy of haar aanstelling. Ek dank u.
[Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Chairperson, the core of this debate is very simple:
we have a shortage of skilled labour in South Africa, whilst the available
skilled workers do not enter the labour market because of affirmative
action in the public sector and the statutory prescripts for the private
sector. I want to state clearly that affirmative action is necessary to
address the inequalities of the past, but the problem lies with the process
used by the government to implement it and it clashes directly with
Minister Manuel’s good intentions with his fiscal policy to improve the
economic growth rate.

Affirmative action forces business enterprises to reflect the population
composition in their race composition in the workplace. This results in
business enterprises simply not expanding their production processes or
replacing their labour with machinery – to the detriment of job creation.

Government policy determines that affirmative action be applied in the
public sector. In most cases productivity is not taken into account and
comrades, friends and family are appointed. Skilled people of all races are
ignored. Many applicants are appointed with falsified school and post-
graduate certificates, but the economy is cruel enough to expose unskilled
labour’s poor productivity very quickly. That is the reason we read daily
news reports about poor financial and administrative management in Public
Service departments at all three tiers of government.

The consequence of affirmative action, which disregards the principle of
equal rights and opportunity, is that young skilled labour is leaving the
country. According to Solidarity it is a fact that for every 1000 skilled
labourers leaving the country, 70 000 other South Africans are left without
an income. This emigration, together with the shortage of artisans because
the training is so poor – the hon Mark Lowe referred to this - has resulted
in the average age of a South African craftsman being 54 years. When these
experts retire in six years’ time, South Africa will experience a crisis as
never before and this can pose a danger for Asgisa.
The government must realise one thing and that is that affirmative action
cannot be implemented overnight. It must be implemented gradually so that
the education system and the tertiary training institutions, as well as the
process of in-service training in the workplace, can make skilled labour of
a high standard available. During the interim period the economy must
utilise the existing skilled labour force of all races, but the ANC
government’s indiscriminate, sustained, unconstitutional implementation of
affirmative action prevents this process.

Then we have had the FF Plus demonstrating in front of the International
Labour Organisation of the UN this past week, asking that only those born
after 2 February 1990 be exempted from affirmative action. What about all
the other coloured, black and white people born before 1990 who want to
work? In other words, the FF Plus is asking that only those who are 16
years old and younger to be exempted from affirmative action. Students
entering the market now were born in 1983 and 1984. What about them? Is the
FF Plus just casting them aside? Does the FF Plus suddenly no longer have
pathos for other whites? Does the FF Plus want these graduates and the
present older skilled white workers who have been prejudiced by affirmative
action since 1994, to also leave the country now?

The DA asks for an end to the one-sided affirmative action in which all the
race groups are not taken into account. We must cease continuously speaking
of a New South Africa that daily requires that affirmative action be
continued. South Africa is twelve years old now. South Africa is no longer
new. We are now an ordinary South Africa and what Asgisa now requires is
that the ordinary South Africa open its labour market to all skilled
labourers from all races, where the productivity of the applicant should be
the criterion for his or her appointment. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Chairperson, members of the executive, hon Members of
Parliament, fellow South Africans, it was in 1953 that Dr Verwoerd said
these words:

  I just want to remind the hon Members of Parliament that if the native in
  South Africa is being taught to expect that he will lead his adult life
  under the policy of equal rights, he’s making a big mistake. The native
  must not be subject to a school system, which draws him away from his own
  community and misleads him by showing him the green pastures of European
  society in which he is not allowed to graze.

With these notorious and immoral words, Dr Verwoerd introduced Bantu
Education to Parliament in 1953 - not in 1994 - which began the era of the
apartheid education system. The shortage of skills and lack of capacity,
therefore, is by no means an accident of history, but the result of a
policy that was planned and approved by the then parliament and implemented
by the apartheid government.

It is important to say these things today because, conveniently, those who
then were opposition parties were not heard opposing these policies. Yet,
today, they are clearly heard opposing the policies of the democratic
government and conveniently raising these issues as if they are this
government’s making. We did not hear or see them opposing apartheid
policies, not because we are not capable of doing so but because they did
not oppose them.

Those who opposed apartheid policies were heard and seen. For instance,
women who 50 years ago matched to the Union Buildings in Pretoria were
heard and they were seen. They were women of all races and from different
social backgrounds who made a stand for human rights. In the petition to
Prime Minister Strijdom, those women declared, “We shall not rest until we
have won for our children their fundamental rights of freedom, justice and
security.” And we heard them.

Indeed, they did not rest. It is on the shoulders of these great and
gallant women of our struggle that we stand. As we confront new challenges
in the struggle for both the emancipation of women and the economic
recovery of our country and continent, we draw inspiration from them.

The economy of our country has been consistently growing for the past seven
and half years. It is true that sustained economic growth hinges on the
development of skills in South Africa and even on sourcing them abroad. But
it is also true that many people, particularly women and the youth, have
not benefited that much from our growing economy.

When it comes to a lack of skills and capacity, and to poverty,
unemployment and a lack of basic services, women and the youth are the hard-
hit groups. Whilst it is true that generally, in terms of total enrolment,
gender equity has been achieved in the higher education system in that the
proportion of female students has risen from 43% in 1993 to 52% in 1999,
gender equity continues to remain a problem, particularly in the former
technikons where female enrolment increased from 32% in 1992 to 42% in
1993.

Furthermore, the spread of women students across different programme areas
is still uneven. Female students are clustered in the humanities but are
underrepresented in the sciences, engineering and technology, and in
business and commerce postgraduate programmes. This probably is the result
of less emphasis on gender equity than on race equity by institutions of
higher learning, and it has to be corrected. In this regard, the National
Plan for Higher Education set out to transform higher education to ensure
that universities, technikons and colleges produce workers who are
adequately skilled to make a difference to the South African economy.

It is further encouraging to note that the government has not only assessed
the challenges but has actually correctly diagnosed them as shortages of
skills. Our government has further prescribed treatment in the name of
Asgisa and even Jipsa. The intended effects of Asgisa as treatment include
helping women to play a bigger role in the economy by helping them to get
training and skills; making it easier for them to get loans to start
businesses; helping them to take part in farming projects and projects such
as the production of arts and crafts; giving them better access to basic
services, and getting more women into the Expanded Public Works Programme.

The Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition – Jipsa - aims to
identify the urgent skills needed and to effect quick yet effective
solutions. At the launch of Jipsa, the Deputy President Mrs Mlambo-Ngcuka
said: “The most fatal constraint to shared growth is skills, and it should
be noted that skills are not just one of the constraints facing Asgisa but
a potentially fatal constraint.”

Such a statement indicates the seriousness with which the government,
particularly the Office of the Deputy President, views the issue of the
skills shortage. But, in sharp contrast, in 1945 a Mr J N le Roux said: “We
should not give the native any academic education. If we do, who is going
to do the normal labour in the community?” This is how they think even
today. They dropped the ball and they are complaining about the way it is
bouncing.

Jipsa and Asgisa are not just talk-show programmes. Through the programme
of Jipsa, the Department of Public Works and the Presidency have co-
ordinated a programme with regard to the United Arab Emirates to secure
sustainable placement of women in infrastructure projects. Also, in the
hospitality and finance sectors, offers have been secured for the placement
of women - 100 women and unemployed graduates are targeted. These women are
poor and are from poor communities. By the way, Asgisa also aims to
initiate interventions to address deep-seated inequalities and target the
marginalised poor. Another 120 women and youth are being placed with the
Bombela Consortium to be part of the Gautrain project.

Jipsa also recognises the need for private-sector involvement. In this
regard, the Old Mutual Business School is but one private-sector body that
has joined, basing its project management curriculum on the Jipsa
development programme. The Development Bank of Southern Africa and Old
Mutual also launched the Hluma Development Local Investment Agency, a
multimillion-rand initiative aimed at facilitating investment projects in
marginalised areas of South Africa. Such initiatives show us the importance
of unity as a nation in pursuit of the goal of a better for all.

In conclusion, as we approach our work as MPs, I believe we need to pay
particular attention to these and other transformation elements embedded in
Asgisa. The ANC is the architect of establishing the framework for social
change. Let us continue to lead this country. Those who are hysterical need
to be watchful if they neglect treatment. Rest assured, one day they will
see the light and join us.

But if they do not join us, they will continue to be reborn purists who
failed to effect change at many points in their privileged lives in the
apartheid South Africa. They failed the people and supported immoral
policies. The ANC led the people to freedom. As women in South Africa we
are encouraged by opportunities suggested by Asgisa and Jipsa. We believe
as women that indeed we must be at the centre of economic activities. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, the core drive of Asgisa is to halve
unemployment and poverty by 2014, followed by achieving a 6% economic
growth rate between 2010 and 2014. However, according to the South African
Employment Report released in April, we need to create 60 000 jobs a month
to achieve that. What heightens this concern is that, according to
economists, we are currently only delivering 30 000 new employees a month.

The MF does, however, support the view that addressing our skills shortage
through local skills development and foreign skills recruitment is
essential to promoting South African economic growth.

We do, however, express our concern regarding xenophobia and the safety of
foreign recruits. We request that avenues be exhausted to find local skills
first to address shortages, and in this regard skills that are considered
to be in short supply need to be clearly identified. These fields needs to
be highlighted at tertiary institutions as potential future careers.
Further, we need to question why these shortages exist and prevent the
loopholes from draining our scarce skills supply.

The MF agrees that we need to undergo a skills revolution to meet Asgisa’s
goals that will liberate South Africa from the shackles of poverty. Thank
you, Chairperson.

Ms L L MABE: Chairperson, I would also like to join those who say that
South Africa needs a skills revolution, a revolution that is going to
ensure that those who were disadvantaged in the past will have a better
life in future. Those who have been disadvantaged in the past will
therefore contribute towards economic growth in a country and a democracy
that we have fought for, a country where we have ensured that we laid down
all our efforts to ensure that our children and those of us who are still
living benefit from all the achievements.

But I would also like to say: Thank you, Lowe. For the first time I want to
thank you.

An HON MEMBER: The hon Mr Lowe.

Ms L L MABE: It doesn’t matter.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): No, hon member. Let us address
each other as “hon”. [Interjections.]

Ms L L MABE: Hon Lowe, thank you. I would like to say thank you again for
bringing this matter to the fore so that people who do not understand why
it is important for us to have affirmative action and acquire skills and
for those who did not have skills to be given skills, will from now on
understand this much better. I hope that in what you have said, you will
also educate your colleague the hon Van Dyk, but I will come to him at a
later stage during my speech.

We have a challenge as South Africa. We have a challenge as government in
that the economic growth we have been experiencing has developed some
employment but only to a certain extent. And it should be borne in mind
that unemployment was very high because disadvantaged people, the black
people, were not given the necessary skills that are needed to grow the
economy. This was not a mistake; it was a deliberate intention of the past
government to ensure that the majority did not take part actively in the
development of the economy in this country. They were only destined to be
in a bottomless pit with regard to development in this country.

I also wish I could have been there when some of the people were favoured
by the past polices to ensure that they acquired the skills that they
needed when some of us could not have that advantage.

I would also like to indicate that the economic growth we have experienced
has, to a limited extent, impacted positively on poor households. This is
because members of these poor households do not have the necessary skills
to enter the economy and participate actively. It is not because they do
not have the will to participate, but because they do not have the
necessary skills.

I would like to say that we want to thank those business partners that have
joined hands with government to ensure that we capacitate those people that
have the will to take part and also to acquire those skills.

I would also like to say with regard to the public infrastructure
development that government is prepared to roll out and the private-sector
investment programmes, that there is no way that these can be successful
without giving the necessary skills to the majority of our citizens. Those
black people who did not have access to the necessary skills must get
skills in the engineering field to become artisans, and that they must have
on-the-job training. Once they have gone through further education and
training, they must have on-the-job training to ensure that they gain the
necessary experience.

I would also not support those who say that the private sector must go only
for those who have the necessary experience. Where will somebody get
experience if the person does not have on-the-job training? This is because
that is where you get the skills; that’s where you get the experience.
Therefore, I want to challenge the private sector - those of you who have
not bought into the idea of taking on the unemployed graduates – to employ
the unemployed graduates, give them the necessary skills and you will see
wonders in that they will develop within a short space of time.

I would also like to indicate that the Dinaledi programme is a good one,
but it is important that the teachers, those educators, be trained. Those
educators, at the same time, must be willing to be trained, because you can
try to train somebody but that person will be untrainable if he or she has
not changed his or her mind-set.

So it is important that those teachers who are taken for training must
change their mind-set. They must realise that they play a crucial role in
ensuring that we acquire the necessary skills that we need as a country.

At the same time it is important that those who were advantaged in the
past, those who have skills acquired because of the preferential treatment
of past policies, must ensure that they also change their attitude. They
must ensure that, during mentoring programmes, they do not do it for the
sake of doing it. They must do it with real commitment, because there is no
use doing it just to please government and to claim or even to charge
government as much as they want to without transferring the necessary
skills.

We are quite aware that in most of the programmes, or in most of the
projects that government gives to consultants, these people do not transfer
the skills. It is a fact. There are those who do it with passion, but there
are those who want to frustrate the efforts of government to ensure that
people get on-the-job training and mentoring to acquire the necessary
skills. This may be done to ensure that the same people have the same
benefits continually.

I would also like to say that, with urgently needed skills, we fully agree
that those retired, skilled personnel need to be taken on board. When they
are taken on board, as I indicated earlier, they must be willing to share
the experience they have. They must be willing to share the skills they
have, rather than do it for the sake of doing it and coming back after a
few months or going to another project, feeling that they are
indispensable. That should not be allowed. Nobody is indispensable.

It is important that those people who are retired and who will be brought
to bear must ensure that they share those skills. They must also remember
that they are South Africans. As South Africans, this is for the
development of our country and our economy, from which their children and
grandchildren will benefit.

It is no use saying that the whites who have skills need to continue to
dominate the economy. It does not help, because they are in the minority.
For our economy to grow, it needs the participation of the majority. I
would also like to thank the private sector, for instance KPMG and the
DBSA, for what they are doing to assist us in terms of acquiring the
necessary skills we need as a country.

I cannot continue with my speech if I do not indicate that without the
training of women, without the training of the youth who are in the
majority, who have energy ... You know, when you educate a woman, you
educate a nation. If you don’t educate women, if you don’t give them the
necessary skills, who will put food on the table for the family? This is
because most households are led by women. Most households depend on women.
We can go anywhere, but the fact of the matter is that our economy is
dependent on the youth and on the women. So let us give these two groups
the necessary support and training.

I would also like to say that unemployed graduates need to take it upon
themselves to take training offered to them seriously. I know that in some
areas when these people are trained, they do not have the passion to go
through that training. It is just a waste. We understand fully that it
might be because they have been unemployed for quite a long time. But I
say, never despair. Never despair, regardless of how long you have been
unemployed. Undergo that training, benefit from of it and then you will
contribute towards economic growth.

I would also like to say that all these things that are frustrating
government efforts to ensure that those who were disadvantaged have access
to the economy are the baggage of the past. Given the type of education
that we have received, the type of education which my colleagues on the
left supported with passion, I expect that right now they should support
the efforts that government is undertaking with passion, because they are
the ones who contributed to the mess that we find ourselves in as a
country.

I would also like to respond to the hon Mfundisi. Hon Mfundisi, remember
when you said that appointments were made on the basis of political
correctness? Don’t forget that during the Mangope regime, that is what you
were excelling in. Don’t forget that. For your information, government
appoints people on merit and qualifications, not the way you did, as
brothers and sisters and as a family.

Hon Van Dyk: representivity is important. There is no way that the economy
can continue being dominated by whites. We are in the majority, and we must
be represented in the economy as the majority. I would also like to remind
you that when you say that there is poor financial management, yes, you are
correct. There is poor financial management in the departments. Where does
it emanate from? It emanates from the policies that you supported in the
past. The government of the ANC is working hard to ensure that it addresses
those problems that it inherited from you people.

I’d like to also say that financial management is a challenge for
government and a challenge for Parliament. That is why we have a problem
with underspending. That is why we have a problem with overexpenditure. But
government must still be committed to ensuring that we develop those
skills. Those artisans you referred to as being around 54 years old ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Hon member, your time has expired.

Ms L L MABE: I thought that I had 20 seconds left.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): You are on minus 21 seconds.

Ms L L MABE: Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr G Q M Doidge): Good try, hon member.

Mr C M LOWE: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I’d like to thank everybody
for participating and for the contributions that they have made in the
debate this afternoon.

Perhaps in future debates - and I hope that they will be on this very
important topic - we could have the Deputy President and the Ministers of
Labour and Education present. I know they are all very busy people, but I
think this sort of issue needs their input and certainly their attention.

I’d also just very briefly like to respond to the hon Chikunga to say while
it is important, Ma’am, that we honour the past, we can’t continue to live
in it. I’m even young enough to have been born after Verwoerd and Strijdom
had died. The democratic Ministry of Education has been around for 12
years. I think we have to realistically look up and face the problems in
the Education department and deal with them and stop blaming the past.

A skills revolution, by its very definition, therefore has to include a
change in the way we currently racialise our skilled jobs, but also has to
include a serious and focused national debate on what is worth learning in
schools and how schools should be teaching these subjects which are
meaningful, so that pupils leave school with the ability to read well, to
analyse what they have read, to write effectively and to speak from a
logical perception. Hopefully, that national debate has started here today
and the DA intends to contribute fully to it. We all have to win in this
debate.

Four things that government can do immediately to address the skills crisis
are to identify priority-scarce skills and exempt them from the employment
equity requirements, as I have mentioned. Secondly, we need to set up a
development fund to address the shortage in qualified teachers and
graduates schooled in mathematical and natural sciences. Thirdly, I have
talked about scrapping the wasteful and ineffective Seta bureaucracies and
making regulated demand-based skills development in education attractive to
employers through tax incentives. Fourthly, we need to simplify the process
and reduce the timeframes for work permit applications and approvals for
skilled foreigners wanting to work in South Africa.

By the Deputy President’s own reasoning, unless the skills bottleneck is
unblocked, the battle against poverty and unemployment cannot be won. The
DA is ready to stand shoulder to shoulder with government in tackling our
skills crisis and facing down unemployment and poverty, but it will mean
facing up to unpopular truths, making hard choices and introducing radical
solutions, but it can and must be done. We cannot fail. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

   CONSIDERATION OF FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                           – INGONYAMA TRUST BOARD


   CONSIDERATION OF THIRD REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                        – DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS


   CONSIDERATION OF FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
           - STATE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AGENCY (PTY) LTD (SITA)
   CONSIDERATION OF FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                     - TRADE AND INVESTMENT SOUTH AFRICA


   CONSIDERATION OF SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
            - SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL ACCREDITATION SYSTEM (SANAS)


       CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
              ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION


   CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                   - ONDERSTEPOORT BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS LTD


   CONSIDERATION OF NINTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
        - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA LIMITED


   CONSIDERATION OF TENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
                               - GODISA TRUST


      CONSIDERATION OF ELEVENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                     ACCOUNTS - FINANCIAL SERVICES BOARD


       CONSIDERATION OF TWELFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
               ACCOUNTS - DEVELOPMENT BANK OF SOUTHERN AFRICA


     CONSIDERATION OF THIRTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
             ACCOUNTS - AIRPORTS COMPANY SOUTH AFRICA LTD (ACSA)


     CONSIDERATION OF FOURTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                 ACCOUNTS - ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD (ASB)


      CONSIDERATION OF FIFTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
             ACCOUNTS - NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL MARKETING COUNCIL


      CONSIDERATION OF SIXTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                  ACCOUNTS - GREATER ST LUCIA WETLAND PARK


     CONSIDERATION OF SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
       ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY INSTITUTE (SANB)




     CONSIDERATION OF EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
   ACCOUNTS - EXPORT CREDIT INSURANCE CORPORATION OF SOUTH AFRICA LIMITED
                                   (ECIC)


     CONSIDERATION OF NINETEENTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                       ACCOUNTS - COMPETITION TRIBUNAL


      CONSIDERATION OF TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                   ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL PARKS


    CONSIDERATION OF TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
             ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN BUREAU OF STANDARDS (SABS)


    CONSIDERATION OF TWENTY-SECOND REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC
                      ACCOUNTS - SOUTH AFRICAN TOURISM



Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, comrades and hon members, it is my singular
honour and pleasure to once more present before the House a set of reports
adopted and recommended by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. I
must indicate that we have not departed from the Scopa tradition of working
by consensus and these 22 reports were adopted unanimously.

I must also express my gratitude to my Scopa colleagues, the staff and the
Office of the Auditor-General for the amount of effort they put into our
huge workload. I only wish the House could appreciate more and better the
heavy responsibility it has placed on their shoulders.

Be that as it may, let me point out that the reports we are asking the
House to adopt can be put into three categories. The first category is the
annual report of the committee. The report contains a summary of the
committee’s activities for the past year. It is about its general oversight
activities, including hearings that were held - 16 in total; the training
workshop organised by the Association of Public Accounts Committees, Apac;
and the Apac conference held in the North West.

The committee also undertook a study tour to Mozambique and was invited to
the conference of the Australasian Council of Public Accounts Committees.
We are satisfied, as Scopa, that the report correctly reflects on our
activities for the year and that these activities fell within the scope of
our mandate.

The challenges for Scopa, however, remain the need to cover a greater
volume of work, to strengthen the qualitative aspect of its work, to ensure
follow-ups on recommendations and to have a high impact. In order for all
the above to be realised, there is an urgent yearning for the capacitation
of Scopa, viz we need more staff and our committee members need support
staff individually.

The second category consists of those entities and departments whose
financial management and administration have so far not lived up to the
expectations of the Public Finance Management Act and National Treasury
regulations. We are referring here to the first report on the Ingonyama
Trust Board, the third report on the Department of Home Affairs, and the
fourth report, which is on the State Information Technology Agency. These
entities and department have a range of inadequacies identified in their
financial reports that do not assist the objectives of financial
accountability, rules-based administration and proper service delivery.

Beyond the observations that Scopa has made, which are actually an
indictment, we have also made specific and tough recommendations which,
when adopted by the House, will have to be responded to by the said
entities and department.

We are happy to stress to the House that National Treasury has made it an
obligation for departments or entities to include in their annual financial
reports a paragraph on Scopa resolutions, in which a department explains
what it has done to respond to the Scopa resolutions. Therefore the
resolutions we are taking here are not in vain or for their own sake.

The third category is of reports from the fifth to the twenty-second
report. These are reports whose financial audits are clean and have nothing
substantive to be concerned or worried about. We wish to congratulate these
entities on adhering to the Public Finance Management Act and National
Treasury regulations in their financial management and administration. We
hope that future audits will be equally unqualified. We also hope that
others will emulate their good example.

As we present these reports to the House, we also want to stress Scopa’s
commitment to its oversight mandate despite the massive underresourcing of
the committee. The laws that we pass in this House must be implemented to
the letter by all officials and the House must express itself unequivocally
in instances of transgression.

The aspirations and rights of our people to quality service delivery cannot
be subverted by indifference and perversion of the laws that we pass in
this House. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

     CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS -
                  ANNUAL REPORT (JANUARY TO DECEMBER 2005)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - DEPARTMENTAL
  EXPENDITURE FOR THE SECOND AND THIRD QUARTERS OF 2005-06 FINANCIAL YEAR –
                            JULY TO DECEMBER 2005

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF JOINT BUDGET COMMITTEE - ANNUAL REPORT OF JOINT
                              BUDGET COMMITTEE


Ms L L MABE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, I would like to present the
report of the Joint Budget Committee for the year, and the second and third
quarter reports of departments.

I would like to start by indicating that the Joint Budget Committee was
constituted by a resolution of 2003 and was only convened at the end of
2004. It also became a long process to develop a strategic plan over the
third term of Parliament and this was completed only at the end of 2005. To
some people’s minds, the Joint Budget Committee is still a young committee.
That is true. But, being a young committee, it is faced with serious
challenges and it cannot relax because that it is still young and wait to
develop. It must grow in leaps and bounds, regardless of its age.
Amongst the goals of the Joint Budget Committee is that there must be a
review of annual expenditure reports for effective and efficient spending
by departments. These are very important objectives in the work of the
Joint Budget Committee. Also, the committee must provide meaningful
recommendations aimed at improving government spending by engaging the
executive effectively in a dialogue in terms of expenditure in various
departments.

The basic principle is that Parliament’s role in the budget should not
disrupt the integrity of the budget or the integrity of the expenditure
system. But Parliament must play an oversight role – the departments must
be accountable to Parliament for the fact that Parliament votes on the
budgets that go to those departments.

As a result, this Parliament has taken it upon its shoulders to do rigorous
oversight this term in terms of service delivery, and a priority for
Parliament is that we must ensure that we have proper and effective
oversight over the departments. We must also monitor their spending, and
that is the responsibility of the Joint Budget Committee. It will take on
that task diligently and with passion.

I would also like to say that spending in departments is not as expected.
We have sufficient financial resources as government, but spending is still
lacking. For example, during the second quarter of the 2005-06 financial
year government departments fell behind in current and capital spending.
Capital spending was at 29,5% and current spending was at 43,8%. The
question is: why should this be the case? Is it because we have a shortage
of skills in those fields? That is a question we need to answer as members.

But that does not mean that spending should not be done as expected. We
expect that spending should be done. At the same time it should be done not
for the sake of doing it, but to ensure that we deliver the necessary
service to the people.

Some departments are low spenders, and I do not want to delve much into
that. Let us take Agriculture, for example. Agriculture is there to ensure
that the poor in the rural areas get access to basic stuff, which is food,
and to ensure that the rural poor get access to the economy. If Agriculture
does not spend, then what? That therefore says something wrong is being
done to those people who are poor, who are looking to government to ensure
that their lives become better on a daily basis. And the issue is, as
members we need to challenge the Departments of Land Affairs and
Agriculture. Why are they not spending, when that money is supposed to go
to the rural areas to develop people?

At the same time, there are some high spenders. But when we look at the
high spenders, we must also check the following: high spending on what? Are
they just spending because it is the end of the financial year, or is it
because it is the third quarter and that is why they are spending? There
should be consistent spending throughout all four quarters of the year. If
people have done their homework, that would be the case, but if they
haven’t during the first and second quarters, as is reflected in our
report, there will be underspending. These matters will be elaborated on by
my colleague, the hon Dambuza.

I would also like to refer to the lowest spenders on transfer payments –
provincial and local government departments. When there is low-level
spending on transfer payments, that tells us that local government is
suffering as it does not get money. If local government does not get money,
who will ensure that services are delivered to the people? Where will local
government get money from if the national departments are not transferring
money or funds? That is a challenge we need to follow up: why funds are not
transferred on time, rather than making local government a dumping ground
of money allocated to various departments.

The Department of Arts and Culture is a low-level spender on transfer
payments. The monies that must go to agencies that promote culture and art
do not get there on time. That is why they spend in such a low-level way.
As the Portfolio Committee on Arts and Culture, we need to challenge them.
Why are they not transferring those funds to various institutions?

With regard to capital spending, one of the lowest spenders was Minerals
and Energy at 5%. I don’t want to elaborate on that one.
I’d like to move to the third quarter. With regard to the third quarter,
spending on capital funding was, as usual and as in previous years, very
low. We say that we want to roll out infrastructure. If spending on capital
is not sufficient, how are we going to roll out infrastructure? We need to
make departments account for why they are not spending on infrastructure.

At the same time, I have indicated that Land Affairs is one of the lowest
spenders. Land Affairs is responsible for ensuring that land restitution
becomes a success. If they do not spend, how will it be a success? This is
because we expect that 2014 there will be a great margin - that the
majority of blacks have access to land. So Land Affairs must spend in terms
of ensuring that land restitution becomes a success.

One of the challenges we face as a committee is the absence of dedicated
members and dual membership of NCOP members in that they are members of the
select committee and the Joint Budget Committee. When we have to convene
our meetings it becomes a problem because the same people have to attend
meetings of two different committees.

Another challenge we face is the frequent restructuring of committees:
today it is this member, but after three or four months it is another
member. That member has been moved to another committee, and after two or
three months again there is a new membership. That makes stability a
problem in the committee.
The other thing is the absence of a dedicated researcher. I am happy that
at last Parliament has appointed a researcher for the Joint Budget
Committee. But we suffered when the researcher was deployed to the Pan-
African Parliament. We do want to thank Parliament for appointing that
researcher.

Also, there is the fact that we want to regularise our relationship with
Scopa and the portfolio committees and select committees so that as the
Joint Budget Committee we can inform various portfolio committees in terms
of spending in their departments long before the Auditor-General comes with
a report. This means that on a continual basis portfolio committees will
follow up on policy implementation through budgeting, and it is our
intention to have that interaction.

There must be that close working relationship between the Joint Budget
Committee, Scopa, the portfolio committees and the select committees. I am
just challenging them in that when we go to them and request that we have
joint meetings, they must be willing to share information. Thank you very
much, Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, the report of the Joint Budget Committee on
departmental expenditure makes for depressing reading. The budget committee
discovered that departmental expenditure is decreasing gradually and that
there is more underspending than there was in previous financial years.
Total underexpenditure increased from R3,6 billion in the 2004-05 financial
year to R5,4 billion in the 2005-06 financial year.

The Auditor-General’s reports too are often disheartening. The Auditor-
General discovered that national departments were guilty of R37,3 million
in unauthorised and R46,3 million in fruitless, wasteful and irregular
expenditure in the 2004-05 financial year.

As far as departments are concerned, they have been faced with a budgetary
reform process since 1994. Two fundamental changes have taken place in the
budgetary process, namely the introduction of zero-based budgeting and,
secondly, the introduction of the MTEF. Zero-based budgeting has forced
departments to critically review performance, and to motivate for
allocations based on proven past delivery. The MTEF has introduced
stability in the budgetary process and has enabled departments to plan with
longer-term strategies in mind.

But government has realised that it needs to build on these achievements,
and in order to realise the desired efficiency in Public Service delivery
they gave birth to the Public Finance Management Act. The implementation of
the first phase of the Act focuses on the basics of financial management.

Maar, Speaker, die Ouditeur-generaal het nou bevind dat departemente nog
net tot ’n mindere mate aan die vereistes van die wet op effektiewe
finansiële bestuur voldoen. [But, Speaker, the Auditor-General has now
found that departments comply only to a lesser extent with the requirements
of the law that deals with effective financial management.]

The second phase of the Public Finance Management Act focuses on best
practice financial management. In this regard, I refer to the generally
recognised accounting practice of converting from a cash basis of
accounting to the accrual basis.

Tans is een van die grootste probleme by staatsdepartemente juis die
kontantbasis van begroting waar sekere departemente nie die werklike stand
van uitgawes aan die Ouditeur-generaal voorhou nie. Baie uitgawes word
steeds aangegaan deur departemente wie se begrotings uitgeput is, om welke
rede ookal, voor die einde van die finansiële jaar en dan word die skuld
net eenvoudig oorgedra na die volgende boekjaar wat met die nuwe begroting
betaal word, asof die dienste ook eers in die nuwe boekjaar gelewer sou
wees. In die verlede het die SAPD, byvoorbeeld, al tot R400 miljoen se ou
skuld sodoende ongesiens oorgerol na die volgende jaar toe.

Hierdie toedrag van sake beteken dat klein sakeondernemings wat dienste
lewer aan departemente nie betyds betaal word nie en sukkel om hulle
werkers se insetkostes te betaal, en gevolglik om te oorleef. En dit werk
direk in op die goeie bedoelings van Asgisa.

Met die “accrual basis” van rekenkundigheid sal die uitgawes reeds as ’n
las beskou word wanneer die diens gelewer is, al is die rekening nog nie
betaal nie en sal bogenoemde wanpraktyke in hierdie verband voorkom word.

Dit word verwelkom dat die begrotingskomitee aangetoon het dat hy die
toedrag van sake by departemente onder die soeklig gaan plaas ter
beskerming van sakeondernemings en ter wille van verantwoordelike
departementele finansiële bestuur. Die DA steun hierdie verslag. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[At present one of the biggest problems experience in at government
departments is indeed the cash basis of budgeting where certain departments
do not reflect the true state of expenditure to the Auditor-General.
Numerous expenses are still incurred by departments who have exhausted
their budgets, for whatever reason, before the end of the financial year
and then the debt is simply rolled over to the following financial year to
be paid from the new budget, as though the services will also be rendered
in the new financial year. In the past the SAPS has, for example, rolled
over up to R400 million’s old debt, unobserved, to the following year.

This state of affairs means that smaller enterprises that deliver services
to departments are not paid on time and they battle to pay their employees’
input costs, and consequently to survive. And this is directly contrary to
the good intentions of Asgisa.

With the accrual basis of accounting the expenditure will already be
reflected as a liability when the service is rendered, even if the account
had not been paid and in this way the above malpractices will be prevented.


It is to be welcomed that the budget committee has indicated that it will
place this state of affairs at departments in the spotlight to protect
business enterprises and in the pursuit of responsible departmental
financial management. The DA supports this report. Thank you.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon ... Well, there’s no Minister here. The ACDP
notes that the Joint Budget Committee has a wide-ranging and complex
mandate, which includes monitoring, on a regular basis, monthly published
actual revenue and expenditure per department.

We also note that the committee held meetings with every department,
including the financially challenged Home Affairs. The question then arises
as to how the committee missed the very serious financial irregularities in
this department, notwithstanding various warning signals issued previously
by the Auditor-General and various reports of the Standing Committee on
Public Accounts, Scopa. One can also ask the question: Why didn’t the Joint
Budget Committee recommend Treasury intervention, as the Minister has now
done?

We do, however, appreciate that the committee is in a developmental phase
and has to meet various challenges. It is an almost impossible task to
monitor the monthly expenditure of all government departments, amongst the
committee’s various other tasks. It is, therefore, imperative that we, in
our portfolio committees, should also regularly monitor the monthly
expenditure of our departments. The ACDP will support this report. I thank
you. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Swart, did you say that there was
no Minister in the House?

Mr S N SWART: No, this Minister.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): That particular Minister? Thank you.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Chairperson, members of the executive, hon members ...

... okwam, ngale njikalanga, kukugxila nje kumba wenkcitho-mali ngamasebe
karhulumente kunye namaphondo kwisigaba sonyaka ophelileyo. [... my duty
this afternoon is to dwell upon the issue of expenditure by government
departments and provinces last year.]
In pursuit of its monitoring and oversight mandate, the Joint Budget
Committee is guided by a range of national policy and legislative
frameworks, including the Constitution, in terms of which budget processes
are required to promote transparency, accountability and effective economic
and efficient public-sector expenditure control; the Public Finance
Management Act, by means of section 32 reports - monthly, quarterly and
annually - and the terms of reference of the committee itself, which put an
emphasis on the committee to practise its oversight over actual expenditure
in the implementation phase.

In terms of National Treasury regulations, departments are required to have
spent 50% of their budget by the third quarter. However, various
observations have been made in this regard. National expenditure
performance indicates that by the end of the second quarter of the past
financial year departments had spent an average of 47,5%, with the
Department of Education being the highest spender at 75,18%, followed by
the Department of Social Development.

The Departments of Agriculture and Land Affairs have been identified as the
lowest spenders, followed by Statistics SA. By the end of the third
quarter, reports indicated that there was an increase in overall
expenditure to about 70,47%, with the Department of Education being the
highest at 91,9%. The Sport and Recreation department was the lowest
spender, with a record of 24,67%.

In terms of current expenditure, departments’ overall expenditure was about
67,77% at the end of the third quarter, with the Department of Arts and
Culture being the highest spender at 106,52%, and the Department of Sport
and Recreation being the lowest spender at 40,17%.

The overall average transfers were 72,49%, with the Department of
Correctional Services at 151,18% in the third quarter, and the Public
Service Commission being the lowest at 0,5%. Overall average capital
expenditure stands at 54,33%.

Departments with the highest overall capital expenditure included
Parliament, spending 210,37% by the third quarter, followed by the Science
and Technology department at 186,83%, Agriculture and Land Affairs at 158%,
Social Development at 142% and Public Service and Administration at
133,47%.

The departments with the lowest overall capital expenditure at the end of
the third quarter were Defence at 0,00%, Arts and Culture at 1,72%, Sport
and Recreation at 12,01%, Minerals and Energy at 16,33% and Transport at
17,35%.

Generally, departments had spent a significant portion of their budgets by
the end of the third quarter. It is also important to highlight that the
Department of Communications significantly improved its expenditure trends
over the past financial year.
Abaninzi baya kukhumbula ukuba kunyaka ophelileyo eli sebe belibizwa qho
ukuba lize kuvela phambi kwekomiti. Yiyo loo nto siye sabona ukuba
masilincome xa libonakalisa inkqubela-phambili. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[Many will remember that last year this department was regularly called to
appear before the committee. That is the reason we have considered it
necessary to congratulate this department when it shows improvement.]

In conclusion, in order to respond to a call by the hon President in his
state of the nation address, it is important to register that the Budget
plays a pivotal role in achieving broad government objectives such as the
eradication of poverty, and development. Therefore, the committee has
resolved to strengthen its monitoring and oversight functions to ensure
that departments’ expenditure promotes and improves the livelihood of
citizens, and stimulates economic growth and development. The ANC supports
the report. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, in view of the departmental expenditure report
of the second and third quarters of 2005-06, the MF is pleased that the
departments have spent a significant portion of their budgets. With 47,50%
having been spent by end of the second quarter, indications show an
intention to deliver.

We are pleased with the Department of Education, which spearheaded spending
in that quarter with 75,18% of its budget. Further, as the third quarter
concluded, overall spending was at 70,47%. We view expenditure for 2005-06
as fairly consistent. The MF does, however, express concern regarding
underspending and roll-overs.

Concerning the annual report of the Joint Budget Committee, we are pleased
with it but we would like to stress the importance of oversight visits that
we hope will be embarked upon this year. The MF supports the reports.

Mr S L DITHEBE: Deputy Chair, thank you very much for this opportunity to
address the House. In fact, in trying to do so I have realised that I have
left part of my speech behind. [Interjections.] It is indeed a very short
speech. I think I have left it behind.

I would like to say with regard to the report of the Joint Budget Committee
- despite the strident voices we hear every time from this side, which
strident voices say that by virtue of its majority the ANC will always sing
the praises of the executive and ignore those very uncomfortable areas in
so far as the oversight by Parliament of the executive is concerned – that
the support of this report by all parties today is itself evidence to the
effect that the ANC will not shy away from exposing difficulties wherever
they are found and does not see any contradiction in playing that role and,
in fact, giving credit where it is due.
This is, in fact, what the ANC is doing today. That the chairperson of the
Joint Budget Committee can stand in front of this House and talk about the
most uncomfortable trends in expenditure in various departments and, at the
same time, where these departments have done well, credit them, is in fact
proof of what I have said earlier.

I must say that because June 16 was celebrated only a few days ago, we must
not forget that this month is still celebrated as Youth Month. I would like
to paraphrase Nicaraguan poet, revolutionary and priest Carlos Castaneda,
who said that we must always think of those who died because we are where
we are today because of their sacrifices. In fact, our Constitution calls
on us to honour those who suffered and sacrificed in order for us to have
the sweet freedom and dignity we enjoy as a people today.

As we think of those who died, we must ask whether we are increasing the
availability of life-sustaining goods and services like health, food,
protection, shelter and other things. We must ask whether we are raising
the standard of living generally for everybody. I have no doubt that many
of us will answer in the affirmative, but I would like to add that many
challenges still abound. These challenges include the Department of
Education, which has been spending its resources well recently, but is
nonetheless confronted with vexing situations of the kind contained in the
report of the SA Human Rights Commission, despite all the good intentions
to utilise these resources economically, efficiently and effectively.
The Departments of Sport and Recreation, Land Affairs and Agriculture are
some of the culprits who must be strongly cajoled into spending their
allocated budgets, as has been mentioned by the chairperson and other
speakers. The lessons we draw from this experience is that Parliament is
endowed with immense powers to scrutinise and oversee executive action.

The National Treasury has asked Parliament to debate the research paper
that I have here and that is called “Guideline for Legislative Oversight
Through Annual Reports”. Perhaps we might realise that we do not as yet
need powers to amend the budget. I know that there might be very strong
arguments in support of that, but I think proposals and information that we
are familiar with already that are contained in here will make us realise
that we not exercising those powers as well as we should.

We shall continue to deepen our oversight work as the Joint Budget
Committee and work synergistically and nonantagonistically with sector
portfolio structures in this institution.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr S L DITHEBE: In this age of hope, as we work and yearn for the soul of
the new nation, we shall always think of those who died, even from these
hallowed Chambers. I thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chair, we move that the
Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
                      VISIT TO PRISONS IN NORTHERN CAPE

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
       VISIT TO DURBAN-WESTVILLE CORRECTIONAL CENTRE IN KWAZULU-NATAL


Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, Minister, Members of Parliament, the phrase
“overcrowding in Correctional Services” has become almost part and parcel
of the uniform of this department.

There is a view out there that one of the main causes of overcrowding is
the minimum sentence. Some people are arguing that we must do away with the
legislation in this regard. I don’t think so. It is not true that this
minimum sentence causes overcrowding.

Let’s go to the heart of overcrowding. The problem is awaiting-trial
inmates. Let me argue further. Why do we have people sitting in prison
awaiting trial for as long as seven years before they can appear before a
magistrate or a judge? A recent example is a young lady who has been
sitting in Pollsmoor prison. She has been sitting there for three years
waiting to appear in court. She was 17 years old when she was arrested, and
she is now 20 years old. That is the problem with regard to overcrowding,
not the minimum sentence.

We are sitting with 50 000 awaiting-trial prisoners in our prisons. When we
visited Durban-Westville prison in KwaZulu-Natal we found that, there
alone, we had 5 000 prisoners awaiting trial.

The report on our visit to the Northern Cape is a bit different from other
reports. In the conclusion of the report we say that we are very impressed
with the good communication channels between all the role-players in the
criminal justice cluster in this province. This is the only way to address
the problem of overcrowding in our prisons. In all five towns, from
Kimberley to Upington, everybody is working together and looking for
solutions to this problem: magistrates, police, prosecutors, legal aid
boards and NGOs - all of them are involved.

We know that there will always be challenges, and I want to mention some of
these. They are danger allowance, recruitment of new members, the morale of
staff, lack of females in management positions, and the high number of
people filling acting positions.

Let me deal with one of these challenges, and that is recruitment. In
Kimberley and Upington we held izimbizo. People, especially the youth,
complained about the process of applying for employment in the department.
They said that some of them filled in forms every time vacancies were
advertised, but that they were not short-listed. They claim that some
people apply only once and are successful. They want to know what criteria
are being used to select these people. We must give urgent attention to
this concern, because people are raising this problem all over and not only
in these two towns.

The committee visited Durban-Westville prison and found that the biggest
problem there was overcrowding, as I said earlier on. Overcrowding ranges
from 131% in the youth centre to 228% in Medium B alone. A very serious
challenge in this prison is the high number of HIV/Aids cases. Aids is
prevalent amongst the majority of inmates.

Regarding the inmate tracking system that was installed earlier last year,
it is of great concern to the committee that the equipment got lost. That
equipment consisted of 8 292 tags worth R7 million. The problem has not
been addressed as this loss was reported in February last year. The total
cost of this contract amounts to R28 million.

Under very difficult circumstances the staff of the department are doing
their best and are always willing to give their best. I want to tell
members of this House that we have very loyal, dedicated and honest members
in this department. There are only a handful of corrupt and rotten apples.

On behalf of the committee, I want to thank Commissioner Mti, the regional
commissioner of the Northern Cape Mr Modise, and the area commissioner of
KwaZulu-Natal Mr Manana, for the good work that they are doing in this
area. It is an honour for me to present these two reports to the House.

Let me deal with an issue regarding the privileges of inmates. I have said
many a time that we must really look at the privileges. We can’t have
murderers, criminals and rapists enjoying the very same privileges as all
other inmates in prison. We must take them and say to them, as the Minister
said last week when two criminals were arrested that had escaped from
Middledrift prison, that they are going to spend the rest of their lives in
Kokstad. I fully support you, Minister. We must show these people that we
are sick and tired of escapes and of threats to our law-abiding citizens.

Minister, in some of these prisons these inmates think that they are free.
They want to control members, law-abiding citizens who have done nothing
wrong. They are there to dictate. Even if a member is responding, they are
going to be charged. I think we must really address that. Many of the
members complain and say that these inmates now have “better privileges
than us”. Minister, we must address these things.

These people have committed serious crimes outside. When they land up in
prison, they think that they will, all of a sudden, know the Constitution
and their rights in prison, because they are sitting there with a
Constitution. They say, “this and that are my rights”. That is nonsense.

We must think first. We are not going to interfere with their
constitutional rights, but we must take away some of their privileges. They
can’t sit and watch television and have a nice time in prison. It must be
taken away. They must feel that they have done something wrong.
[Interjections.] You are next. We are going to put you in jail and you are
not going to talk like this. You are going to be very ... [Inaudible.] ...
in prison. We are going to deal with you. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, your time has expired, on
that note.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair ...

Mr D V BLOEM: No. There are still 20 seconds. I can see the clock,
Chairperson. Let me deal with Mr Ellis.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Bloem, I am in the Chair here and
you will speak through me. If I have decided that your time has expired, it
has expired.

Mr D V BLOEM: I thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, does that mean that my point of order falls
away?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): It does. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: I am sure I stood up before he actually had finished.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Deputy Chief Whip, please say
that again.

Mr M J ELLIS: I said that I’m sure I stood to give a point of order before
he had finished.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): You certainly did. But I hastened the
end of his speech. So it was my decision to stop the speech, and you spoke
after I had told him to stop.

Mr M J ELLIS: Well, I think you did us a favour by ending his speech, Madam
Chair. So I will sit down. [Laughter.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Hon Chairperson, Minister, members, on behalf of my bench-
mate the hon James Selfe, I want to apologise that the DA was unfortunately
unable to attend the oversight visit to the Northern Cape, but participated
in the three-day visit to the Durban-Westville Correctional Centre.

Durban-Westville is a vast complex, consisting of five prisons,
accommodating about 12 500 inmates, which is roughly double its capacity.

The overcrowding leads to a number of problems. The staff are overworked
and stressed, the environment in which they work is very dangerous,
caseloads are impossibly large, and the lack of physical space and the
shortage of professional staff inhibit opportunities for rehabilitation.

There are other problems too. The lack of promotion opportunities and the
absence of subsidised housing lead to staff demotivation. But other
problems pale into insignificance measured against the reality of
overcrowding.

As usual, overcrowding is everyone’s problem and therefore also no one’s
problem. The committee heard that the diversion programmes were
problematic, owing to the absence of information about previous
convictions, while the magistrates reported that they had never received
applications in terms of section 287(4) of the Criminal Procedure Act to
convert sentences into those of correctional supervision.

It is very frustrating when Parliament establishes mechanisms to release
inmates in a controlled and responsible way, but these mechanisms are
ignored or rendered useless.

More worrying still was the situation around the inmate tracking system.
This is an excellent system – in theory. Each inmate wears an electronic
tag, which allows the staff to determine who is in the facility without
having to do a roll call, and whether the right inmate is in the right part
of the facility at the right time. This, of course, depends on the system
working.

When the committee visited Medium A in which the system has been installed,
the system was not working terribly well. It was unable to show tell
members of the committee who was in a particular section. Moreover, and I
must repeat what the hon Bloem said, a total of 8 292 tags valued at some
R7 million were lost during the implementation period of this project.

Despite having commenced in November 2004, the system has not been fully
implemented. It seems as if some staff members have actively resisted or
even sabotaged the implementation. If true, this is a scandalous situation
that the public accounts committee should investigate thoroughly.
The most tragic aspect of the visit was listening to nurses describe the
challenges they face in dealing with the large number of Aids-infected
inmates. Huge problems are encountered in rolling out ARVs in the prison
environment, while many people who ought to be released on medical
discharges cannot be released because their families will not accept them
or because the judges are unwilling to grant the applications.

The committee, however, should be congratulated on the active way in which
it tackles its oversight responsibilities. The DA supports the report and
the recommendations.

Maar aangesien die besoek al verlede jaar plaasgevind het, is ons
teleurgesteld dat die aanbevelings nie intussen ten volle ingestel is nie.
Die departement sal hieraan moet aandag gee. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[But considering that the visit already took place last year, we are
disappointed that the recommendations have not yet been fully implemented.
The department will have to attend to this. [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mrs S A SEATON: Madam Chair, hon members, the IFP supports the report of
the portfolio committee on its oversight visits to prisons in the Northern
Cape in October 2005 and to the Durban-Westville Correctional Centre in
KwaZulu-Natal in March 2006. We fully align ourselves with the concerns
expressed in these reports and support the recommendations as well.

I share the concerns of Mr Bloem with regard to the overcrowding, but I
unfortunately do not have the time to go into it. But, certainly, our staff
have tremendously trying conditions to work under, and I think we need to
just say to them that we do support them and we do understand.

I was also unfortunately unable to attend the Northern Cape visit but did
attend the Durban-Westville one. As far as the Durban-Westville
Correctional Centre is concerned, the IFP shares the frustration of the
committee particularly with regard to the implementation of the inmate
tracking system and the centre where it is merely used for identification
purposes - that’s all that it’s being used for. It is hugely problematic
that lost equipment, as we’ve heard, amounted to some R7 million, and that
the matter had not been addressed for a long time after it had been
reported.

The biggest shock, however, was that we were informed that the inmate
tracking system was functional, but this was not the case, as we’ve already
heard from Mr Doman, when the committee visited the database room at the
centre. The IFP therefore wholly supports the committee’s insistence that
the department must please come back and report to us within three months
after today’s adoption of the report.
In conclusion, I wish to raise a concern that the committee’s report on the
visit to the Northern Cape, which took place in October last year, is only
now being considered by this House. This is far too long and we need to
ensure that our reports are dealt with timeously. The IFP does support the
reports and the recommendations. I thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Chair, the ACDP shares the concerns regarding the high
numbers of awaiting-trial prisoners who do not pose a danger to society,
but who cannot afford the relatively low bail amount, in question, which
may be as little as R100. Overcrowding remains a problem, as has been
pointed out, and is the root cause of health problems and the spread of
diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV/Aids.

The ACDP also raised our concerns regarding the capacity problems
experienced by community corrections. We note that complaints were raised
by officials in the Northern Cape about a lack of staff and vehicles which,
according to officials, hampers their ability to monitor parolees and
probationers effectively.

However, hon Minister, there is good news. We particularly welcome the
restorative justice activities at various prisons, which create or build a
better relationship between the offender and the aggrieved party. A
highlight, mentioned in one report, was the handing over of a house that
was built by inmates to a victim of crime. To the department we say well
done in that regard. The ACDP will support these reports. I thank you.

Ms S RAJBALLY: Chairperson, Minister, in view of the portfolio committee’s
report regarding their visit to prisons in the Northern Cape, the MF seeks
that the Northern Cape and Free State be separated as correctional service
regions and that each be given a suitable budget to address the sector’s
needs. The overcrowding of prisons, minimal resources, staff constraints
and minimal funding appear to be the key problems in these prisons.

We are pleased to note that there is good communication between all
components of the criminal justice cluster in this region. We call for the
challenge to be addressed through better funding. Further, we call on the
SA Police Service in these regions to clamp down on offenders in terms of
gangsterism, rape and murder.

As for the correctional facility in Durban-Westville, similar constraints
of serious overcrowding, minimal resources and staff shortages are noted.
These need to be addressed earnestly if we are to deliver South Africa from
its scary crime infestation. We would appreciate some input on this
facility’s expenditure traits to analyse how to address its shortfalls. The
MF supports the report. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr L M GREEN: Chairperson, the FD commends the chairperson as well as all
the members of the Correctional Services committee who undertook the trips
to both the Northern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, visiting several prisons in
these provinces. The detailed reports are evidence of much hard work done.
Well done!

The FD is particularly encouraged by the restorative justice activities at
the Kuruman Correctional Centre, especially the good example set by the
inmates of this centre in building a house for a victim of crime in this
area.

We would like to encourage the Minister and the Department of Correctional
Services to continue to explore creative ways to increase restorative
justice activities.

The FD supports all the recommendations in this report, especially the one
that says that no person shall be kept in prison longer than the time
allocated in his or her sentence. It is criminal to keep people in prison
if they have served their time, especially if we note that the report says
that the Northern Cape prisons have 173% occupancy. The FD supports this
report. I thank you.

Mr E T XOLO: Deputy Chairperson, the visit to the prisons in Durban-
Westville and the Northern Cape was informed by the need to have an insight
of prison situations as part of the committee’s ongoing oversight. As
revealed in the reports, there are challenges and achievements in the
sphere of imprisonment.

It is proper to say that in line with ANC policies the Department of
Correctional Services is committed to rehabilitation programmes. The
reports show that various programmes rendered are informed by the diverse
needs of different offenders. Some of the cases in both prisons are dealt
with through restorative justice in terms of which the victim and the
offenders are allowed to resolve disputes through negotiations facilitated
by a professional officer. These approaches should be informed by the need
to reduce the backlog and take into account the nature of crimes and the
ages of the offenders in order to reduce overcrowding.

Ngakolunye uhlangothi, imibiko yalo Mnyango isisibonise isidingo esikhulu
sokubambisana nomphakathi ekuhleleni ukuthi kube khona izinhlelo
ezenziwayo, ikakhulu uma kukhona abazokhululwa ejele, ukuze kungabe
kusenzeka ukuthi bazithole sebebuyela ejele futhi. Lezi zinhlelo zenzelwa
ukuthi bemukeleke kahle emphakathini.

Olunye uhlangothi lugxile ekuthini lokho isiboshwa esikufunde sisesejele,
okunjengomsebemzi wezandla nemfundo yolwazi, sikwazi ukuphila ngakho;
nokuthi abamabhizinisi bakwazi ukuqasha labo abakade beboshiwe, noma
bazakhele owabo umsebenzi bangabheki ukuba wokhamisa ngithele. Ngokwenza
kanjalo labo bantu baba ngamalunga omphakathi ophilayo nowethembekile.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[On the other hand, the reports of this department show that there is a
huge need to collaborate with the public in planning programmes to be put
in place, particularly if there are inmates who are due to be released from
prison, so that they don’t return to prison. These programmes are
undertaken to make sure that they are reintegrated with the community.

The other part is focusing on what an inmate has learned while in prison,
which is craft skills and skills knowledge and to be able to earn a living
with such skills. Businesspeople would be able to employ such ex-inmates or
they can open their own businesses and avoid being beggars. By so doing,
these people can be members of a loyal and good society.]

All forms of discrimination against offenders should not be allowed. It is
noted in both reports on the visited prisons that the HIV/Aids pandemic is
on the rise. In this regard, the deaths of ill inmates in prison should be
avoided as stated in the Correctional Services Act, Act 111 of 1998. This
calls for more professional staff in order to assess health-related
matters, make appropriate recommendations and take preventive measures.

In conclusion, it is noticeable in the reports that holistic approaches are
of vital importance to ensuring the success of rehabilitation goals. This
requires the involvement of the community, business, police members, NGOs,
judicial officers and even the Department of Social Development.

Above all, recommendations made by the portfolio committee should be
implemented and there should be a follow-up visit resulting from previous
visits. This will ensure that visits do not just take place for their own
sake, but that a proper process is put in place for the future. The ANC
supports this report. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Chairperson, hon members, I must
first of all thank the portfolio committee. We do appreciate the oversight
work of the portfolio committee, which greatly assists us in fulfilling our
mandate. It is very ably led by the hon Dennis Bloem. Thank you to him and
all the members of the portfolio committee. There are always fireworks when
my chairperson comes to this podium. There are also fireworks when he goes
to the prisons on visits, because my officials know that he won’t take
anything lying down. He’ll make sure that things get moving.

What you have done today as Members of Parliament is that you have actually
contributed to an operation we have in Correctional Services called
Operation Masibambisane. As you’ll be going out to the different areas
where you live, please continue visiting our centres and make sure that as
you visit our centres you follow up on some of the things that are in these
two reports. It’s always very heartening to hear members say, “I tried to
visit or I visited this centre.”

I’ve just been talking to Mawa Ramgobin about restorative justice. I didn’t
know that he was so interested in it. He came to talk to me about it. So,
when you hear it mentioned here, you must know that lots of people are
involved and want to help. Judy Chalmers also approached – she wants to
visit a prison in her constituency. I really appreciate that kind of
approach in which our members go out - Mr Mlangeni - to visit these
centres. Xa bebona wena isithwalandwe [When they see you as a man of great
deeds] and having known what prison life is like, they will gain some
insight into what they can come out with in prison, particularly the
juveniles. [Applause.]

Let me quickly go through some of the issues. With regard to the inmate
checking system in Durban-Westville, I would like to assure the committee
that the problems around this system are being attended to with more vigour
now. We’ve identified the culprits who sabotaged the system by stealing
those 8 292 tracking tags or gadgets at the Durban Westville Correctional
Centre, and they are facing disciplinary action.

The pilot programme is still going on, because we want to make a success of
it, and it can then go to other centres. All the gadgets were recovered and
we’re now dealing with the thugs who stole those gadgets. [Applause.]

In terms of professionals – nurses, psychologists and other professionals
we have spoken about - the underlying problem with regard to this in our
centres is the issue of remuneration. It’s very difficult because we’ve got
to deal with other departments in terms of their remuneration. This is a
matter that we’ve decided to prioritise during this financial year so that
we attract the best skilled professionals to our centres.

The recruitment drive is aimed at ensuring that the centres that have a
dire shortage of such professionals are taken care of. We’re also reviewing
their salary packages so that we are able to retain them within the
department.

There are rehabilitation problems in our centres, and it is compulsory -
I’ve taken that decision - for all juveniles to attend rehabilitation
programmes. If they do not, they then get penalties. So, regarding the
privileges that you were talking about that we should take away,
chairperson, please help me so that we can do those things. Take away those
privileges.

No offenders are going to tell us what to do. We did not collect them from
the streets. We didn’t invite them to come to where they are now. They
committed crimes. So we should treat them as such - without being inhumane,
without stripping them of their dignity, without taking away any of their
constitutional rights, but they should know who is who in the zoo.
[Applause.]

As stated previously, the department is currently in the process of
conducting an HIV and Aids prevalence survey and we do hope that when we
finish that we can bring those statistics here to the House and let the
House know what the situation is in terms of HIV and Aids.

Meanwhile, other comprehensive HIV and Aids treatment initiatives, which we
are conducting jointly with the Department of Health, are proceeding. These
include further accreditation of three correctional centres. Three of our
centres have been accredited as ARV sites in addition to Grootvlei in the
Free State and Qalakabusha in Pietermaritzburg.

Regarding the release of terminally ill inmates, I have publicly stated
that we are considering the release of terminally ill inmates so that their
welfare could be better taken care of by their relatives. Those without
relatives to take care of them could be placed in government health care
centres so that they can go home or, if they are going to die, they can at
least die in dignity and not behind bars. We have relayed this matter to
the Parole Review Board and to the National Council of Correctional
Services, which is helping me.
We are improving our internal communications. We are also looking at the
staff morale. That is why we had internal promotions this year to try to
lift the morale of our staff members, and we will continue doing so, even
this year. We took them from Grade 3 to Grade 2 and then to Grade 1. We
will start some time this year from Grade 1 upward, and try to get them
promoted. [Applause.]

I just want to say one thing about recruitment. It has been a problem. The
Jali commission, which we spoke about today – this document - has indicated
that we need to outsource our recruitment drive because our members
interfere with that. We’ve done exactly that. We have two companies that
are doing that. But I can assure members of one thing: it still takes a
long time to get to the stage at which you get all the information you
want, because of the numbers of people who apply to Correctional Services –
who want to work for us.

With regard to overcrowding, Nicro had a workshop during the past two days,
a colloquium, where our lovely Deputy Minister participated in that
programme. She assisted in that colloquium, which sat for two days. Our new
Acting Judge, Judge Nathan Erasmus, also participated, and we are hoping to
get good things from that process.

Lastly, we are overhauling community corrections. It needs a total
overhaul. I’m sitting on the Chief Deputy Commissioner for Correctional
Services, Tebogo Motseki, to make sure that we overhaul community
corrections so that judges can have confidence in community corrections and
then divert those that don’t deserve to be in prison into that system. We
need to make that system a good one. [Applause.]

Separate regions? Not yet. We are still restructuring a lot of things, so
we cannot go into anything about separate regions at the moment because we
are still building capacity.

I must, as I stand here, thank the former Minister because he started the
Jali commission. He went to the President. I must thank him for that, and
it has come out with good recommendations. We will try to really look at
those recommendations and make sure that we apply them - recommendations
that the portfolio committee has made on these two reports, and I’ve read
the reports. We will, as a department, make sure that we stick to whatever
recommendations you have given us. Please do not get tired of calling us to
the portfolio committee to report on the work that we do. We don’t feel bad
about that. Actually, to me, that is operation Masibambisane. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Hon Minister, will you please take
your seat. Hon member?

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chair, can we as the IFP acknowledge that compliment
from the Minister?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms C-S Botha): Well, you have done so. Thank you.
Hon Minister?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Well, hon Ben belongs to the IFP.
So, it stands to reason that you can take that compliment for yourselves.

I also want to thank the members of staff all over the country, and to
thank the senior management of the department who help when these visits
take place, who go with the team and make sure that they are part of the
team and know the problems that we have. Correctional Services is not an
easy department – it does not need a softy to try to run it; it needs a
bastard. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, we move that the
reports be noted, and in saying that we want to make it clear that it’s not
for any disagreement with what is in the reports or the recommendations. I
think we’ve indicated that we also fully support those recommendations. But
the problem with the time-lag has been alluded to in the debate, and we
feel that there would be technical problems in adopting the reports as
opposed to noting them. That’s the only reason we move that they be noted.
Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

Reports accordingly noted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION
    231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION - CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL INTERESTS IN
                              MOBILE EQUIPMENT

   CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT IN TERMS OF SECTION
                        231(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION -
 CONVENTION FOR THE UNIFICATION OF CERTAIN RULES FOR INTERNATIONAL CARRIAGE
                                   BY AIR

There was no debate.

Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment and Convention
for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air
approved.

The House adjourned at 17:42.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
                           THURSDAY, 15 JUNE 2006


CREDA INSERT REPORT- Insert T060615E-insert – PAGES 1429-1441

                            MONDAY, 19 JUNE 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism:


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism on 19 June 2006 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(6) classified the following Bill as a money Bill:


             a) Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws
                Bill [B 14 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 77).


     (2)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism on 19 June 2006 in terms of Joint
         Rule 160(3) classified the following Bill as a section 75 Bill:


           (a)   Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of
               Taxation Laws Bill [B 15 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec
               75).


National Assembly

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Home Affairs for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Vote 4 – Department of Home
             Affairs for 2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 53-2006].


    2.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development:

          a) A report in terms of section 9(5)(b) of the Magistrates’ Courts
             Act, 1944 (Act No 32 of 1944), a list containing information
             with regard to vacancies in the offices of magistrates which
             have remained unfilled for a continuous period exceeding three
             months as on 31 March 2006.

    3.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development, the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and Security and the Joint Standing Committee on
        Intelligence:


          a) Proclamation No R67 published in Government Gazette No 28282
             dated 29 November 2006: Commencement of sections 40 and 62(6)
             of the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
             Provision of Communication-Related Information Act, 2002 (Act
             No 70 of 2002): Amendment of Proclamation.

    4.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration:

          a) The Corporate Strategy of the Department of Science and
             Technology for (2006/7) 2005/6 to 2008/9.

    5.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State
             of the Public Service for 2006 [RP 39-2006].

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Safety and Security:


          a) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             January 2004 to December 2004, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
             the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 115 of 1998) [RP 209-
             2004].


          b) Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) for
             January 2005 to December 2005, in terms of section 18(5)(c) of
             the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of 1998) [RP 56-
             2006].


    7.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for consideration:


          a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Environmental Affairs and
             Tourism for 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2010, 2006/07 Review.

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration:


          a) Medium Term Performance Plan of the Department of Provincial
             and Local Government for 2006 to 2009.


    9.      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration:

        (a)      Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for
             2006.


    10.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Minerals and Energy for consideration and report. The Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements is referred to the
        Standing Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Mineral Technology
             (Mintek) for 2004-2005, including the Report f the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 58-2005].

    11.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local
        Government:


        (a)      Government Notice No 362 published in Government Gazette
             No 28740 dated 13 April 2006: Publication of Local Government
             allocations and frameworks, in terms of the Division of Revenue
             Act, 2006 (Act No 2 of 2006).


    12.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Labour:

        (a)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Project: Learnership Training System
             Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
             Learnership Training System Programme.

        (c)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
             of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
             Germany concerning the Project: Skills Development Strategy
             Initiative (SDSI), tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
             Constitution, 1996.

          d) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
             Skills Development Strategy Initiative (SDSI).

    13.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Public Service and
        Administration and the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
        Constitutional Development:

        a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning the Project: Legislative Drafting Programme,
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
           Legislative Drafting Programme.

    14.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Provincial and Local Government
        and the Portfolio Committee Foreign Affairs:


        a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning the Project: Mpumalanga Rural Development
           Programme, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
           Mpumalanga Rural Development Programme.


    15.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Safety and Security and the
        Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology:


        a) Agreement between the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium and
           the Government of the Republic of South Africa on Technology-
           Aided Distance Self Learning in the South African Police
           Service, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution,
           1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Agreement between the Government
           of the Kingdom of Belgium and the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa on Technology-Aided Distance Self Learning in the
           South African Police Service.

    16.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Provincial and Local Government for consideration:


        a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning the Project: Technology Diffusion through
           Technikons, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
           Constitution, 1996.


        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
           Technology Diffusion through Technikons.

    17.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance, the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Joint
        Monitoring Committee on the Improvement of Quality of Life and
        Status of Children, Youth and Disabled Persons:

        a) Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic of
           South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning the Project: Peace and Development Project,
           tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
           the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
           Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the
           Project: Peace and Development Project.

        (c)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
           of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning Financial Cooperation in 2005, tabled in
           terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between
           the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
           Government of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
           Financial Cooperation in 2005.

    18.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Finance and the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry:

        (a)      Exchange of Letters between the Government of the Republic
           of South Africa and the Government of the Federal Republic of
           Germany concerning the Project: Programme to Develop Markets for
           Business Development Services, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
           of the Constitution, 1996.

        b) Explanatory Memorandum on the Exchange of Letters between the
           Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
           the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the Project:
           Programme to Develop Markets for Business Development Services.

    19.     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Agriculture and Land Affairs for consideration and report:


        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission on
             Restitution of Land Rights for 2005-2006 [RP 54-2006].


     20.    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on the
        Auditor-General for consideration and report:


        (a)      Activity Report of the Auditor-General for 2004-2005 [RP
        231-2005].

     21.    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Education:


        (a)      Government Notice No 540 published in Government Gazette
             No 28719 dated 10 April 2006: Call for written submissions from
             stakeholder bodies and members of the public on the draft
             policy document: An addendum to the policy document, the
             National Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
             National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners
             with special needs, in terms of the National Education Policy
             Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996).


        (b)      Government Notice No 603 published in Government Gazette
             No 28806 dated 8 May 2006: Call for comment on the Further
             Education and Training Colleges Bill, 2006.

        (c)      Government Notice No 265 published in Government Gazette
             No 28657 dated 24 March 2006: Calling for the nomination of
             persons to serve as members on the Second Umalusi Council for
             General and Further Education and Training Quality Assurance
             for the period 8 June 2006 until 7 June 2010, in terms of the
             Act, 2001 (Act No 58 of 2001).


        (d)      Government Notice No 593 published in Government Gazette
             No 28790 dated 3 May 2006: National policy regarding further
             education and training programmes: Approval of Modern Greek as
             an additional subject to be listed in the National Curriculum
             Statement: Grades 10-12 (General), in terms of the National
             Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and the South African
             Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).

    22.     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism:


          a) Government Notice No 385 published in Government Gazette No
             28753 dated 21 April 2006: Regulations in terms of Chapter 5,
             made in terms of the National Environmental Management Act,
             1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).


          b) Government Notice No 597 published in Government Gazette No
             28803 dated 5 May 2006: Draft Regulations relating to listed
             threatened or protected species, made in terms of the National
             Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of
             2004).

          c) Government Notice No 598 published in Government Gazette No
             28803 dated 5 May 2006: Draft national norms and standards for
             the regulation of the hunting industry in South Africa, made in
             terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity
             Act, 2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

     1) Report and Financial Statements of the Road Accident Fund (RAF) for
        2004-2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements for 2004-2005 [RP 34-2006].

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Second Small
   Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill [B 15 – 2006]
   (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 June 2006:


      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered the  subject  of
      the Second Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of  Taxation  Laws
      Bill [B15 – 2006]   (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it,  and
      classified by the Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a  section  75  Bill,
      reports the Bill without amendment.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Finance on the Small Business
   Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill [B 14 – 2006] (National
   Assembly – sec 77), dated 14 June 2006:

      The Portfolio Committee on Finance, having considered and examined the
      Small Business Tax Amnesty and Amendment of Taxation Laws Bill, [B14 –
      2006]  (National Assembly – sec 77), referred to it, and classified by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a  Money  Bill,  reports  that  it  has
      agreed to the Bill.


3.    Twenty-Third Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  Water
   Research Commission, dated 15 March 2006:

1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Water Research Commission for the year ended
      31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
      follows:

2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Water Research Commission is necessary for
      the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

4.     Twenty-Fourth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
   Umalusi Council for Quality Assurance, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Umalusi Council for Quality Assurance for the year
      ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports
      as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Umalusi Council for Quality  Assurance  is
      necessary for the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.


5.     Twenty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
   Sedibeng Water Board Qwaqwa, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION


      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Sedibeng Water Board Qwaqwa for the year ended
      31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
      follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Sedibeng Water Board Qwaqwa  is  necessary
      for the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

6.    Twenty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts:  State
   President Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the State President Fund for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION
      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the State President Fund is necessary for  the
      financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.


7.    Twenty-Seventh Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  South
   African Institute for Drug Free Sport, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the South African Institute For Drug-Free Sport for the
      year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
      reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the  South  African  Institute  For  Drug-Free
      Sport is necessary for the financial year under review.
      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.


8.     Twenty-Eighth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
   Refugee Relief Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Refugee Relief Fund for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Refugee Relief Fund is necessary  for  the
      financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

9.    Twenty-Ninth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Umngeni
   Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:
   1. INTRODUCTION


      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Umngeni Water Board for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Umngeni Water Board is necessary  for  the
      financial year under review..

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

10.   Thirtieth Report of Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Trans-
   Caledon Tunnel Authority, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority for the year ended
      31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as
      follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting  Authority  of  the  Trans-Caledon  Tunnel   Authority   is
      necessary for the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

11.   Thirty-First Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts,  Social
   Relief Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Social Relief Fund for the year ended 31 March 2005,
      tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION
      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Social Relief Fund is  necessary  for  the
      financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

12.   Thirty-Second Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  South
   African National Accreditation System, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the South African National Accreditation System for the
      year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
      reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority  of  the  South  African  National  Accreditation
      System is necessary for the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

13.   Thirty-Third Report of Standing Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  Rand
   Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Rand Water Board for the year ended 31 March 2005,
      tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Rand Water  Board  is  necessary  for  the
      financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

14.   Thirty-Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Public  Accounts:  Rural
   Housing Loan Fund, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Rural Housing Loan Fund is  necessary  for
      the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.
15.    Thirty-Fifth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
   Magalies Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Magalies Water Board for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Magalies Water Board is necessary for  the
      financial year under review.


      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

16.   Thirty-Sixth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:  Namaqua
   Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION
      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Namaqua Water Board for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Namaqua Water Board is necessary  for  the
      financial year under review.


      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

17.   Thirty-Seventh  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:
   Overberg Water Board, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the Overberg Water Board for the year ended 31 March
      2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting Authority of the Overberg Water Board is necessary for  the
      financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

18.   Thirty-Eighth Report of Standing Committee on Public Accounts:
   CHIETA, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the CHIETA for the year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in
      Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.
   3. GENERAL MATTERS

      The Committee finds it totally unacceptable that CHIETA did not
      respond to Parliament’s resolution of 2004.
      The Committee further requests CHIETA to supply a thorough explanation
      why the 60 days deadline was not met.


   4. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that, except for the aspects highlighted
      above; no further interaction with the Accounting Authority of the
      CHIETA is necessary for the financial year under review.


      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.

19.    Thirty-Ninth  Report  of  Standing  Committee  on  Public   Accounts:
   National Home Builders Registration Council, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the National Home Builders Registration Council for the
      year ended 31 March 2005, tabled in Parliament and referred to it,
      reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will be equally
      unqualified.


   3. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that  no  further  interaction  with  the
      Accounting  Authority  of  the  National  Home  Builders  Registration
      Council is necessary for the financial year under review.


      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.


20.   Fortieth Report of Standing  Committee  on  Public  Accounts:  FOODBEV
   SETA, dated 15 March 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

      The Standing Committee on Public Accounts, having considered the
      Annual Report and the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
      Statements of the FOODBEV SETA for the year ended 31 March 2005,
      tabled in Parliament and referred to it, reports as follows:

   2. AUDIT OPINION

      The Committee noted the unqualified audit opinion expressed by the
      Auditor-General, and trusts that future audit opinions will equally
      unqualified.


   3. GENERAL MATTERS


      The Committee finds it totally unacceptable that FOODBEV did not
      respond to Parliament’s resolution of 2004.
      The Committee further requests FOODBEV to supply a thorough
      explanation why the 60 days deadline was not met.


   4. CONCLUSION

      The Committee is of the view that, except for the aspects  highlighted
      above; no further interaction with the  Accounting  Authority  of  the
      FOODBEV SETA is necessary for the financial year under review.

      The Committee therefore awaits the next Annual Report and the Report
      of the Auditor General.


21.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the
   Principles and Guidelines Governing Democratic Elections and Standards
   and Norms for Elections, dated 13 June 2006:

   1. SADC PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES GOVERNING DEMOCRATIC ELECTIONS

   The  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)   Principles   and
   Guidelines for Elections were adopted in Mauritius in 2004.  They  govern
   the conduct of  elections  in  SADC  member  countries  with  an  aim  of
   enhancing transparency, credibility of elections,  democratic  governance
   to make  sure  that  elections  are  free  and  fair  and  to  create  an
   environment in which elections result  are  accepted  by  those  who  are
   participating in the election.  The  main  body  of  the  principles  and
   guidelines include inter alia the following:

       Full participation of the citizens in the  political  process  during
       elections.
       Freedom of association.
       Political tolerance.
       Regular interval  for  elections  as  provided  for  in  the  country
       constitution.
       Equal opportunity for all political parties to access State media.
       Equal opportunity to exercise the right to vote and be voted for.
       Independence of the judiciary.
       Impartiality of electoral institutions and voter education.

   The principles  are  developed  with  an  intention  of  encouraging  the
   adherence to broad human rights principles and norms, which would  create
   an environment of peace and political stability. They are not binding  to
   any state or government, but are  voluntary  for  all  member  countries.
   Thus, their implementation solely resides with the individual  government
   or  country  and  in  compliance  with  the  election  standards   and/or
   constitution of that country.

   2. SADC Norms and Standards for Elections

   The SADC Norms and Standards for Elections are based on the  Organisation
   of African Unity (OAU) or African Union  Declaration  on  the  Principles
   Governing Democratic Elections in Africa that was  adopted  at  the  38th
   Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads  of  State  and  Government  in
   2002. They are also designed in accordance with the Universal Declaration
   of Human Rights. The main aspects of the  norms  and  standards  are  the
   following:

        a) The recognition that proper elections should include  a  process
           in which voters are registered to vote and have a  right  to  be
           voted for.
        b) Voting would be secret.
        c) Individuals have a right to freedom of association and  free  to
           express themselves during elections.
        d) Adherence to multi-party democracy.
        e) Political parties must be treated equally, and have a fair share
           of resources  distributed  by  government  for  the  purpose  of
           elections.
        f) Equal  access  to  State  media  by  both  the  ruling  and  the
           opposition parties.
        g) Establishment of an Independent  Electoral  Commission  for  the
           preparation and conduct of elections.
        h) Transparent and Democratic Election process.
        i) Free and Fair Elections.
        j) Voter education.
        k) Political tolerance during election campaigns.
        l) Independent Judicial System in the form of courts to  deal  with
           election offences, appeals  and  petitions  and  post  elections
           legal issues.


   The norms and standards  seek  to  establish  a  regional  barometer  for
   elections in member countries. They also aim  at  buttressing  the  human
   rights standards  of  member  countries  in  line  with  the  AU  and  UN
   declarations and protocols.

   3. Recommendations

   The following are recommendations arising from consideration of the above
   facts and issues relating to the SADC Principles and Norms and Standards:



        a) The SADC principles and norms and standards must  be  harmonised
           as opposed to having two sets of analogous election guidelines.
        b) The central pillar should be to foster the  application  of  one
           single elections barometer for member countries.
        c) Parliament must adopt both the SADC  principles  and  norms  and
           standards as  outlined  with  the  proviso  that  they  will  be
           harmonised.

   The Committee feels that there are no necessities to change  our  current
   norms and there’s no need for these to be harmonised with other  election
   principles.

There is a call for SADC to have one election observation-monitoring tool.

Report to be considered.

22.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Comoros
   Presidential Elections: SA Observer Team, dated 12 June 2006:
   1. INTRODUCTION
       • Within  the  framework  of  the  national  reconciliation  process
         coordinated by the AU and  in  response  to  the  request  of  the
         Comorian authority, the international community deployed observers
         to assess the conduct of the Presidential Elections of 14 May 2006
         in the Comoros.


       • In pursuance of the Peace and Security Council decision  taken  at
         its 47th Session held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on 21  March  2006,
         the  Peace  and  Security  Council  requested  the  African  Union
         Commission to coordinate the efforts of the  AU  partners  in  the
         Comoros in order to facilitate the smooth holding of the  election
         process.


       • South Africa and the African  Union  (AU)  have  been  pivotal  in
         securing the first  round  of  elections  (Primaries).  This  task
         emanates from  the  engagement  by  President  Mbeki  as  well  as
         Minister Dlamini Zuma  in  her  capacity  as  Chairperson  of  the
         Countries of the Region on the Comoros.


       • In terms of the Union Constitution of  Comoros,  the  position  of
         President rotates every 4 years amongst the three  Islands  (Grand
         Comoros, Moheli and Anjouan).


   2. COMPOSITION DELIGATION
   A delegation of 10 members,  consisting  of  five  MPs,  namely,  Mr.  DJ
   Sithole, Ms. M Maunye, Ms. A Van Wyk, Mr. P Smith, Mr. A Steyn and Mr.  F
   Kgodumo of the Youth Commission, Mr. A Mali of the South African  chapter
   of ECOSSOC and officials of DFA (Department of Foreign Affairs),  Amb.  C
   Seleka, Mr. S Mhlana and Ms. M Kekana arrived on the 23 April 2006 in the
   Comoros.
   3. PROGRAMME
       • Ambassador Mabeta of South Africa  introduced  the  delegation  to
         Minister Madeira, the Political head of AMISEC and


       • Ambassador Mouraad of the AU,


       • The Military leadership of AMISEC, Col Sibanyoni and Col Schoeman.




       • The delegation was briefed on the general political  situation  in
         the Comoros and the expectations of AMISEC  given  the  weaknesses
         discussed in the body of this report.


   1. MEETINGS WITH STAKEHOLDERS


   1. Union President, Mr. Azali Asoumani
   2. Minister of Foreign Affairs
   3. President of Grand Comoros, Mr. Abdou Soule Elbak
   4. President of Moheli, Mr. Faull
   5. President of Anjouan, Mr. Mohamed Bacar
   6. Candidates, AA Sambi , M Djannfari  and I Halidi
   7. The Constitutional Court
   8. International Community
   9. All three Island CIECs (Comoros Island Elections Commissions) and  the
      CNEC (Comoros National Elections Commissions).

   4. RESULT OF THE PRIMARY ELECTIONS, 16 APRIL 2006, IN ANJOUAN
   On 16 May 2006, Primaries were held with 13 Presidential candidates  from
   Anjouan contesting the elections. The Primaries determine the  top  three
   candidates that then  contest  the  National  President  Elections.   The
   result of the Primaries on Anjouan was:

|A Sambi                       |26%                               |
|M Djaanfari                   |14.44%                            |
|I Halidi                      |14.30%                            |

   4.1.     Evaluation of the 1st Round  of  Primary  Elections  in  Anjouan
       16/04/06

       Irregularities were noted in the following voting stations:

         i) Nyumakele Region
              -Voting Station of Ongojou 1
              -Voting Station of Mirondroni
         ii) Sima Region
              -Voting Station of Nindri
              -Voting Station of Nindri 2


       Delays in the delivery of election material was noted as one  of  the
       critical weaknesses of CNEC as the late arrival of material  resulted
       in NyuMakhele region’s voting stations opening as late as 13h00.  Due
       to the late opening and other delays, some stations were  allowed  to
       go beyond the 18:00 closing time.

       Sudden changing of polling station presidents resulted in  voters  in
       the affected areas refusing to vote.


      The International Community and AMISEC were also criticized.  It  was
       noted that AMISEC personnel were not in every voting station  despite
       explanations that the Military was efficiently deployed and that they
       were mobile to deal with any  difficulties  within  10  minutes.  The
       expectation remained that AMISEC are required to be placed  at  every
       poling venue.  AMISEC was specifically pressured  to  take  over  the
       elections from the CNEC, as people felt nervous with the  performance
       of the electoral body.


      It was noted that electoral officials in Anjouan gave in to political
       pressure and flaunted CNEC procedures.


      The delegation was briefed about attempts from a certain  section  of
       the political spectrum of the Comoros, arguing for the  annulment  of
       the elections due to perceived irregularities in the above  mentioned
       regions and voting stations. All three Island CIECs raised a  concern
       regarding the non payment or late payment of accounts from  the  side
       of CNEC.


      During the first week of  the  delegation’s  visit  in  the  Comoros,
       several events took place on  the  Island  of  Moheli  that  had  the
       potential to create uncertainty on the ground.  The first was related
       to a march by the military and the second with a strike action at the
       Island’s harbor. Both these issues were addressed with  the  relevant
       role-players and steps were agreed upon to address the situation  and
       ensure that no repetition of it takes place.


   4.2.     Corrective steps to  remedy  the  identified  weakness  for  the
       upcoming  2nd round of Union Presidential elections

       A workshop was held with CNEC, all three CIECs,  IEC,  Observers  and
       AMISEC leadership to work through identified problems  and  agree  on
       corrective  actions  to   be   taken   and   to   allocate   specific
       responsibilities to individuals and bodies.


       The following recommendations came out from the workshop:
         • Increase the Military Component of AMISEC,
         • Increase Civilian Observers and improve their visibility,
         • Appointment of Voting Station Staff to be done in time,
         • IEC to train all election Staff,
         • All election material to be dispatched  in  time  by  CIEC  with
           AMISEC securing the material,
         • Preparations of material to all voting stations to also be  done
           in time,
         • IEC and Observers be deployed in time,
         • Arrangements are made between UNDP, CNEC and the three CIECs  to
           address the late payment of accounts and to ensure that it  does
           not happen again.


   5. ELECTION DAY

   Preliminary results of the Presidential Elections of 14 May 2006.

   The preliminary results for the Presidential elections held on 14 May
   2006, was issued on 16 May 2006 by the Minister of Interior, who is also
   in charge of the elections. The Constitutional Court will issue the
   official announcement of the results no later than Thursday, 18 May 2006.


   The following are the summarised preliminary results for the autonomous
   island of Grande Comoros, Anjouan and Moheli:

|Candidate|Grande      |Moheli      |Anjuoan     |Total       |
|         |Comoros     |            |            |            |
|Sambi    |64,35%      |74,72%      |45,70%      |58,28%      |
|Halidi   |29,50%      |17,86%      |27,65%      |28,01%      |
|Djaafari |6,15%       |8,43%       |26,65%      |13,72%      |

   6. POST ELECTIONS

        • The AU and International observers issued a statement on  16  May
          2006 declaring the elections  free,  fair  and  transparent.  The
          SA/AU observers were deployed to the three islands to  cover  all
          the 624 voting stations. Three members were deployed  in  Moheli,
          five members in Anjouan and five members in Grand Comoros.


        • Other observers come from the  Francophone,  Arab  League,  UNDP,
          Indian Ocean Commission, France, China and the USA.


        • The voting process was conducted smoothly in  almost  all  voting
          stations. There were isolated incidents of  intimidation  against
          some electoral officials and attempts to fraudulently cast  votes
          by using forged ballot papers. The general observation  from  all
          observers was that there were no acts of violence  and  that  the
          general conduct of the Comorian people was commendable.


        • Errors on the voters roll were noted. One voter card  number  was
          used for up to five different voters and this opened  the  voters
          roll to manipulation.


        • The SOMA agreement  tasked  AMISEC  with  the  responsibility  of
          distributing the voting material to all voting  stations.  Voting
          started slightly late in some of the voting stations, with a  few
          voting stations opening very late due to inaccessibility and late
          delivery of materials.


        •  In all voting stations were officials,  party  agents  for  each
          candidate and a member of the AMISEC. It  is  important  to  note
          that certain  voting  stations  had  no  AMISEC  presence  but  a
          contingency plan was  devised  whereby  AMISEC  patrolled  around
          these areas.


        • AMISEC was also tasked with the rollback of all  voting  material
          including envelopes with the results, for each  island,  destined
          for the Constitutional Court.


   7. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

        • Daily meetings were held between members of AMISEC, CNEC and  the
          international community to  discuss  matters  regarding  election
          preparations and to  overcome  anticipated  problems  that  might
          arise during the elections.


        • Training of electoral staff was minimal due  to  poor  logistical
          planning.


        • Lack of Professionalism and poor communication was noted in  some
          members of the IEC.


        • The question of how South Africa’s Institutions  relate  to  each
          other when they are on deployments outside the  country  must  be
          discussed. The approach adopted on the deployment of extra troops
          from RSA to the Comoros is a critical point in hand. The military
          informed  all  stakeholders  in  the  Comoros  and  international
          community about the 850 troops to be deployed by RSA just  before
          the elections. It was the view of  the  RSA  Diplomats  that  the
          matter was best placed between the AU and the RSA Capital and  it
          should not be discussed in the  AMISEC  planning  meetings.  This
          view was not shared by AMISEC and the matter became a  source  of
          tension.


        • The SABC was on the ground and they were unable  to  be  assisted
          effectively by the AMISEC Media office. However, with the arrival
          of the Beeld journalist it was a different case. She  was  picked
          up and dropped at the airport by AMISEC and exclusive  interviews
          were arranged for her.


        • AMISEC Political Head, Mr.  Madeira  and  IEC  expert,  Mr  Steve
          Ngwenya confused the role of observers. In  their  view  the  IEC
          will be responsible for  the  deployment  of  AU,  SA  and  other
          observers. They wanted observers to roll out and roll back voting
          materials and that observers should, together  with  supervisors,
          do trouble shooting during Election Day. After intense debate  it
          was agreed that observers should be allowed to observe  elections
          as per the normal guiding principles of observations.
   8. RECOMMENDATIONS


        • Need to financially capacitate CNEC and  CIEC’s  to  be  able  to
          independently perform their duties in future.
        • Intensive training and skills transfer to CNEC and CIEC’s.
        • Restructuring and depolarization  of  CNEC  and  CIEC’s  and  the
          Constitutional Court.
        • South Africa to consider  assisting  in  the  retraining  of  the
          Comoros Security forces.
        •  Reevaluation  of  the  voter  roll  and  Voters  Cards  and  the
          improvement of its management.
        • The AU mandate to be clearly spelt out to the  Observers  special
          envoys.
        • The SA DFA needs to clarify its  responsibilities  to  the  South
          African Observer Teams.
        • The Institutional relationship to be clarified  and  streamlined,
          (this relates to behavior that has the potential to undermine the
          Diplomatic representatives of RSA, not limited to this  mission).


        • Institutional mandates in any mission to be communicated  clearly
          to all involved so as to avoid the problems noted above.


23.   Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  South
   African Parliament  delegation  to  the  19th  Plenary  Assembly  of  the
   Southern African Development Community - Parliamentary  Forum,  dated  13
   June 2006:

   1. INTRODUCTION

   The 19th Plenary Assembly of the Southern African Development Community-
   Parliamentary Forum (SADC-PF) took place in Gaborone, Botswana from 8 to
   17 December 2005. The theme of the Plenary Assembly was, “ Redefining
   Strategic Priorities of the SADC Parliamentary Forum to Mainstream
   Parliamentary Dimensions to Regional Integration”. The following Members
   of Parliament (MP’s) represented the Parliament of South Africa at the
   Plenary:


      • The Hon. F Hajaig, MP (Head of the Delegation)
      • The Hon. Mr E Sogoni, MP
      • The Hon. Mr W J Seremane, MP
      • The Hon. D J Sithole, MP
      • Two Support Staff, Ms L D Lenzie (legal advisor) and Mr  J  Mokoena
        (researcher), assisted the delegation.

   The Presiding Officers and representatives of the following  twelve  (12)
   of the thirteen member Parliaments of the  Southern  African  Development
   Community Parliamentary Forum attended the Committee meetings and Plenary
   Sessions, viz.:

   Angola                                     Mozambique
   Botswana                                   Namibia
   Democratic Republic of Congo                    South Africa
   Lesotho                                    Swaziland
   Malawi                                     Zambia
   Mauritius                                       Zimbabwe


   The Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania was not represented  as
   it  was  dissolved  pending  the  outcome   of   the   Presidential   and
   Parliamentary elections that were taking place in the country.

   2. OPENING SESSION

   The following dignitaries addressed the opening session:


      • The Speaker of the National Assembly of Botswana, the Honourable
        Patrick Balopi (MP).
      • The Chairperson of the SADC-PF and Speaker of the Zambian
        Parliament, the Honourable Amusaa Mwanamwambwa (MP).
      • The President of the Republic of Botswana and Chairperson of the
        Southern African Development Community (SADC), His Excellency Mr
        Festus Gontebanye Mogae.
      • The Speaker of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Swaziland,
        the Honourable S’gayoyo Magongo (MP).

   2.1.     Welcoming Address by the host Speaker, the Hon Patrick Balopi
   The host Speaker, the Hon  P.  Balopi  welcomed  delegates  to  Gaborone,
   Botswana. The Speaker highlighted the historical commitment  of  Botswana
   to the ideals of SADC as evidenced by the precursor to SADC, the Southern
   African Development Coordinating Conference (SADCC), which was  conceived
   in Botswana. Botswana first hosted the plenary  assembly  in  March  1998
   when the Forum was still very much in its infancy and shortly  after  the
   election of its first executive committee  in  Cape  Town  in  1997.  The
   active participation of the Parliament of Botswana in the work of SADC-PF
   is a contribution that the country makes to the region  and  the  African
   continent. The continued contribution of Botswana Members  of  Parliament
   in the Parliamentary Forum is immense with most of them holding positions
   in the Executive and Standing Committees.  In  September  2005,  Botswana
   hosted a  SADC-PF  regional  seminar  on  Electoral  System  Design.  The
   government of Botswana is committed to the historical mission of SADC-PF.

   2.2.     Welcoming Address by the Chairperson of SADC-PF, the Hon. Amusaa
       Mwanamwambwa

   In his address to the opening session, the Chairperson of the
   Parliamentary Forum stressed the need for closer co-operation and
   collective decision-making on matters that affect citizens of the region.
   He emphasised the importance of Parliamentarians to participate in
   regional politics, development and integration, which could be enhanced
   by the creation of a SADC Parliament. It was pointed out that the 19th
   Plenary Assembly would, among other issues, develop a new Five-Year
   Strategic Plan. The Chairperson congratulated SADC Heads of State and
   Government for raising the threshold of women representation in decision-
   making structures, increasing it from 30% to 50% in line with the African
   Union’s target.


   The SADC-PF will contribute towards the realisation of the goals
   envisioned in the Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (RISDP),
   as adopted in Tanzania. Through the proposed SADC Parliament, the
   objectives and plans of SADC can easily transcend national boundaries of
   countries. The Heads of State and Government, in approving the
   establishment of the SADC-PF foresaw the Forum as a nucleus of a future
   regional Parliament, unfortunately the role of parliamentarians in
   regional co-operation and integration remain undefined. The envisaged
   role of a SADC Parliament is primarily that of bringing parliamentary
   dimension to regional co-operation and integration.


   The coming into being of the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) in 2004 is a
   welcomed development and regional Parliamentary Forums are necessary for
   the PAP to fulfil its functions as outlined in its establishing protocol.
   The Chairperson of SADC must built consensus around the idea of
   establishing a SADC Parliament as a way of completing the building of a
   SADC community with all its constituent components, the Executive,
   Legislature and the Judiciary.


   The Chairperson thanked the Botswana government for hosting the 19th
   Plenary Assembly of the Forum and for the generous hospitality extended
   to delegates. He also thanked His Excellency, President Mogae for
   accepting the invitation to officially open the Plenary Assembly.

   2.3.     Address by the President of Botswana, His Excellency Mr.  Festus
       Gontebanye Mogae

   In his address, the President of Botswana acknowledged the valuable  role
   played by the  SADC  Parliamentary  Forum  over  the  years  in  building
   regional consensus and capacity. He appreciated the role  played  by  the
   Forum in  setting  benchmarks  for  the  promotion  of  gender  equality,
   fighting against HIV and AIDS, and observing  elections  in  SADC  member
   countries. It was noted that  SADC  Election  Observation  Missions  will
   benefit from the Forum’s experience  in  observing  elections  and  thus,
   closer cooperation is necessary.


   The President noted that at the time when the SADC-PF was established  in
   1997, it was  not  considered  necessary  to  establish  a  fully-fledged
   regional Parliament. The President assured the Plenary Assembly that  the
   proposal  to  establish  a  SADC   Parliament   would   receive   careful
   consideration. The President also noted that Parliamentarians have a role
   to play in the RISDP and the Strategic Indicative Plan of  the  Organ  on
   Defence, Politics and Security Co-operation among other SADC declarations
   and protocols.


   2.4.     Vote of thanks by  the  Speaker  of  the  National  Assembly  of
       Swaziland, the Hon. S’gayoyo Magongo
   The Speaker of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Swaziland, the Hon
   S’gayoyo Magongo thanked the President of Botswana for his address to the
   Plenary Assembly and his election to the chairpersonship of SADC. In his
   address, the Speaker posed key questions for consideration and noted that
   the Region is at a time where co-operation at regional level must
   necessarily give way to competition. He called upon the Legislative and
   Executive arms of government to work cooperatively and not to the
   exclusion of the other in order to improve the socio-economic, cultural,
   and political situation of the people.


   The Speaker suggested that the Southern African Development Community
   (SADC) must ask itself the following questions:

      • What difference has it (SADC) made to the lives of women?
      • Has SADC made any difference to the status of women in the society?


      • What concerns do the children have in making it to a university?
      • What difference will SADC make to the people of the region?
      • What is it that will make people to be proud of being  citizens  of
        the region?
      • What are the  necessary  facets  of  a  fully  integrated  Southern
        African Development Community?


   On behalf of SADC-PF, the Speaker suggested that, during  the  tenure  of
   the President of Botswana, as the Chairperson of SADC, there will be  co-
   operation between the Executive and the Legislative  arms  of  government
   and this would be enhanced in order to achieve regional co-operation  and
   integration.

   3. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MEETINGS – KEY ISSUES
   3.1      Report of the Legal Sub-Committee

   The Legal Sub-Committee met and considered the credentials  of  delegates
   to the 19th Plenary Assembly, as prescribed  in  Article  6  (3)  of  the
   Constitution  of  SADC  Parliamentary  Forum.  The  Committee  made   the
   following observations and reported that:

       a) The Parliament of  Tanzania  was  not  represented,  due  to  the
          pending general elections that were taking place in the country.


       b) An apology had been received from the Parliament of South Africa,
          whose  Speaker  is  currently  leading  the  African  Union  (AU)
          Election Observer mission in Tanzania.


       c) Namibia did not have a member from the opposition.


       d) Parliaments of Lesotho, Mauritius and South Africa did  not  have
          representatives   of   their    respective    National    Women’s
          Parliamentary Caucuses, due to the following:


   The Committee also noted that the Chairperson  of  the  Lesotho  National
   Women’s Parliamentary Caucus is currently leading the SADC  Parliamentary
   Forum Election Observation Mission in Tanzania. It  further  noted  that,
   Mauritius is yet to constitute a National  Women’s  Parliamentary  Caucus
   following the elections in July 2005, while South Africa sent an  apology
   on behalf of the  Chairperson  of  the  Country’s  Women’s  Parliamentary
   Caucus.


   It was noted that, most Parliaments had at least one-third representation
   of women  and  members  from  ruling  and  opposition  parties  in  their
   delegations.


   In addition, the Executive Committee adopted a report of the  Legal  Sub-
   Committee  relating  to  Guidelines  for  Elections  of  Chairpersons  of
   Standing Committees. The elections will be conducted in terms of the 2003
   electoral process, which requires that:


       a) Signed nominations for candidates  should  be  submitted  to  the
          Secretary-General a day before the day of elections.


       b) Names of  duly  nominated  candidates  should  be  publicized  to
          committee members the day before elections.

       c) In electing office  bearers,  consideration  should  be  made  to
          gender equity and geographic spread of Member Parliaments.


       d) Election shall be by secret ballot.


       e) Outcome of elections would be  subject  to  ratification  by  the
          Plenary Assembly.


   3.2      Report of the Chairperson

   The Chairperson reported on the following issues:

      • The Office of the Chairperson made courtesy calls to the  Heads  of
        State and Government of Namibia, Botswana, Malawi and Zimbabwe.
      • The courtesy call to the Namibian Head of State took place  on  the
        14th July 2005.
      • The courtesy call on the Head of State of Malawi took place  on  22
        July 2005 under the  leadership  of  the  Hon  Duke  Lefhoko,  Vice
        Chairperson of SADC-PF.
      • The courtesy call delegation to meet the Head of State of  Botswana
        included the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson (Speaker of the National
        Assembly of Botswana) and members of SADC-PF in Botswana.
      • The courtesy visit to  President  Robert  Mugabe  of  Zimbabwe  was
        carried out in terms  of  a  decision  made  at  the  17th  Plenary
        Assembly and 18th Plenary Assembly.
      • The main purpose of the courtesy calls was for SADC-PF to  be  more
        inclusive by  involving  parliamentarians  in  its  structures  and
        programmes.
      • During the visits, the Parliamentary Forum requested the  Heads  of
        State and Government to consider establishing the  SADC  Parliament
        under article 9 (1) of the Treaty, which establishes core organs of
        SADC.
      • The establishment of the SADC Parliament  would  allow  Members  of
        Parliaments to be involved in SADC  matters  through  a  formalised
        legislative arm of SADC.
      • During the courtesy calls, the Presidents  of  Namibia  and  Malawi
        expressed support for the  establishment  of  SADC  Parliament,  of
        which the  Presidents  of  South  Africa  and  Zambia  had  already
        expressed support for the establishment of a SADC Parliament.
      • The Heads of State and Government of Mauritius,  Angola,  Tanzania,
        and DRC were not visited.
      • The Vice-Chairperson of SADC-PF also paid a courtesy visit  to  the
        Hon Prof Ali Nouhoum Diallo, Speaker of the Economic  Community  of
        Western African States (ECOWAS) Parliament in which it  was  agreed
        that the two bodies will work together.

   3.3      Report of the Secretary-General

   The report highlighted the following key points:
      • The institutional development, preparatory work on the  development
        of a new  Five-Year  Strategic  Plan,  support  to  policy  organs,
        relations with SADC, networking and participation at  international
        parliamentary conferences.
      • The actual implementation of the activities which are  expected  to
        be hosted by the different member parliaments will  be  subject  to
        consultation with the respective Parliaments to address  issues  of
        cost sharing, sitting calendars and local expectations,  and  other
        issues.
      • The following are some of the issues that should be considered  for
        incorporation in the work plan:


             i) Knowledge and information  sharing  and  capacity  building
                initiatives  on  parliamentary  reforms  to   enhance   the
                independence and financial autonomy of Parliamentary Forum.


            ii) Engagement with the PAP processes, including SADC caucus in
                the PAP.
           iii) Conscientisation of National Parliaments  on  the  work  of
                SADC-PF  and  the  establishment  of   permanent   feedback
                mechanisms  between  parliamentary   forum   and   national
                Parliaments.

   3.4      Report of the Treasurer

   The following key points were made:

      • The Committee noted that the audit for the financial statements for
        the year ended 31st March 2005 was conducted in July 2005.
      • The Committee congratulated the Office of the Secretary General for
        this record.
      • The Committee also noted the management accounts  reported  on  the
        results for the six months ended 30th September  2005  with  budget
        figures  representing  that  period  and  that  the  budget  needed
        rationalisation.
      • The audited  donor  funded  programmes,  accountability  statements
        provided in the report were noted and the Office of  the  Secretary
        General was congratulated for the good  performance  and  auditors’
        opinion.
      •  The  Executive  Committee  considered  the  application  for  bank
        overdraft and Internet banking facilities, which was agreed to  and
        concluded with the Forum bankers, Nedbank Namibia Limited.
      • The Forum has an overdraft access of up to N$500 000.
      • The arrangements regarding  Internet  banking  facilities  will  be
        extended to the second bankers of the Forum, Standard Bank.
      • Only nine out of the thirteen member Parliaments paid their  annual
        mandatory contributions.
      • The member Parliaments that are outstanding in  their  contribution
        should pay soonest.
      •  The  increment  of  annual  mandatory  contribution   per   member
        Parliament of R850 000 will take effect from 1st April 2006.
      • The staff compliment in the Office of  the  Secretary  General  has
        been increased with diverse nationalities and addressed the  gender
        question through new staff recruitment.
      • In August 2005, the Executive Committee reviewed the  threshold  of
        R2 000  000  for  the  purchase  of  the  Secretary  General’s  new
        residence to R2 500 000 to accommodate  transfer  costs  and  other
        costs.
      • The new residence of the Secretary General was acquired at  R2  340
        000, including transfer costs realising a saving of R160 000 on the
        approved budget of R2 500 000 and the Secretary General  has  taken
        occupation of the residence.
      • The old  residence  of  the  Secretary  General  was  renovated  to
        increase its market value from R1 500 000 to 1 775 000  and  estate
        agents have been commissioned to sell the property.
      • The preparations for the 10th Anniversary of the  SADC-PF  in  July
        2006 are underway and the Treasurer should constitute  and  head  a
        committee to consider activities for the anniversary celebrations.
      • The Committee should include representatives of  the  host  country
        and the Clerk of the Country hosting the headquarters and the Clerk
        of the Country that will host the 20th Plenary Assembly.
      • All member Parliaments shall participate in the  financing  of  the
        activities of the 10th Anniversary.

   4. STANDING COMMITTEES

   4.1      Committee on Democracy, Gender  and  Conflict  Resolution/Peace-
       building

   The Committee considered the proposed  new  name  of  the  Committee  and
   agreed that it will, henceforth be,  the  Committee  on  Democratisation,
   Governance and Gender Equality. The Draft Strategic  Plan  for  the  next
   five years 2006-2010 was also adopted, aimed at the  following  strategic
   objectives:


   (i)      Effective implementation of regional integration programmes.
   (ii)     Improving institutions of  democratic  governance  in  the  SADC
        region.
   (iii)    Increased Professional performance.
   (iv)       Strategic   partnerships   and   alliances   established   for
        parliamentary cooperation.


    The following Programme Areas for the Committee were adopted:

   (i)      Elections and Electoral Systems:  This  will  include  elections
        observation in order to keep a watching brief on the proper  conduct
        of elections.
   (ii)     Gender: The adoption of protocols to accelerate gender  equality
        in SADC
   (iii)    Strengthening Institutions of  Democracy  and  Good  Governance:
        working with institutions of civil society, political  parties,  and
        anti-corruption bureaus in order to strengthen their capacities.
   (iv)      Developing  Best  Practice  and   Policy   Frameworks   through
        Parliaments: such practices should also be aimed at  mitigating  and
        combating HIV and AIDS.

   4.2      Committee on Inter-parliamentary Co-operation

   The Committee acknowledged the observer status of the Forum in Inter-
   Parliamentary Union (IPU) and Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
   (CPA) as a desired achievement. It also acknowledged the collaborative
   mechanisms that have been established with New Partnership for Africa’s
   Development (NEPAD) and Association of West European Parliamentarians for
   Africa (AWEPA).


   The  Secretariat  was  mandated  to  ensure  that   reports   on   Inter-
   Parliamentary  co-operation  activities  are  circulated  to  all  member
   parliaments quarterly. It  was  agreed  that  Members  attending  SADC-PF
   meeting must present summary reports of the meeting to  be  discussed  by
   their Parliaments.


   The Committee noted the need to  increase  advocacy  work  in  individual
   Parliaments in order to increase awareness of the Forum’s activities. The
   Committee  also  acknowledge  the  Forum’s  newsletter  as  a   tool   of
   information sharing.
   With regard to the Parliamentary Leadership Centre  (PLC)  Contributions,
   the Committee encouraged Members to appeal to their  Parliaments  to  pay
   the contribution, as this is a  requirement  by  the  donor,  the  Africa
   Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF). The Committee raised concern on  the
   recommendation that three  members  of  the  Committee  be  part  of  the
   Leadership Centre – Advisory Board but the Executive  Committee  approved
   only two (2).


   The committee recommended that the Chairperson of the Forum  be  part  of
   the PLC Advisory Board since the committee will be  responsible  for  the
   PLC. It also acknowledged that the Strategic Plan was well tailored,  but
   raised concern over capacity to realistically  implement  the  programmes
   suggested. It also  received  a  submission  from  the  Southern  African
   Development  Community  Organisation   of   Public   Accounts   Committee
   (SADCOPAC) for the structure to be made part of SADC-PF.  SADCOPAC  is  a
   body of Parliamentarians of the SADC region.  The  Committee  recommended
   that SADCOPAC’s request to be part of  the  Forum  be  submitted  to  the
   Plenary Assembly.


   4.3      Committee on Regional Integration

   The key issues, which were noted and discussed by the committee included:

    • Visa restrictions:


         o  Bilateral   negotiations   regarding   eliminations   of   Visa
           requirements among  SADC  Member  States  has  resulted  in  the
           scrapping of Visa restrictions between Swaziland and Mozambique,
           and between Angola and Namibia.
         o It was also noted that Visa negotiations  between  some  of  the
           SADC Member States were continuing.
         o The treatment of Members of Parliament at South African Airports
           has not improved and this needs to be addressed.
         • New Strategic Plan, 2006 – 2010:
         o The Committee considered the Draft Strategic Plan including  its
           terms of reference and objectives.
         o It resolved that the strategic plan be adopted.
         • SADC Protocol:
         o The Committee welcomed the SADC Protocol on the Facilitation  of
           Free Movement of Persons.
         o It proposed that a workshop be convened to discuss the  protocol
           as an instrument to facilitate regional integration.
         • Relationship between SADC and SADC-PF
         o The Committee recommended that  SADC  pronounce  itself  on  the
           relationship between the Forum and SADC and the  status  of  the
           Forum thereto.
         o The Committee’s  view  was  that  the  pronouncement  will  help
           clarify  the  issue  of  a  regional  Parliament  and   regional
           integration.
         o The election observation instruments by SADC and SADC-PF  should
           be synchronised.
         o The Committee recommended a mechanism to include issues of SADC,
           SADC-PF and PAP in the school curriculum across the region.
         • Transboundary Natural Resources Management (TNRM) Initiatives:
         o The Committee noted the TNRM meetings that took place in Angola,
           Namibia and Zambia.
         o The Committee  recommended  that  information  on  transboundary
           projects be shared among member Parliaments and  that  the  TNRM
           initiatives be put on the Regional Cooperation  and  Integration
           agenda.
         • RISDP, NEPAD and Millennium Development Goals
         o The Committee has noted the submission by the Honourable  Gamboa
           to integrate the Regional Indicative Strategic Development  Plan
           (RISDP), New Partnership for Africa’s  Development  (NEPAD)  and
           the Millennium Development Goals (MDG’s) into its agenda
         o The Committee approved the integration of RISDP, NEPAD and  MDGs
           as proposed since this will guide  the  committee’s  development
           and integration agenda.
         • Poverty in the region
         o Majority of the people in the SADC region live below the poverty
           datum line surviving on US$1 per day.
         o The Committee proposed that poverty be a standing agenda item on
           its agenda.
         o Further recommended  that  SADC  should  rely  on  its  internal
           resources  instead  of  foreign  assistance  when  dealing  with
           poverty.

   4.4      Committee on HIV and AIDS


   The Committee made the following key points:

         • The Committee considered country presentations on the role  that
           parliamentarians and governments  play  in  addressing  HIV  and
           AIDS.
         • The Committee noted that Namibia has failed in  two  consecutive
           years to present a country presentation.
         • The country presentations focused on progress made by countries
         • The Committee noted the following:
               o The Secretariat did not keep contact with  the  Chairperson
                 of the Committee on matters pertaining  to  activities  and
                 decisions that need to be taken on behalf of the Committee.
               o Food and nutrition are critical to people living  with  HIV
                 and AIDS
               o The  efficiency  of  stand-alone  HIV  and  AIDS  Portfolio
                 Committees  in  relation  to  infectious  diseases  in  the
                 region.
               o The Forum has repackaged material  with  support  from  the
                 United States Agency for International Development  (USAID)
                 Namibia in the form of fact sheet.
               o A handbook on  HIV  and  AIDS,  Gender,  Human  Rights  for
                 Members of  Parliament  has  been  developed  and  will  be
                 validated by Member Parliaments before going to press.
                     • The Committee agreed to the following:
               o HIV and AIDS should  be  dealt  with  together  with  other
                 infectious diseases.
               o The  interplay  between  HIV  and  AIDS,  Tuberculosis  and
                 malaria should come out clearly in the Strategic Plan.
               o The handbook on HIV and AIDS, Gender and  Human  Rights  be
                 circulated to members of the Committee for validation
               o The Forum and SADC should work  closely  to  synchronise  a
                 regional response to the pandemic and regional programmes.
               o The Committee recommended that the Executive be lobbied  to
                 strengthen  cross  border  HIV  and   AIDS,   Malaria   and
                 Tuberculosis programmes and activities.
               o The Committee also resolved that the consultant develops an
                 HIV and AIDS  Action  Plan  based  on  the  Strategic  Plan
                 objectives and other relevant documents.


   4.5      Committee on the Regional Women’s Parliamentary Caucus

   The Regional Women’s Parliamentary Caucus (RWPC) made the following key
   points:

      • One of the objectives of the SADC-PF Regional Women’s Parliamentary
        Caucus mandate is to advocate and influence the  participation  and
        representation of women in elective political and  decision  making
        positions, including advocacy and lobbying.
      • The objective of the RWPC advocacy and lobbying  in  Zambia  is  to
        influence political parties and a broad range  of  stakeholders  to
        put in place mechanisms that will increase  women’s  representation
        in the Zambian Parliament to at least have 30% women.
      • The lobbying and advocacy mission to Zambia was conducted from  the
        5-19 August 2005.
      • The lobbying and advocacy mission was undertaken in  terms  of  the
        SADC Declaration on Gender Development and Norms and Standards  for
        Elections in the SADC region.
      • The SADC Declaration commits SADC countries to the  achievement  of
        at least 30% (this threshold has been increased) representation  in
        positions of power and decision-making by the year 2005.
      • In terms of the African Union (AU) Constitutive Act and Declaration
        and the August 2005 SADC Summit resolution, SADC countries are  now
        expected to achieve 50-50 representations of women and men.
      • The Committee resolved to actively promote the  50%  representation
        of women at parliamentary level.
      • The RWPC assessment  and  stakeholders  consultations  reveal  that
        Norms and Standards for  Elections  in  the  SADC  region  was  the
        reference document that informed the review of electoral laws.
      • The RWPC was concerned that most parties claim to have incorporated
        the SADC Declaration principles but this was not visible.
      • The Committee recommended the following:


          (a)    Awareness campaign about the importance of women’s
               political participation and representation at all levels of
               power and decision-making.
          (b)    Effective implementation and evaluation systems to track
               down progress on women’s empowerment in all spheres.
          (c)    Capacity development for women.
          (d)    Political parties to implement stated commitments on
               achieving gender equality and institute intra-party
               democratic processes to review the mainstreaming of gender
               equality.

   5. PLENARY SESSIONS – KEY ISSUES

   5.1      Thematic Session of the Plenary Assembly
   The following presentations were made in line with the 19th Plenary
   Session theme” “Redefining Strategic Priorities of the SADC Parliamentary
   Forum to mainstream parliamentary Dimensions to Regional Integration”.

   5.1.1    Address by the Deputy Executive Secretary of SADC, Engineer Joao
        Samuel Caholo

   The address of the Deputy Executive Secretary covered progress and
   challenges in the region. According to the Deputy Executive Secretary, In
   2004, real Growth Domestic Product (GDP) of the SADC region grew at the
   rate of 4.1% as compared to 3.2% in 2003. It was also observed that
   average economic growth of the region was below the average economic
   growth of the continent over the same period. This economic growth was
   due among other factors, peace and political stability obtained in the
   region, sound macro-economic reforms in the SADC member countries.
   According to crop production vulnerability assessment conducted in
   April/May 2005, 9.7 million SADC citizens will require food assistance.


   The challenges facing the region include inter alia, peace and political
   stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, poverty, food
   insecurity, HIV and the AIDS pandemic, low rate of investment, and gender
   inequalities.


   5.1.2    Presentation by Professor Max Essex of  the  Harvard  School  of
        Public Health


   The presentation covered progress made in the development of vaccines and
   other interventions in Southern Africa. It recognised the need to conduct
   multiple trials with modern designs, international cooperation and
   regional expertise will be critical in this regard. The presenter advised
   that modern behavioural change is important to avoid the spread of the
   pandemic. An emphasis was placed on the provision of anti-retroviral
   drugs to those infected. It was also emphasised that Parliaments must be
   committed to fighting the spread of HIV and AIDS through legislative
   interventions and sharing of best practices.


   5.1.3    Draft  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Southern  African  Development
        Community Parliamentary Forum: 2006-2010
   The Plenary Assembly reiterated its commitment to continue lobbying for
   the establishment of the SADC Parliament to foster regional cooperation
   and integration. The Plenary also agreed to develop mechanisms to deal
   with SADC matters, to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of the budget
   and programmes of SADC. A call was made for the acceleration of Intra-
   African trade to mitigate the unfavourable terms of the World Trade
   Organisation (WTO).


   In addition, the Plenary Session approved the Parliamentary Leadership
   Centre and its work plan including the advisory board.
   The Plenary adopted the vision and mission of SADC-PF which were amended
   to read:


      • Vision:  ”A  delivery  focused,  people  centred  institution  that
        accelerates and promotes parliamentary  participation  in  regional
        decision making for the benefit of the citizens of SADC”.

      • Mission: “To facilitate  strategic  partnerships  within  the  SADC
        region,  promote  information  sharing,  initiate   and   implement
        projects that enhance regional integration  and  promote  effective
        and professional parliamentary practice”.

   The Plenary Assembly also adopted the SADC-PF organisational structure as
   proposed by the executive committee.


   The following four (4) strategic objectives contained in the draft
   strategic plan were adopted. These objectives are:


     (a)    Improved institutions of democratic governance in the SADC
                  region.
     (b)    Effective implementation of Regional Integration Programme.
     (c)    Increased professional performance of Members of Parliament and
        parliamentary staff under the Parliamentary Leadership Centre
        (PLC).
     (d)    Strategic Partnership and Alliances Established for
                  Parliamentary cooperation.

   5.2      Policy Session of the Plenary Assembly

   The Plenary Assembly also dealt with the following key issues:


         • The Plenary endorsed the PLC Advisory Board to be chaired by the
           Secretary General and will include members of the Forum.


         • Country Reports


   Countries presented written reports highlighting progress in dealing with
   issues that the Forum has decided upon, covering the following issues:


         o The SADC principles and guidelines for democratic elections and
           women representation.
            o Support for Women’s Parliamentary Caucus.
         o The implementation of the SADC Parliamentary Forum Norms and
           Standards for elections.
         o Ratification of SADC protocols, treaties and legal instruments
           for purposes of regional integration and cooperation.
         o Steps taken to deal with the HIV and AIDS, including prevention
           and the fight against the pandemic.
         o Cooperation and participation in the Pan African Parliament
           activities and the African Union and the New Partnership for
           Africa’s Development.
     • HIV and AIDS:
         o The Plenary Assembly approved a Plan of Action for national
           Parliaments to address the continued increase in the rates of
           HIV infections.
         o The Plan covered prevention, treatment, discrimination, cultural
           practices and the Care of Orphans and Vulnerable Children.
   (  Action Plan
         o The Plenary adopted a work plan for January-December 2006, which
           included inter alia, programmes on electoral reforms, norms and
           standards, the parliamentary leadership centre, advocacy and
           lobbying, gender issues, and women representation, poverty
           reduction and HIV and AIDS, peace and stability and site visits.


    • Future Plenary Sessions:
         o The 20th Plenary Session will be held in Maputo, Mozambique, in
           June 2006.
         o South Africa has been requested to host the 21st plenary session
           late in 2006.


                            TUESDAY, 20 JUNE 2006

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Assent by President in respect of Bill

        1) Children’s Bill [B 70D – 2003] – Act No 38 of 2005 (assented to
           and signed by President on 8 June 2006).

2.    Fast-tracking of Bill

     (1)    The Joint Subcommittee of the Joint Programme Committee on 20
            June 2006 took the following decision:
            That—
            (1)   noting South Africa's international commitment to adopt
            special legislative    measures regarding the 2010 FIFA World
            Cup within specified timeframes;
            (2)   further noting that the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa
                  Special Measures Bill [B 13–2006] which was introduced on
                  6 June 2006 is to be split into separate section 75 and
                  section 76 Bills;
            (3)   in accordance with Joint Rule 216(2) the two Bills upon
                  receipt be fast-tracked by shortening any period within
                  which any step in the legislative process relating to the
                  Bills has to be completed, but subject to public
                  participation in the process of the consideration of the
                  Bills, in order for the Bills to be passed by both Houses
                  before 31 August 2006;
            (4)   for this purpose the relevant NA and NCOP committees
                  confer on the Bills; and
            (5)   the National Assembly committee finalises its
                  consideration of the Bills by 31 July 2006 and the NCOP
                  committee reports formally on both Bills in time for the
                  approved deadline to be met by Parliament.
     (2)    In terms of Joint Rule 216(4) this decision must be tabled in
            both Houses for ratification.

3.    Bill returned to Executive

    (1)    On 20 June 2006 the Speaker and the Deputy Chairperson, after
         consultation, referred the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special
         Measures Bill [B 13 – 2006], introduced in the National Assembly as
         a section 75 Bill on 6 June 2006, back to the Minister of Sport and
         Recreation, as it contains both section 75 and section 76
         provisions.


4.    Reintroduction of Bill


    (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


      2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill [B 13 – 2006
         (Reintroduced)] (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary
         of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published in
         Government Gazette No 28593 of 10 March 2006.]


    Reintroduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
    Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the JTM for
    classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


    In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of the
    Bill may be submitted to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) within three
    parliamentary working days.

5.    Introduction of Bill
     (1)    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


          a) Second 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa Special Measures Bill
             [B 16 – 2006] (National Assembly – sec 76) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 28593 of 10 March 2006.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Sport and
         Recreation of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
         Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint
         Rule 160.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    Report of the Mediation Committee on the Older Persons Bill [B 68B
    and B68D – 2003] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76), dated 14 June
    2006:

        The Mediation Committee, having considered the Older Persons Bill
        [B68B and B68D – 2003] (National Council of Provinces – sec 76), as
        well as the papers referred to it, reports that it has agreed to a
        new version of the Bill [B68F – 2003 (Reprint)].


        The Committee notes with concern the technical errors that occurred
        in the processing and preparation of the printed version of the Bill
        in the National Assembly. The Committee recommends that the
        Presiding Officers investigate the reasons for the technical errors,
        and report to the Joint Rules Committee on measures to be put in
        place to avoid similar errors in future.


National Assembly

CREDA INSERT REPORT - Insert - T060620E-insert1 – PAGES 1507-1516


