---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 February 2006'
layout: debate
year: 2006
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2006/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2006-02-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2006
                                    ____




              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

                                    ____

The Council met at 10:05.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                      SUCCESS BY ANC DURING PAST DECADE


                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr C J VAN ROOYEN: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:


   Dat die Huis -


   (1)      kennis neem van die ANC se 2006-verkiesingsmanifes wat daarop
        gemik is om ’n beter lewe vir almal te verseker;


   (2)      kennis neem van die volgende suksesse wat die afgelope dekade
        deur die ANC behaal is, naamlik dat -
        (a)      meer mense as ooit tevore toegang tot skoon water en
               elektrisiteit het;


        (b)      meer mense die geleentheid het om hulle lewe te verbeter
               en geleerdheid en vaardighede te bekom en ’n beter Suid-
               Afrika te help bou;


        (c)      dit nog nooit beter gegaan het met die Suid-Afrikaanse
               ekonomie as onder die ANC-regering nie;


        (d)      meer mense as ooit tevore toegang het tot behuising, grond
               en onderwys;


        (e)      die gehalte van diens by klinieke verbeter het; en


   (3)      die ANC gelukwens met hierdie ongekende vooruitgang die afgelope
        dekade.


(Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

   (1)      notes the ANC’s 2006 election manifesto which is aimed at
        ensuring a better life for all;
   (2)      notes the following successes that were achieved by the ANC over
        the past decade, namely that -


        (a)      more people than ever before have access to clean water
             and electricity;


        (b)      more people are in a position to better their lives,
             attain knowledge and skills and help build a better South
             Africa;


        (c)      things have never been better with the South African
             economy than under ANC rule;


        (d)      more people have access to housing, land and education
             than ever before; and


        (e)      the quality of service at clinics has improved; and


     3) congratulates the ANC on this unprecedented progress over the  past
        decade.]


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

Mr M A MZIZI: Deputy Chairperson, though I am not against the motion, the
procedure should have been that if a motion without notice is going to be
given in the House, it should circulate amongst all parties so that we all
take notice of what is going to take place. That is the agreement I know
of. But I am not against the motion, as it has no connotations that may
make one sneeze, but I think the procedure needs to be followed.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Mzizi, if you
have an objection to that motion then you have to state it. But if haven’t
got an objection, the motion is agreed to in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.


                  CLUSTERING OF ORAL QUESTIONS TO MINISTERS


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, I move:

   That -

   (1)      notwithstanding Rule 234(2), the Council put on a trial run the
         clustering of oral questions to Ministers, as follows:

         Cluster 1: Peace and Security


         Defence, Foreign Affairs, Safety and Security, Correctional
         Services, Justice and Constitutional Development, Intelligence;


         Cluster 2: Social Services and Governance


         Home Affairs, Education, Social Development, Housing, Public
         Service and Administration, Communications, Water Affairs and
         Forestry, Arts and Culture, Health, Sport and Recreation, Minister
         in the Presidency, Provincial and Local Government;


         Cluster 3: Economics


         Finance, Public Works, Public Enterprises, Trade and Industry,
         Labour, Agriculture and Land Affairs, Transport, Environmental
         Affairs and Tourism, Minerals and Energy, Science and Technology;
         and


     2) the National Council of Provinces Rules  in  respect  of  time  and
        number of questions to Ministers shall remain unchanged, unless the
        Chairperson of the Council from time to time decides otherwise.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: (Ms P M Hollander) We shall now proceed
to the voting on the question. I shall do this in alphabetical order per
province. Delegation heads must please indicate to the Chair whether they
vote in favour of or against, or abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?
Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Steun. [Support.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: KwaZulu-Natal elethu. [KwaZulu-Natal supports.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Supports.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON FOLLOW-UP VISIT TO KWAZULU-NATAL IN TERMS
             OF THE PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT ON FOLLOW-UP VISIT TO THE NORTH WEST IN TERMS
             OF THE PROGRAMME OF TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, on a point of order: I am not
sure whether your permission as a presiding officer has been sought for
photographs to be taken in the House, because that should only be done with
your permission.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Permission has been
granted.

USIHLALO WOMKHANDLU KAZWELONKE WEZIFUNDAZWE: Sanibonani nonke malungu  eNdlu
ehloniphekile ephethe  izifundazwe  zonke  zaseNingizimu  Afrika.  Ngithanda
ukunihalalisela onyakeni omusha futhi nginifisele  okuhle  ezimpilweni  zenu
kanye nemindeni yenu njengoba siqala ukuhlangana namhlanje siyiNdlu.  Ngithi
inkosi ibe nani futhi niphile kahle  kulo  nyaka  ka-2006.  (Translation  of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE  NCOP:  Hon  members  of  the  National  Council  of
Provinces, I greet you all. I would like to congratulate you  and  wish  you
and your families all the best in the New Year. May God be with you  in  the
year 2006.]

I have been reminded since this morning, and I don’t know why, to also say
I wish you all a happy Valentine’s Day. I do not want to expand on that
because the debate is not about that. The debate is about the reports on
the follow-up visits to KwaZulu-Natal and the North West.

We all know the challenges that our communities are facing, more especially
local communities, right now. Regarding the work that we have done as the
National Council of Provinces out there, I think there is nobody who can
say to me he does not understand what is happening on the ground. If you
then don’t understand what is happening, you have not been there. But I
think we understand.

There are challenges that require us to work tirelessly together with our
people to turn the misfortunes of our past on their heads and bring hope to
those people who have elected us to be here. That’s a critical message.
Unless we find ourselves on that type of route as members of the NCOP and
members of Parliament, then we are out, because the role that we should
play is the one that gives hope to our people on the ground all the time
when we get in touch with them.

Our follow-up visits to KwaZulu-Natal and the North West were clearly aimed
at doing exactly what I am saying, “ensuring that we work with our people
to speed up service delivery”. These visits provide us with hands-on
experience of the challenges facing our people and how government machinery
is moving to address those things.

I would like to remind people all the time what our jobs as members of
Parliament are. Remember: we pass the laws, the executive implements and we
monitor the implementation. Remember those three critical things. You pass
the laws, OK? The executive implements; you monitor the implementation. If
we do not monitor, then we do not know what is happening, and we do not
know whether those things are being implemented on the ground. That is a
job that we have to do as members of Parliament and do it with the greatest
love, from the bottom of our hearts.

From the outset, I would like to direct our committees to sit down and
thoroughly look at the two reports to see what emerges from them. If they
have already done so, I am grateful. If they haven’t, I say to them: Please
go and sit down, and elicit some of the things from those reports. This
will be important, as the committees need to identify the issues that were
raised and put them before members of this House so that we can follow them
up in a proper manner. We will await the report so that, as the House, we
can determine the next step to take if the challenges still persist. We
expect the committees to be creative in their follow-up so that they also
provide guidance, as they are the people behind the laws and policies we
have.

But, perhaps, at this point, I must say that, in the near future, I shall
present a framework for a structured follow-up programme to assist the
House and committees with a guide as to what we would expect from time to
time after we have visited a province. This will be part of the exercise we
need to do to advance our programme of action for this term of Parliament.
We are reviewing this as I am speaking.

We should come up with a proper mechanism to support the work of the
National Council of Provinces. It has been a concern to me for quite some
time that we don’t have a proper mechanism to follow up. We are putting up
that follow-up mechanism which we will adopt and own as a House, all of us,
so that we run with it all of the time. This will be part of the exercise
that we will be doing as members of the NCOP. This will include the need to
strengthen the follow-up mechanism so that it makes our programme of
“Taking Parliament to the People” more effective. It is therefore opportune
at this point to raise one or two challenges that we faced after we decided
to embark on a follow-up visit to KwaZulu-Natal and the Northern Cape.

The first example that I want to mention is that, in order to conduct a
proper follow-up, we need to receive information from government
departments and be able to interrogate it to see where the gaps are,
because that is very important. Without that information, you don’t know
where you are going. I know Rev Moatshe often raises this with us when we
are in meetings.

Perhaps the time we gave departments to provide us with information was not
adequate. Hence some departments, not the majority though, gave inadequate
and, in some cases, irrelevant information to work with. The follow-up
framework I have just mentioned will hopefully assist the departments to
prepare as they would at least know when the NCOP would expect feedback and
conduct follow-ups, because this is very important.

On following up on some departments concerning the need to submit
information before we embark on these visits, my office also learned that a
number of departments did not engage with our reports, to such an extent
that the process of eliciting information about successes at regional
levels – they had been tasked to follow up on issues in some of the cases
provided - was too cumbersome. What I am trying to say here is that,
although we came up with a report that we have passed over to the
departments, the departments did not really study it and elicit the issues
that they need to follow up with their regional structures or with their
local structures in the different provinces. But perhaps we have been too
cumbersome in asking our questions.

We will make it very simple for the departments by sending them reports
that are reader-friendly, easy to understand and from which it will be easy
to pick up the things that they need to pick up and follow up so that when
we go there, they can give us a proper report on what they have done with
those issues that we requested them to follow up. If we introduce some
predictability as to when the NCOP could require feedback, I think the
situation will definitely improve, as some of those departments were able
to provide the required and relevant information although it was late and
we were already on the ground.

The follow-up visits help to give us some more insight into the workings of
the machinery of government. Without delving into the nuts and bolts of
some of these issues that sometimes impede government attempts to speed up
delivery, there is evidence of an apparent lack of communication between
departments. For example, when we were in KwaZulu-Natal, it was apparent
that there was lack of communication between the Department of Education
and the Department of Public Works, in respect of physical planning
regarding the building of infrastructure. This lack of communication was
very evident when we visited Bhekukwazi High School in KwaMbonambi, and it
points to the role that officials can play, sometimes unwittingly, in
delaying the delivery of services on the ground.

In its report, for instance, the Department of Education said that it had
made available resources to build the necessary infrastructure. But when we
got to Bhekukwazi High School, which is one of the schools that had been
visited by the NCOP in its initial visits, the two departments gave
different accounts of the reasons for the slow delivery or lack of action
on the ground. These are some of the things that we experience on the
ground, which then make us more informed as to what is happening.

We cannot have a situation where officials, whose duty is to interpret and
implement government programmes and policies, hold government to ransom,
for no other reason than the fact that our people deserve better. Now we
have to unlock that. We have to unblock that. If we have those types of
public servants who still have the notion that they will hold government to
ransom and not implement the policies that are there, then we have to do
something about that. We can’t keep quiet.

But I would like to bring to the attention of the members that last month,
the standing committee on education in the province visited the school to
follow up on some of the things that were raised when we visited it in 2004
and last year. The school, which did not have water when we initially
visited it, now has 25 000 litres of water supplied to it. That water is
being made available and four additional classrooms have been built.

I am very proud that, early this year, the chairperson of committees in
KwaZulu-Natal or the chairperson of that committee phoned me directly and
said: “Mr Mahlangu, can I please have the report you people compiled as the
NCOP when you came here last year.” I said: “For sure, you can have it.” I
phoned my office and they forwarded the report. In the next two to three
weeks they reported back to us and told us they had been there and also
gave us information on what was happening.

Isn’t that good? What is it that we want if we do not want that? That is
exactly what we want. This is the type of the communication that we want.
This is the type of communication that we need between the provinces and
the National Council of Provinces. When we touch ground there, they must
report back to us and tell us what is happening because the community
benefits in that way.

Our programme of “Taking Parliament to the People” should penetrate every
corner of the land. Members of the NCOP who are representatives of the
people in this Parliament must meet, discuss and take back to Parliament
the issues that our people want to raise with Parliament. It is the voice
of the people that must inform Parliament on how they want Parliament to
work. The successes of the programme are a call to all of us to embolden
our efforts to make change visible, to unlock constraints to delivery of
service and to inform and educate the people about their rights and the
laws that we have made to ensure that their lives are improved.

This week we are finalising our consultation on the important document:
Programme 2009. We want to launch it later this week with the hope that
each and every member of this House will use it as a guide to the work that
the institution must do from this year until 2009. Later this year or early
next year, when we review this programme, I will ask for a debate on what
hon members of this House might have done to implement the things that are
contained in the document.

I want that to be a public debate because we owe it to the public to
explain to them what we have achieved, with regard to the commitments that
have been made. The Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP and the House
Chairpersons will monitor the implementation of the programme during the
course of this year and inform the Chairperson of the NCOP from time to
time.

When we rise as this House in 2009, we must have a scorecard that will
illustrate what we have done to achieve the targets that are set out in the
document – which I will expand on later this week.

The time has come for us all to roll up our sleeves, get down on the ground
and work. Our collective wisdom, as members of this Parliament, must guide
us in our quest to achieve for our people the ideal of realising a better
quality of life. I’m confident that we have the will, the tenacity and the
tools to make a difference. I again wish you good luck in your work in
2006. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms J M MASILO: Ke a leboga Motlatsa-Modulasetulo wa Ntlo e e tlotlegang,
Modulasetulo wa NCOP, Rre Mahlangu, batlotlegi botlhe . . . [Thank you,
Deputy Chairperson of this august house, Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr
Mahlangu, distinguished guests . . . ] “. . . and I also wish you all a
happy Valentine’s Day.”

This year marks, amongst other things, the 50th anniversary of the Women’s
March to the Union Buildings. Malibongwe! It also marks the 30th
anniversary of the 1976 Soweto uprisings and the 10th anniversary of the
adoption of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa in 1996.

We believe that it will be important to remind our people that according to
our Constitution the Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic
state founded on the values of human dignity, the achievement of equality
and the advancement of human rights and freedom to address challenges that
include poverty, unemployment and under-development that have been the
legacy of our particular history.

Whilst we acknowledge that there are still challenges of poverty,
joblessness and underdevelopment, we are nonetheless delighted to register
progress in critical areas. More people have access to clean water,
sanitation, electricity, land, education and health care. The services in
places like hospitals, clinics, courts and police stations are improving
with new infrastructure developments.

Ketelo ya rona mo kgaolong ya Bophirima e latela morago ga diketelo tse di
nnileng teng mo kgweding ya Mopitlwe 2003 mo porofenseng ya Bokone
Bophirima. Se e ne e le maiteko a NCOP go naya baagi ba Bophirima tšhono ya
go buisana le baeteledipele ba bona ba sepolotiki mo mererong e e amang
matshelo a baagi ba Aforika Borwa.

Ke tiro ya NCOP go bona gore maphata a mararo a puso a abelana maikarabelo
a puso. Go bona gore go na le tirisanommogo magareng ga ona, dingwe tsa
dikgetlo le diphitlhelelo tse go neng go buiwa ka tsona di akaretsa tse di
latelang: thuto, dipuso-selegae, temothuo, tsweletso ya tsa leago, merero
ya metsi le kago ya dikgwa. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Our visit to the North West was a follow-up on other visits that took
place in the province during March 2003. This was an attempt by the NCOP to
give North West residents an opportunity to talk to their political leaders
about issues that affect their lives as South African citizens.

It is the responsibility of the NCOP to ensure that there is co-operation
and shared responsibility in facing challenges in the three spheres of
government. They talked about, among other things, challenges and
achievements, which include the following: local government, agriculture,
social development and issues affecting water and forestry.]

In August 2005, as part of the follow-up visit, four delegations visited
four schools in different areas of Bophirima District. The delegations met
with site managers, school governing bodies, school management teams and
learner representative councils. The following schools were visited: the
Gabobidiwe High School, Reveilo High School, Walter Letsie High School and
Joseph Saku Secondary School.


Several challenges were faced in Greater Taung Local Municipality. Firstly,
there was the issue of teenage pregnancy. In Ward 14 at Joseph Saku
Secondary School, each year the school experiences about 30 learners who
leave school due to pregnancy; drug and substance abuse is rife; the
educators’ code of conduct and their dress code are not of a good standard.
There is a need for the Select Committee on Education to visit the area
and, together with the North West Education Portfolio Committee, try to
assist the region as a matter of urgency.

During the March 2003 visit to the North West, the focal areas in this
sector were the need to address poverty, illiteracy, unemployment, youth,
and insufficient water supply to schools, insufficient support of orphan or
child headed households as a result of HIV/Aids and the absence of career
guidance in schools.


Integrated Social Development Security and Service Grants have been
introduced; the uptake of social grants, particularly child support grants,
has been increased; pay-point facilities have been upgraded to assist
pensioners and other beneficiaries of state social grants; support centres
for victims of domestic violence have been established and equipped; an
amount of R10 million was earmarked for the provision of Adult Education
and Training, ABET; the North West Provincial Trust was established; an
amount of R14 billion was earmarked for the nutrition programme in primary
schools and an amount of R375 million for 385 farm schools in the province.

Challenges in schools in the North West Province include, among other
things, a shortage of educators; alcohol abuse by some learners; education
on HIV/Aids; fluctuating matric results; high teenage pregnancy rates;
insufficient libraries, laboratories, administration and hostel facilities;
insufficient ablution facilities and low morale among learners.

Achievements in the Greater Taung include an increased budget - the
municipality started from zero-based budgets. In 2000 the municipality
started from a zero-based income, and currently its budget from own revenue
collected stands at R4,1 million. The Greater Taung Municipality formed
part of the former Bophuthatswana, and is a typical rural municipality
consisting of 106 villages, with 7,2% of its 201 683 population urbanised
in terms of the 2005-2006 Budget. The total budget from government grants
was R41 million.

Ka nako ya Bophuthatswana, baagi ba ne ba duela diranta di le pedi [R2,00]
ka kgwedi, e le ya ditirelo tsa mmasepala. Diphetogo di simolotse go
bonagala ka 1994, fela majelathoko ga a bone pharologano ka ntlha ya gore
ke bomabina-go-tsholwa. Se ba se itseng, DA, ke ``Slaan Terug!’’ –
ipusulosetse - le go tsamaya ba tsenya ba losika mo diphatlhatirong le mo
Palamenteng ba sa lebelele ditlhoko tsa baagi. Bantsho ba ba tleng ba ba
boutele, ka re ka nako ya jaanong ba fatlhologe, ba tlhabologe ba bone gore
ditirelo di tswa kwa kae fa ese puso ya ANC. (Translation of Setswana
paragraph follows.)

[During the Bophuthatswana era, members of the community used to pay R2 per
month for municipal services. The developments became noticeable in 1994;
however, the opposition party cannot notice the difference because they are
impatient. The only thing the DA know is “Fight Back”, and practising
nepotism, not considering the needs of the community. I would like to
caution the black voters who voted for them that it is time they realise
that it is the ANC-led government that provides services.]

There are challenges such as limited access to land due to the fact that
90% of the land falls under the tribal authorities. The municipal budget
for the provision of water and electricity was reduced and 1 200 houses
were built in Greater Taung. No formal structures are in place to ensure
municipal relations with other departments. The majority of the residents
have only received primary education in that area.

Achievements by the Naledi Local Municipality are as follows: As from 1
July 2005, free basic services were provided to all indigent households
earning less than R1 600 per month. The municipality procured the Zeus
Credit Control debt collection management system, and has entered into a
twinning agreement with the Assen Gemeente in the Netherlands in order to
strengthen the housing capacity in the municipality.

There are still some challenges, like raising the municipality income level
and addressing the challenges of obsolete plant machinery and equipment.

The Lekwa Teemane Municipality has reported progress in the following:
Functional ward committees have been established in all six wards; there
has been an improvement in community participation in the IDP and budgeting
process; the municipality’s financial position has improved to the extent
that it has been able to service its loans with the Development Bank of
Southern Africa and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry and to
deliver the necessary services to the people. The province has managed to
create a . . . I thank you, Deputy House Chairperson. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mnr J W LE ROUX: Agb Voorsitter en kollegas, die NRVP se besoeke aan
verskillende provinsies van ons land is ’n baie innoverende poging om die
breë gemeenskap nouer te verbind met hul politieke verteenwoordigers.
Andersyds is dit ook noodsaaklik dat politieke verteenwoordigers werklik
kan sien wat op grondvlak aan die gebeur is.

Met die besoek aan die Noordwesprovinsie was dit duidelik dat dit
noodsaaklik is dat parlementslede self kan sien hoe sukkel die meeste mense
om net in hul basiese behoeftes te voorsien. Dit is baie duidelik dat
staatstoelaes en pensioenbydraes die enigste bron van inkomste vir die
grootste deel van die bevolking is. Daar is natuurlik talle probleme wat
dadelik aandag moet kry, maar die gebrek aan werksgeleenthede is sekerlik
die kern van die probleme in die meeste van ons plattelandse gebiede.
Indien ons besoeke aan die provinsies nie bydra tot die oplossing an die
werkloosheidsprobleem nie, sal ons oor 10 jaar nog steeds provinsies besoek
en sal die plattelandse mense nog steeds arm en sonder hoop wees. Die vraag
wat ons ons moet afvra, is: Wat kan ons doen om die werkloosheid en die
gepaardgaande armoede wat al erger word, te stuit? Wat kan ons doen om die
mense weer hoop te gee?

Eerstens moet ons sorg dat entrepreneurs in die platteland belê. Ons moet
dit aantreklik maak vir ondernemers om in die platteland te belê. Dit moet
vir die sakeman beter wees om in die platteland te belê as in die groot
stede. Daar is geen manier om sakemanne te dwing om teen hul eie belang op
te tree nie. Daar is talle maniere om sakemanne aan te moedig om te belê,
maar grootskaalse belastingtoegewings is die maklikste en die beste metode.

Die DA het so pas ’n beleid voorgestel waar werkgewers ’n belastingkorting
kry vir elke werkgeleentheid wat geskep word. Tans probeer werkgewers so
min werkers in diens neem as moontlik. Ons moet dit omdraai sodat
werkgewers aangemoedig word om soveel werkers as moontlik in diens te neem.
Ons as NRVP moet ernstig na arbeidswetgewing kyk en planne beraam wat sal
sorg dat ontwikkeling in die platteland plaasvind en wat entrepreneurs sal
aanmoedig om arbeidsintensiewe ondernemings te vestig.
Tweedens moet ons grootskaalse landbouprojekte aanpak. Ons moet die
geleentheid skep vir gevestigde landbou om in vennootskappe met nuwe
toetreders winsgewende boerderyondernemings te vestig. Ons soek
grootskaalse landbouprojekte wat op die wêreldmarkte kan kompeteer.

Dit help niks om vir elke individu ’n klein stukkie grond te gee en dan te
dink dat ’n lappie mielies die armoedeprobleem sal oplos. Sulke projekte
skep eerder nog meer armoede. In die res van Afrika en veral in Kenia was
dit vir my baie duidelik dat dit niks help om vir ’n persoon ’n hektaar of
twee te gee en te dink hy kan daarmee sy lewenskwaliteit verbeter nie.

Tydens ons besoek aan die Noordwesprovinsie was dit duidelik dat effektiewe
plaaslike bestuur noodsaaklik is vir die ontwikkeling en voortuitgang van
ons landelike gebiede. Dit is algemene kennis dat die helfte van ons
munisipaliteite hopeloos swak funksioneer. Dit beteken dat basiese dienste
in baie gevalle nie meer gelewer word nie en dat infrastruktuur in
werklikheid verswak. Dit is duidelik dat derdevlakregering in baie gevalle
in duie stort en dat ondernemers nooit sal belê in gebiede waar dienste
swak of ontoereikend is nie. Gelukkig sal hierdie probleem na 1 Maart
grootliks opgelos wees. [Applous.]

Met ons besoek aan die Noordwesprovinsie was dit duidelik dat daar met die
opleiding van ons jongmense groot probleme is. Ons jeug sal nooit kan
kompeteer met dié ander lande wat opleiding as hoogste prioriteit stel nie.
Die LUR vir onderwys in die Noordwesprovinsie sê dat daar in 1998 ’n tekort
van R2 miljard vir infrastruktuurskepping was. In 2005 was die tekort reeds
R4 miljard. Die begroting was egter R200 miljoen. Met hierdie soort tekorte
is dit onmoontlik om ons jeug voor te berei vir die toekoms.

Ons besoeke aan die provinsies moet te alle tye oplossinggerig wees. Ons as
parlementslede moet die kapasiteit en die klimaat skep om verdere armoede
en agteruitgang te stuit. As ons egter die besoeke as politieke “road
shows” gebruik, is dit ’n vermorsing van belastinggeld en kan ons dit maar
net sowel los. Dankie, Voorsitter. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr J W LE ROUX: Hon Chairperson and colleagues, the NCOP’s visits to the
different provinces of our country are a very innovative attempt to
establish closer links between the broader community and their political
representatives. On the other hand, it is also crucial for political
representatives to be able to see what is really happening at grassroots
level.

With the visit to the North West province, it was obvious that it is
essential for members of Parliament to witness how most of the people are
struggling simply to meet their basic needs. It is very evident that state
grants and pension contributions are the only source of income for the
majority of the population. Of course, there are numerous problems that
should receive attention immediately, but the lack of job opportunities is
definitely at the heart of the problem in most of our rural areas.

However, if our visits to the provinces are not contributing to finding a
solution to the unemployment problem, we will still be visiting provinces
10 years down the line and people in the rural areas will still be poor and
without hope. The question that we should ask ourselves is: What can we do
to prevent unemployment and the concomitant poverty that is getting worse?
What can we do to give people hope again?

Firstly, we should ensure that entrepreneurs invest in the rural areas. We
should make it worthwhile for entrepreneurs to invest in the rural areas.
It should be better for the businessman to invest in the rural areas than
in the big cities. There is no way in which businessmen can be coerced into
acting contrary to their best interests. There are numerous ways in which
businessmen could be encouraged to invest, but large-scale tax concessions
would be the easiest and the best way.

The DA has just recently proposed a policy by means of which employers
would get a tax rebate for every job opportunity that is created. At
present employers are trying to employ as few workers as possible. We
should turn this around in a way that will encourage employers to employ as
many workers as possible. As the NCOP, we should have an in-depth look at
the labour legislation and devise plans to ensure development in the rural
areas and encourage entrepreneurs to establish labour-intensive
enterprises.

Secondly, we should undertake large-scale agricultural projects. We should
create the opportunity for established agriculture to form partnerships
with new entrants in order to establish lucrative farming enterprises. We
are looking for large-scale agricultural projects that will be able to
compete on the world markets.

It does not help in the least to provide every individual with a small
piece of land and to think afterwards that a patch of maize will solve the
poverty problem. On the contrary, these types of projects create even
greater poverty. In the rest of Africa, and especially in Kenya, it was
evident to me that it does not actually help to give someone a hectare or
two and then to think that the person will be able to improve his or her
quality of life with that.

During our visit to the North West province it was clear that effective
local government is essential to the development of, and progress in, our
rural areas. It is common knowledge that half of our municipalities are
functioning completely ineffectively. This means that in many instances
basic services are not being delivered and that the infrastructure is in
fact deteriorating. It is evident that in many instances third-tier
government is collapsing and that entrepreneurs will never invest in areas
where services are poor or inadequate. Fortunately, this problem will be
solved to a large extent after 1 March. [Applause.]
During our visit to the North West province, it was obvious that there were
major problems regarding the training of our youth. Our youth will never be
able to compete with the youth of other countries that accord training the
highest priority. According to the MEC for education in the North West
there was a deficit of R2 billion for establishing infrastructure in 1998.
The deficit was already R4 billion in 2005. However, the budget was R200
million. With deficits like these it is impossible to equip our youth for
the future.

Our visits to the provinces should at all times be aimed at finding
solutions. As members of Parliament, we should create the capacity and
climate to prevent further poverty and deterioration. However, if we use
these visits as political road shows it will be a waste of taxpayers’ money
and we might as well call them off. Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Deputy Chairperson, hon members,
distinguished special delegates, fellow comrades and friends, I think we
are on track because, for the first time, hon Le Roux does accept that the
NCOP programme of taking Parliament to the people is not a road show, and
it cannot be a road show. It is part of the constitutional mandate of
ensuring an ongoing dialogue between the elected representatives and their
electorate. We welcome that particular point.

I must also express my appreciation on behalf of the ANC for the confession
of hon Le Roux which breaks ranks with the notion of regarding this kind of
programme as a paid holiday, as published in one of the opinion articles -
I think it was on 21 December 2005 - by one of the leading members of the
DA. It does clearly point to one particular reality in South Africa that
the supremacy of the ANC, its ability to unite and lead the people of South
Africa towards a better life for all, is uncontested. And you are welcome,
hon Le Roux, to join that fold.

The follow-up visit to the North West, in the week of 15 to 19 August, was
part of the NCOP programme of “Taking Parliament to the People”. It was
intended to meet stakeholders from our communities, that is, provincial
government, national government and local government leaders, to report on
the progress made concerning the issues raised during the visit of the NCOP
to North West in 2003.

These follow-up visits took place after the KwaZulu-Natal visit, which by
and large enriched our experience in the evolving programme of taking
Parliament to the people.

We take this opportunity to extend special gratitude to the Speaker of the
legislature of North West, hon Miss Thandi Modise, and the Premier, hon
Edna Molewa, for the co-operation and support they have shown in ensuring
the success of that follow-up visit. Without them we wouldn’t have
succeeded in what we wanted to do. I think it is quite important that we
need to build on that co-operation.

It will also be an omission, on my part not to extend similar gratitude to
our dedicated staff, led by Adv Lulu Matyolo, the Secretary of the NCOP,
who also ensured that everything we needed, in order to do what we were
supposed to do, was always available. The follow-up visit was an eye-
opener, not only to us as the NCOP, but also to the provincial government
of the North West, to see the impact of government policies on the lives of
our ordinary people.

It further inspired confidence in the people of the Taung district, in
particular, in Parliament as their elected institution, contrary to the
views by some pessimists who call our “Taking Parliament to the People” a
paid holiday. I think hon Le Roux is convinced now. Our people were happy,
and they were inspired. Our people had a renewed sense of confidence in
Parliament, expressing their joys and sorrows to the elected
representatives - not to their political parties – and being able to say
that this is how the country should go, in partnership between the state
and the electorate to pursue the agenda of development.

I think hon Le Roux has alluded to this point, and that is quite correct.
As much as the focus of the trip was on the areas emanating from the 2003
visit, the NCOP delegation could not deny our people the opportunity to
raise new challenges and issues that are affecting their lives.

Central to the salient issues that continue to challenge the North West
province are the following: the child and female headed households; high
levels of teenage pregnancy; mass unemployment; shortage of water for
household use; agricultural irrigation; and the problems of distances to
crucial service points like Home Affairs department, schools, and
magistrate courts. There is also a problem of access to land for
developmental use, which is under the control of traditional authority.

This point becomes a continuing challenge, not only in the North West, but
also in the whole of South Africa. We need to then begin to say, what kind
of impact our co-operative relationship is having, as an institution of
government, Parliament in this regard, with the traditional authorities, in
terms of addressing the developmental challenges of our people.

I think the Chief Whip of the Council will agree that in Limpopo when we
had our “Taking Parliament to the People” programme, we nearly had some
disturbances in some communities that wanted too much, because they wanted
to settle on a particular piece of land. In terms of law that land was
designated for something else, because it was in the hands of the
traditional authority.

This is a very sensitive challenge that all of us must be seized with, to
address the developmental challenges that are facing our communities. There
is, however, work in progress in regard to all these issues at various
levels of government in partnership with our people. The emphasis of the
Chairperson of the NCOP on the robust role of select committees in the
follow-up visit is more than welcome, if not long overdue.

In the redesign of the mechanisms for the follow-up, the roles of the
portfolio committees in the legislature, our ward committees and
councillors should be properly defined and located, because there has been
a lapse of time. We went to North West in 2003, and we did not return in
between that period and last year when we went there. Councillors are
there, they are living there, interacting and engaging with our people on
an ongoing basis. Ward committees are also there.

Our committees in the provincial legislature, in their ongoing oversight
work, do interact with those communities. So, in our planning we should
ensure that there is an integrated approach between those critical role-
players, to ensure that we monitor the efficacy and efficiency of
government interventions on the problems that we have raised.

I raise this point because these structures are the ones closest to the
people on a day-to-day basis. It therefore becomes imperative for us to
work jointly with them. The question of forwarding the reports of this
nature to affected departments should be institutionalised. It cannot just
be an issue of the NCOP. It should be institutional, and if needs be, I do
move that it should be part of the rules, so that it binds not only on
ourselves, but also affected departments.

We were in the KwaZulu-Natal department of education and I want to say that
this is an area that we think warrants your particular attention, as we are
presenting this particular report to you concerning education challenges in
that particular province. This is the kind of time frame within which we
would expect to have a meeting with you to give us a report back in terms
of how you have gone about addressing those issues. Because if we are not
doing that, we are likely to fall into a trap whereby we go to the same
places for follow-up visits, and find the same problems that existed when
we were there. In some instances the problems are even worse than they were
before.

It therefore becomes critical that there should be that kind of a mechanism
that is quite robust in terms of our engagement with the departments and
the executive with respect to reports of this nature.

I am confident that we are on track to rise to the challenges of creating a
parliament which is truly a people’s parliament that is responsive to the
needs of the people in order to create a better quality of life for all our
people. I thank you.

Mr M A MZIZI: Chairperson, hon members and our visitors present here, my
appeal would be that I hope the interpreters will interpret exactly what we
are reflecting on in our reports. The reason behind this is that I did not
prepare my speech. I want to speak of something that I have seen with my
own eyes rather than putting it on paper, because it would then become a
mere scientific document that signifies nothing.

Visiting the provinces by way of the “Taking Parliament to the People”
campaign is a useful tool to us as members of the NCOP. More often one
finds that we get reports from various departments briefing us of what is
happening on the ground.

Kodwa iningi lale  mibiko  uma  uthi  uyalibheka  uthola  ukuthi  kulungiswe
konke, sekukhulunywa ngokuhle nje kuphela, okubi  kuyingcosana  okukhulunywa
ngakho. Ngakho-ke uma umuntu elalela le mibiko bese ewathatha ewabeka  lapha
emsamo  ethala,  isuke  leyo  mibiko  ingasho  lutho   kubantu.   Ngakho-ke,
angiphinde  Sihlalo  ngithi  ngiyadabuka  ngoba  ngithe  uma  ngibheka  uhlu
lwamagama abantu abazokhuluma laphaya, ngathola  ukuthi  phela  sasithe  uma
siya sithatha iPhalamende  silisa  kubantu  sisebenzisana  kanye  namakomidi
ezifundazwe.

Manje ngithe uma  ngibheka  laphayana  ngabona  umfowethu  uNgcolosi  ophuma
kwaZulu-Natali ekhona, ngike ngaya  nakuye  ngabuza  ukuthi  hhawu  mfowethu
wena uzokhuluma kuphi ngoba angiliboni igama lakho?  Uma  ngabe  bengikubone
ekuqaleni lokho, ngabe ngike nganxusa ukuthi akube  uyena  ozokhuluma  lapha
ngoba esifuna ukukwazi ukuthi ekuhambeni kwethu silifulathela lapho  esasiye
khona  kusale  kwenzekani.  Ubeyosinika  indlela  engcono  kunalokhu   ukuba
azolalela  njengoba  elalele  nje,  sifuna  ukuzwa   ukuthi   uthini   yena.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[But when you scrutinise all these reports, you will  find  that  everything
has been done and we are now talking about good things. There are a few  bad
things that we are talking about now. Therefore,  if  you  listen  to  these
reports and do not forward it to people, it doesn’t mean anything  to  them.
Chairperson, when we took Parliament to the people, we  said  that  we  were
going to work with provincial committees.

I noticed that my brother Ngcolosi from KwaZulu-Natal is here in the  House.
I regret, when I looked at the list of the speakers,  that  I  noticed  that
his name is not on the list. If I had  noticed  that  at  the  beginning,  I
would have made the request that he speak here,  because  we  want  to  have
feedback on what happened after we left. He would have  given  us  a  better
report than it is for him  just  to  listen.  We  would  like  to  hear  his
comments.]

Chairperson, reports that are always sent to us by various departments do
not, in most cases, reflect the concept of Batho Pele.
Uma sikhuluma ngabantu kube yibona esikhuluma nabo kuqala, kube yibona
esizwayo ukuthi bathini, lokho kusinika igunya lokuthi ukusa iPhalamende
kubantu kuyinto enosizo ngoba phela abantu bathola ithuba lokukhuluma nathi
ngqo, futhi sibatshele abantu ukuthi bakhulume bangesabi bagonyuluke ngoba
phela la asizanga njengamaphoyisa ukuzobheka ukuthi ubani ongasebenzi,
ubani osebenzayo, silapha ngoba sizokwelekelela isifundazwe noma isifunda
lapho siye khona. Ngakho-ke siyakubeka kuyiqiniso lokho ukuthi thina njenge-
NCOP siyelekelela kuphela hhayi ngoba sifuna amaphutha ukuze kube khona
esimgxekayo. Ngakho-ke uma sihlala phansi siye sithi uma sesihamba kuleyo
ndawo, lokhu kinina-ke makomidi amiyo, akube yikho eniyokwenza kusasa,
okunye nizokwenza ngekusasa elinye, okunye kuyothatha isikhathi ukuze
nifike kukho. Kodwa-ke sifuna ukwazi ukuthingabe abantu bayazithola
izinsiza na?

Angigcine  ngithi  siqinisekisa  thina   ukuthi   abantu   bakuthole   lokho
abakudingayo  ngezinsizakalo   ezitholakala   kuhulumeni   ngoba   siyohlala
silapho,  simele  bona.  Ukuya  kwethu  kubona,  sifuna  ukuthi   basitshele
okungamaqiniso  kuphela  ukuze  nemibiko  ezayo  aphuma  emiNyangweni  ifike
kuyimibiko  ekhombisa  imiyalezo  ephuma  kubantu  bethu   laphaya   phansi.
Angibonge, Sihlalo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[When we talk to people, we talk to them  face-to-face  and  get  what  they
want to say. That confirms to us that taking Parliament to the people  is  a
good thing, because they get the chance to talk to us  freely.  We  are  not
going to the provinces like the police to check on who is  working  and  who
is not. We go there to help the province or provinces that we are  visiting.
The NCOP is not looking for mistakes so that it  might  criticise  somebody.
When we leave the provinces, we advise  standing  committees  on  what  they
must do. They will do things differently in future. It will take time to  do
everything. We want to know if people are experiencing service delivery.

Lastly, let me say that we are ensuring that people get all that  they  want
through help from the government because we represent them.  When  we  visit
them, they must tell us the truth so that  when  we  get  reports  from  the
departments they should be reflecting the concerns of people on the  ground.
Thank you, Chairperson.]

USIHLALO WENDLU: (Nkk M N Oliphant): Sihlalo, ngaphambi kokuthi ngiqhubeke
nenkulumo yami, ngifisa nje ukuthi ngikhumbuze umhlonishwa uMzizi ukuthi
imibiko yokuthi siye ezifundazweni kanye nemibiko yokulandelela yithina
esiyixoxa kule Ndlu siyivume futhi kule Ndlu. Angiqondisisi-ke ukuthi
umhlonishwa uMzizi usuke ekuphi kuze kwamukelwe umbiko athi usuke usukhiphe
ezinye izinto, ngoba le Ndlu inalo ilungelo lokuchibiyela umbiko.

Ngifuna ukusho ukuthi abantu bayobusa futhi bayoba namalungelo afanayo
ngaphandle kokubheka ubuzwe, ibala kanye nobulili. Bayobamba iqhaza
ekuphathweni kwezwe. Lesi yisinqumo esathathwa wuKhongolose e-Kliptown ngo-
1955. Ukufakazela lawa mazwi, le Ndlu ibambe iqhaza ngokuthi ise
iPhalamende ebantwini kwaZulu-Natali endaweni yaseMpangeni ngaphansi
koThungulu. Abantu bazisho izimvo zabo, singuMkhandlu weNdlu yeziFundazwe
sibuye salandelela ukuyobheka ukuthi izikhalo zabantu zifezekisiwe yini
noma qha.

Ekulandeleleni kwethu kwaZulu-Natali siye eNtambanana naKwaMbonambi ngenxa
yokuthi labo masipala bangaphansi kohlelo lokuhlela kabusha. Omasipala
abangaphansi kohlelo lokuhlela kabusha nabo bayazama, ngifuna ukukusho
lokho. Kufanele sibheke ukuthi siqhamuka kuphi. Izinkinga ezinkulu
abasibekela zona yilezi ezilandelayo. Angizukuzisho zonke ngizothi nje
qaphu:

Ukungabikho kwezinsizasidingo zokusebenza komasipala, ugesi, amanzi kanye
nemigwaqo nanokuthi basezindaweni zasemakhaya ezingakwazi ukungenisa inzuzo
ngentela. ENtambanana babuye bengeza ngendaba yomtholampilo kanye
nokuxhumana phakathi kukamasipala noMnyango wezaseKhaya.

Ngokombiko engiwuthole ngokuvakashela kulezi zindawo wamakomidi
esishayamthetho sakwaZulu-Natali, sekwakhiwe isigungu sokuxhumana noMnyango
wezaseKhaya wesifundazwe kanye nomasipala waseNtambanana. Umasipala
usuwabelwe imali yokubhekana nezinkinga zamanzi kanti kube sekuxoxiswana
neRegional Water Scheme, ibhodi yamanzi, ukuthi idonse amanzi edamini
okuthiwa yiBophani. Kube sekutholakala futhi ukuthi kulo masipala
kunamakliniki amathathu asebenzayo okuyiNtambanana, uNomponjwane kanye
noLuwamba. ULuwamba futhi uzonwetshwa kwakhiwe kabusha ngoba bekuyizakhiwo
zesikhashana, amaphrifebhu. UNdunankulu noNgqongqoshe wezeMpilo
wesiFundazwe baphendule isoyi ekupheleni konyaka odlule ukuze kuqaliswe
isakhiwo laphaya eLuwamba. Lokhu kwenzeke ngenyanga kaZibandlela.
Abangamazi uZibandlela, ngisho uDisemba. KwaMbonambi khona kuzokwakhiwa
umsele wokulondoloza amanzi ngaseMfolozi yize ungeke uwanelise uMbonambi
wonkana, kodwa konke-ke kunesiqalo.

Mayelana nohlelo lwemigwaqo, ngokombiko woMnyango wokuthi umgwaqo u-P499
ophakathi kukaMbonambi neDondotha no-P494 ophakathi kweNseleni neDondotha
uhlelelwe ukwakhiwa ngokwesabelozimali sika-2006-07. Thina-ke
sesiyolandelela ukuthi kwenzekile yini lokho. Ngiyaqinisekisa kule Ndlu
ukuthi ukusa iPhalamende ebantwini  kuyingxenye yokusiza uhulumeni ukuthi
enze umsebenzi wakhe kubantu, hhayi lokhu okushiwo ngosibhincamakhasana
ukuthi sisuke siyongcebeleka.

Sibuye savakashela eJabulani Skills Centre lapho sithole ukuthi akukho
ukuxhumana kahle phakathi kwabahlali nesosesheni futhi alukho usizo abantu
abalutholayo kuyo, kwaba-ke ukuthi uMnyango awubheke izindlela zokuthi
indawo ivulwe bese kuba ukuthi iyasizwa.

UMnyango wezenhlalakahle unikezele ngo-R308 000 kanye no-R50 000 ukuthi
kulungiswe ugesi kanye nokukhokhela izindleko zabaqaphi. UMnyango futhi
emuva kocwaningo ube usuxhumana noMnyango wezeziNdlu ukuze ukwazi ukuthi
ulungise izindlu kule ndawo; kodwa-ke kusekuningi okufanele kulandelelwe
ikakhulukazi kubanikazi besikhungo.

Savakashela eSikhawini ukuyohlangana nabantu abakhubazekile abakhalaza
ngokuthi abalutholi usizo eMnyangweni wezeNhlalakahle, abakutholi
ukuqeqeshelwa amakhono, nokunye.

Eminye imiNyango kaHulumeni izinkampani ezakhiwa abantu abakhubazekile
bazibukela phansi uma kunikezelwa amathenda. Okwenzekile emuveni kokuba
sixhumene neKwaZulu-Natali, uMnyango wezeMpilo wavula amathuba okuthi
abantu bathole ukuqeqeshwa ngamakhophorethivu, nabo laba baba yingxenye
kulokho. UMnyango wezeNhlalakahle ube usubaxhasa ngo-R328 000 ukuze bakwazi
ukuthi umsebenzi wabo wenzeke ngendlela abafuna ngayo.

USomqulu weNkululeko uthi uyosiza labo abaphila ngokusebenzisa umhlabathi
ngezinsizangqangi: imbewu, ugandaganda nokunye ukuze basebenze
ngempumelelo. Lokhu kufakazelwa esikubonile okwenziwa nguPhezukomkhono
Women’s Co-operative. Ezicelweni zabo ku-Eskom Development Foundation, ube
usuqoka abantu abazoqedela ukwakhiwa kwamadamu ezinhlanzi. Angama-21
asakhiwe sekusele ukuthi kuqedelwe amathathu. Imakethe kanye nokuthutha
sekumi ngomumo, umsebenzi uyaqhubeka kahle kakhulu kanye nokutshalwa
nokuvunwa kwamakhowe, njengoba behlelile.

Okunye okuhlaba umxhwele ukuthi abakwaHulett bazinikezele ukuthi basize
ikhophorethivu ngokutshalwa komoba engxenyeni yepulazi labo. Uma sibheka
konke lokhu esengikushilo, singuhulumeni oholwa uKhongolose sisemkhondweni
kaSomqulu weNkululeko, yingakho sithi impilo esifuna ukuyiphila isezandleni
zethu.

Ngiyafisa futhi ukusho ukuthi amakhophorethivu kade eqeqeshwa lapha eLower
Umfolozi lapho abantu abazikhethela bona ukuthi bafuna ukwenzani.
Ngikhuluma nje sekukhona amathuba okuthunga amakhethini, amashidi, amajazi
agqokwa yiziguli, ukwakhiwa kwamaphepha asendlini encane kanye namanabukeni
asetshenziswa alahlwe; yonke le mikhiqizo isiwa esibhedlela.

UKhongolose kumhlahlandlela wokhetho luka-1994, 1999 no-2004 wathi
uyokwenza izimpilo zabantu baseNingizimu Afrika zibe ngcono, yingakho-ke
namhlanje sesinamakhophorethivu asekwazi ukukhiqizela esibhedlela. Uma
ufuna ukuzibonela, shona kulezi zibhedlela ezilandelayo: iNgwelezane,
iMadadeni ne-Edendale.

Siyabonga ukuthi uhulumeni oholwa uKhongolose kwaZulu-Natali uvule amathuba
okuthi abantu bakwazi ukuxhaswa ngemali ngokwezikhwama ezibizwa ngokuthi
yiProvincial Growth Fund, yiPoverty Alleviation Fund ne-SMME Fund. Futhi,
babuye baqasha abantu abazochazela abantu ukuthi amabhizinisi abo ukuze
asimame kufanele benzenjani, nokuthi bangazithola kanjani izimali ukuze
baqale amabhizinisi abo.

UMnyango wezeMpilo belu usuvulele amakhophorethivu ukuthi afake amathenda
ngakho njalo ukuletha izidingo ezibhedlela, ukwenza amagceke ezibhedlela
imbala kanye nokuthengiselwa imifino yilaba abenza izingadi. Kulabo
abasasele emuva noma abalele, isukamuva likholwa yizagila. Yingakho
singuKhongolose sizibophezele kuSomqulu weNkululeko othi iNingizimu Afika
ingeyabo bonke abakhile kuyo abamnyama nabamhlophe, futhi akukho uhulumeni
ongaqhosha ngokuthi uphethe ube ungakhelwe phezu kwesisekelo sovo lwabantu.

Ngumbuso okhethwe ngokwentando yeningi ngokovo lwabantu kuphela oyokwazi
noyoqinisekisa wonke amalungelo abo okuzalwa ngokwezidingo nangokwezimvo
zabo ukuthi kuyenzeka, ngaphandle kokubuka ubulili nezenkolo. Ngiyabonga
Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N M Oliphant): Chairperson, before I start my
speech, I just want to remind the hon Mzizi that we all agreed in this very
House on provincial visits and follow-up visits. I am not too sure where
the hon Mzizi was when we adopted these reports, as he now argues that
these reports are not accurate. This House has the right to amend a report.

I just want to say that the people shall govern and they shall have equal
rights regardless of their ethnicity, colour or gender. People shall take
part in the governing of the country. This was the decision taken by the
ANC in Kliptown in 1955. To do exactly what these words say, this House
took Parliament to the people of the uThungulu District Municipality at
Empangeni in KwaZulu-Natal. People had voiced their concerns and as
National Council of Provinces, we went back to find out if people’s
concerns had been addressed.

In our follow-up visit to KwaZulu-Natal, we went to Ntambanana and
KwaMbonambi in particular because both these municipalities fall under
Project Consolidate. I must, however, hasten to say that these
municipalities are indeed trying. We need to look at where we come from.
The main problems that they told us about were the following. I will,
however, not mention them all: the unavailability of infrastructure in
municipalities, like electricity, water and roads; and also the fact that
these municipalities are in rural areas and they do not generate any income
from taxes. In Ntambanana Municipality there were also concerns about the
clinic and the communication between them and the department of local
government and traditional affairs.

According to the report I received from the KwaZulu-Natal provincial select
committee on their visit there, a committee has now been selected to
undertake liaison between the department of local government and
traditional affairs and the Ntambanana Municipality. The municipality was
also given a certain amount to deal with the water shortages, and we spoke
to the Regional Water Scheme Board to get water from the local dam, the
Bophani. It was also found that there were three operating clinics in this
municipality, namely at Ntambanana, Nomponjwane and Luwamba. The Luwamba
Clinic will be revitalised and revamped because its structures were just
temporary.

The Premier of KwaZulu-Natal and the MEC for health, towards the end of
last year, turned the sod at Lumumba so that building could begin. This
happened in December. At KwaMbonambi a water canal will be built for water
from the Mfolozir, even though this water will not be enough for the entire
KwaMbonambi. And this is just the beginning!

On the question of roads, according to the departmental report, road P499,
which is is the road between KwaMbonambi and Dondotha, and road P494, the
road between Nseleni and Dondotha, will be built with the 2006-2007 budget.
We will then follow up to see if that has happened. I can confirm in this
House that Taking Parliament to the people is part of the work of this
House, not what is said by some So-and-Sos, that we simply go out there to
have fun.

We also visited the Jabulani Skills Centre, where we found that there was
no proper communication between the residents and the association
concerned, and that people get no help from the association. The department
concerned then had to look for ways to open up this place and get
assistance through to the people.

The department of social welfare donated R308 000 and R50 000 respectively
for the reinstallation of electricity, renovations and salary of a security
guard. This department, after some investigation, contacted the department
of housing to renovate houses in that area; there is, however, a lot to be
done in following up on the owners of the institution.

We also visited Esikhawini to meet the physically challenged people who
were complaining that they did not get any assistance from the department
of social welfare, that they were not being trained in skills, and many
other things.

Certain government departments look down on companies formed by physically
challenged people. What has happened after communicating with the
department of health is that the department opened up opportunities for
people to be trained in co-operatives, and this included the physically
challenged. The department of social welfare donated R328 000 for the work
to be done the way they want it done.

The Freedom Charter says those who make a living by tilling the soil shall
be helped with things like seed, tractors and many other things that would
help them work successfully. Look for instance at what is done by the
Phezukomkhono Women’s Co-operative. In their application to the Eskom
Development Foundation, they selected certain people to work on the
building of fishponds. About 21 fishponds have been built already; there
are only three still to be constructed. The market and the transportation
of the fish are booming. The planting of mushrooms is also going very well.
It is all going according to plan.

One other good thing is that Huletts is prepared to give up a certain part
of their farm to the co-operatives for the planting of sugar cane. If we
look at all these things I have mentioned, it is clear and evident that, as
the ANC-led government, we are in line with the Freedom Charter, and it is
for this reason that we are saying the good life is in our hands.

I also wish to mention that the co-operatives were trained at Lower
Umfolozi, and people chose what they wanted to do. As we speak there are
opportunities for sewing curtains, sheets, hospital gowns for patients and
making toilet covers and disposable nappies. All these things are then sent
to hospitals.

The ANC manifestos of 1994, 1999 and 2004 declared it would make the lives
of South African people better, and it is for this reason that today we
have co-operatives that can produce things for hospitals. Should you want
to see these things yourself, you can go to the following hospitals:
Ngwelezane, Madadeni and Edendale.

We are very grateful that the ANC-led government in KwaZulu-Natal has
opened up opportunities for people and they can now access funding through
the Provincial Growth Fund, the Poverty Alleviation Fund and SMME Fund.
There are also people who are employed just to explain to people how to
start a business and access funds.

The Department of Health has asked the co-operatives to tender for the
maintenance of gardens and grounds and the sale of vegetables. To those who
are left behind, and those who are still snoozing, I say to them: The last
partridge to rise has the most sticks thrown at it. That is why we, as the
ANC, say we are bound by the Freedom Charter which says, “South Africa
belongs to all those who live in it, black and white”, and there is no
government which can boast about being the people’s government if it is not
built on the foundation of the people.

It is the democratically elected government that will satisfy the needs of
the people without looking at the gender and religious affiliation of
people. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Rre J O TLHAGALE: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, le Ntlo e e tlotlegang, leeto le
la go isa Palamente kwa baaging ba Bokone Bophirima, e ne e le poeletso ya
leeto la 2003. Maikaelelo a lona e ne e le go tlhotlhomisa gore go
fitlheletswe tswelelopele e e kana kang, le gore makoa le diphoso tsa 2003
di siamisitswe.

Lefapha la Thuto le ne le emetswe ke Mokaedi-Kakaretso wa Thuto, mme ena o
ne a neela puo ya sepolotiki le e e sa amaneng le maikaelelo a leeto la
rona. Legale, motlotlegi Moeteledipele wa NCOP o ne a mmusetsa tseleng, mme
a bo a molaela go ya go dira pegelo e e lebaneng pele ga Labotlhano wa beke
eo. Tiragalo e e ne ya godisa boikanyego jwa rona rotlhe mo Moeteledipeleng
wa rona fa re bona a sa gobelele.

Kwa Sekolong se Segolo sa Manthe, go ne go tlhomilwe ditanka tse pedi tsa
metsi tse di neng di seyo ka 2003. Go agilwe matlwana a baithuti a a neng a
seyo ka 2003, e bile go theogetse mogokgo o moša. Khansele e ne ya
itumelela tshiamiso eo ya makoa a 2003.

Mo Lefapheng la Temothuo, Bakaedi-Kakaretso ba ba farologaneng ba ne ba
neela pegelo ya dikabelo tsa madi a a farologaneng a a abetsweng go thusa
balemirui ba Bokone Bophirima.

Madi a mangwe ke a a thusang merafe e e boetsweng ke mafatshe a bagolo ba
bona. Madi a mangwe e ne e le a a abetsweng go thusa balemirui ba ba
botlana. A mangwe madi, ke a a abetsweng lenane la kabelo ya dijo le go
lwantsha lehuma. [Nako e fedile.] (Translation of Setswana speech follows.)

[Mr J O TLHAGALE: Hon Chairperson and the august House, the “Taking
Parliament to the People” visit to the North West was a follow-up on the
2003 visit. The objective of the visit was to assess development in the
area, and also to check whether the weaknesses and mistakes of 2003 had
been corrected.

The Department of Education was represented by the director-general, who
made a political speech and also explained the reason for our visit.
Although he missed the purpose of our visit in his speech, the Chairperson
of the NCOP managed to remind him, and ordered him to go and give a report
relevant to the Friday of that week. This incident increased our loyalty to
this leader for his being fair.

Two water tanks and toilets for learners were also built at Manthe High
School that did not exist there in 2003. And there was also a newly
appointed principal. The Council appreciates the rectification of those
2003 shortcomings.

In the Department of Agriculture, different directors-general made reports
of various financial donations that had been made to help North West
farmers.

The other monies were those that were given to tribal communities that got
back the land of their forefathers. Other monies were given to poor
farmers, while others were given to feeding schemes and poverty alleviation
programmes. [Time expired.]]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: House Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, may I
thank - in absentia - the Chairperson of the NCOP for the good opening
speech we got from him. Belated compliments of the new season to those
members who decided not to greet me until we met here.
Tsine Nine bekunene, tsine lesacedza Lubombo ngekuhlehletela,
lokweValenthayini asikwati kahle; kodvwa sesitawusale sinihalalisela nje
kutsi nibe nelusuku loluhle lweValenthayini. [We, the Swazi nation, who
climbed Mount Lubombo, are not familiar with St Valentine, but we would in
any event like to wish you a very lovely Valentine’s Day.]

Today we are again reminded of the words of our departed stalwart and
previous Chairperson of the NCOP, Comrade Joyce Kgoali, when she said:


   “Taking Parliament to the People” has been conceived within a context of
   the need to engage with and bring on board the ordinary South Africans,
   as we go about doing our parliamentary business.


She further added that:


   This programme should serve as a vehicle to place Parliament where people
   are, ensuring visibility of this important institution even to those most
   rural parts of our country. Ordinary South Africans, including women,
   youth, senior citizens, school children, and traditional leaders are able
   to interact with and inform Parliament of their daily experiences.


Indeed, when we launched this initiative a few years ago, we committed
ourselves to ensuring that our people are accorded the opportunity to
interact and engage with our Parliament.

Sibonile-ke lapho siqombola imiqansa kushunqa izintuli sihambela
imiphakathi yethu, sivakashela izikole, izibhedlela, amapulazi kanye
nezindawo lapho kuhlala khona izintandane kanye nabaphethwe isifo
sengculazi. Konke lokhu besikwenza ngoba besinentshisekelo yokuthi
sihlangane nabantu bakithi. Siyazi-ke ukuthi lokhu sikwenza ngokuhambisana
noMqulu weNkululeko esiwubiza ngokuthi yi-Freedom Charter. Sasho eMqulwini
weNkululeko ukuthi uma sibusa, sizobusa sihambisana nabantu. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We noted a great deal on our backwards and forwards visits to communities,
schools, hospitals, farms, orphanages and institutions for people living
with HIV/Aids. We did all that because we had the passion to meet our
people. We are also aware that we need to do all of this to come in line
with the Freedom Charter. We asserted in the Freedom Charter that “the
people shall govern”.]

Ngingasho nje, Sihlalo, kutsi bantfu sebayacala kwati kutsi yini yona le-
NCOP. Kubuhlungu-ke noko kulabo lesekwabangena engatini badzimate betayela
kakhulu lamagumbi emabhodi lashaya umoya lokahle. Kulabo-ke shangatsi
lelisu lelihlonipheke kangaka, lekutsatsa iphalamende isiwe ebantfwini,
yintfo nje yekubukisa. [I can say, Chairperson, people have begun to get to
know the NCOP. This is painful then to those who are used to its corridors.
To those, this “Taking Parliament to the People” is like showing off.]

I will confirm that that is not a road show nor is it an example of
political tourism, because this programme really assists in unblocking the
bottlenecks towards service delivery. Of course, those who are used to
being newspaper politicians will see this as a road show because they are
only used to going to urban areas and not used to going out to those areas
that we call the back of beyond.

We identify those areas because they have been historically marginalised
and have a historical background of underdevelopment. That is why when you
go to those areas, you will realise that the rate of unemployment is higher
than that in the urban areas. When you go to those areas, you will find
that there are people who stay in shacks and not in mansions such as you
find in Sandton.

So, we who live with the people during their times of suffering, we know
because we don’t only go there when there are elections and remember them
because 1 March is coming. We are definitely sure that 1 March will come
and go and we will still be with those people and assist them to ensure
that their lives become better and better. We will not desert this
programme of visiting our people.

We know that our people need to get enough arable land to use for
ploughing. That is why government has reviewed the stance of willing-buyer,
willing-seller. [Interjections.] When you say willing-seller, willing-
buyer, the bottom line is that that programme has not assisted in unlocking
the skewed landownership to the benefit of the people who need land and
have not been given any.

You cannot, Mr Le Roux, stand at this podium and mislead people by
pretending that you want them to get land and yet when the ANC-led
government comes with a measure to help expropriate land, you are the very
same ones who through your party, the DA, are against the measures of
expropriating land. How do you expect those people to have hundreds and
thousands of acres of land to have sustainable agricultural farming going
on, when you oppose such a progressive stance to ensure that skewed
landownership is balanced out to better the lives of our people?

We want to say that if these were road shows we would not have seen, after
the visit of the NCOP to KwaZulu-Natal, the 181 classrooms built in 41
schools. If these were road shows without any impact, those schools which
were devastated by the storms would never have been renovated. I am happy
that when we visited one of the schools one of the principals said the
following in isiZulu.

Ufisa sengathi uMkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe ungahlale uvakasha njalo
nje ngoba ukuba uhlale uvakasha, nale labhorethri esiyabelwe imali yokuthi
yakhiwe ngabe kudala yaphela. Ngokwakhe ubengafisa nje ukuthi emva
kwempelasonto Mkhandlu kaZwelonke weziFundazwe ufike laphaya. Lokho
kukhombisa ukuthi abantu bayaluhalisela udumo lo uMkhandlu kaZwelonke
weziFundazwe ngosizo abalubona ulwenzayo lokuthi izinsiza zifike kubantu.
Sikhuluma nje kunezindlu ezincane ezinga-670 ezakhiwe ezikoleni eziyi-117.
Uma bekuwumbukiso lona noma ezokuvakasha, ngabe lezo zindlu ezincane
azakhiwanga. Sikhuluma nje kune-160 lamagumbi okufundela angomahamba
nendlwana . . . (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[He conveyed the wish that the National Council of Provinces would
frequently visit that place, because the proposed laboratory, whose
construction budget has been allocated, should have been completed a long
time ago. According to him he would have loved the National Council of
Provinces to pay another visit after that weekend. That is an indication
that people are commending the National Council of Provinces for bringing
service delivery to the people. As we speak, 670 toilets are being built in
117 schools. If things were done for fun those toilets would not have been
built. As we speak, 160 mobile classrooms have been made available . . . ]

. . . in areas where we found the conditions were not conducive to
learning. This is also in line with the presidential directive that said
that no learner must be taught under a tree. We must understand, Mr Le
Roux, that our country is only 12 years old, and we are trying to deal with
something that the result of 350 years of exploitation and colonial
occupation of South Africa as a country. And, we must applaud ourselves for
saying that we are taking the right direction to ensure that we develop
those people who were downtrodden and underdeveloped.

We say, come 1 March people should vote for the party that they know is
doing something for them. People will not go back to where they know that
they will only be considered when their votes are needed; and when their
votes are not needed, you will vote against progressive legislation which
ensures that people own land, progressive legislation which ensures that
their labour rights are respected.

As we conclude this debate, I want to say that the NCOP should commit
itself to making those follow-up visits because it can’t afford to have a
programme that is a shoot-and-run programme where we don’t go back to check
what progress has been made in terms of our commitment. The ANC in its
manifesto of 2004, which is the mandate we have for this third Parliament,
said that we are in contract with our people. That people’s contract says
we have to go back and account to our people.

That is why this programme puts co-operative government into action. You
have a situation where there will be no citizen of South Africa who asks a
question that will not be responded to; because all the spheres of
government - local government, provincial government and the national
government - are there to account to the people. Thank you. Aluta continua!
[Applause.]
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms P M Hollander): Hon Chairperson, hon
members, Parliament is elected to represent the people. The NCOP in
particular is entrusted with the role of representing provinces and local
government in the national sphere of government. This might sound
rhetorical but we must state it upfront, because this specifies our
mandate. It is because of this mandate that the programme, “Taking
Parliament to the People”, has been undertaken and the follow-up visits
were initiated last year.

Having said this, the most important question, however, is whether this is
worthwhile. Judging by the input of the speakers in this debate the answer
is definitely a resounding yes. To find out the answer to this question one
needs to look no further than the vision of Parliament, which is to build
an effective people’s parliament that is responsive to the needs of the
people and that is driven by the ideal of realising a better quality of
life for all the people of South Africa. This is the motivating factor.

Parliament is made up of people who have been elected to represent the
people; they must go to the people to get the mandate. This we do when we
take Parliament to the people. They must also come back to report to the
same people on that mandate, and this we do during the follow-up visits. We
still find that a number of our people, especially in rural areas, are
unfamiliar with their right to participate in government, unfamiliar with
parliamentary processes in general, and unfamiliar with the role of the
NCOP in particular.

The “Taking Parliament to the People” programme was conceived as both a
public education and a public participation programme. Regarding public
education, the NCOP is a public forum for debate and needs to make its
proceedings and decisions known to the public through the media and
personal contact. However, you will agree with me that this has now taken
on an important dimension of serving as an oversight tool.

Regarding public participation, the NCOP needs to be responsive to the
people and take their views into account. Public participation alerts the
NCOP to challenges and achievements in the process of service delivery.
Listening to what people have to tell Parliament strengthens the NCOP’s
ability to oversee the implementation of key programmes for their benefit.

The design of the programme provides the ideal interface for MPs to engage
with people on the ground. More than anything else it emphasises the
importance Parliament attaches to the business of bringing our Constitution
to life and sustaining it through ongoing dialogue, interaction and
discourse. The programme provides a unique opportunity to share experiences
and enhance mutual understanding. The feedback that MPs receive from
community representatives provides invaluable information, and sets down
key markers in improving the delivery of services.

The open nature of the meetings allows for a wide range of participants to
express their viewpoints. Of great interest is the active participation of
members of ward committees, women and youth. The purpose of the follow-up
visits is to look at progress, or the lack thereof, on the issues raised by
the people and where government was expected to act. The follow-up visits
to KwaZulu-Natal and the North West did achieve this. They proved to be
very successful and yielded many critical insights. Many lessons were
learnt as to how to improve upon service delivery.

This programme, together with the follow-up visits, is also important with
regard to the issue of acceleration of the process of transformation,
focused on the objective of a better life for all our people, and focused
on the objective of improving as quickly as possible the quality of life of
all our people. It is encouraging to hear the progress made after these
visits. Even though this is not enough, however, it shows that some
positive results have come out as a result of the programme and the follow-
up visits.

We should therefore step up a gear and be proactively involved with the
communities before we visit them. We shouldn’t always wait for the people
to tell us about their problems at these meetings. We can do better if we
find out about the problems and challenges before the visits. This will
help people to be better prepared when Parliament is taken to them. This
will also give both parliamentarians and the public an opportunity to
engage in constructive debate.

There is a clear need for programmes like these if we are to make a better
life for all. If we don’t succeed in making the lives of our people better
we will never put a stop to the wave of protests, which we have witnessed
recently. Protests presuppose fighting. We don’t need fights; we need
talks. As Winston Churchill once said, “To jaw-jaw is always better than to
war-war.”

And now I come to the DA, to the hon Le Roux - and they are always talking
about the taxpayer’s money.

Die belastingbetaler se geld: ek wil nou ’n bietjie vir julle van dié
belastingbetaler se geld vertel. [The taxpayer’s money: I would now like to
tell you a little about this taxpayer’s money.]

If you owe the government money and the government has given you your
account for what you owe them, and you have settled the account with
government, which is to render unto Caesar that which belongs to Caesar,
then it is not the taxpayer’s money anymore. It is not my money, it is not
your money; it becomes the government’s money because you have paid the
money to Sars. Once Sars gets the money in hand they pay it to the
government. So, why is the DA always talking about the taxpayer’s money?
Even the debate on our Deputy President was about the taxpayer’s money. It
is not your money anymore. You have paid it to government; it does not
belong to you.

The hon Gibson sits in on our discussion of the budget of Parliament. He
agrees with everything that we discuss in this budget programme. So what is
all this fuss about? Stop attacking our Deputy President also. She hasn’t
done anything that is wrong; she is acting within the Rules of Parliament.

The ACDP comes along and they use the Bible. God doesn’t need us to help
Him and assist Him because He created us, so He doesn’t need us to take His
part in any fight. The ACDP actually walked out at the opening of
parliament at the Northern Cape legislature last Thursday. They have
committed political suicide. Why are they doing this? They walk out of
prayers because the Hindus and the Muslims have said a prayer. It is a
disgusting thing to have done. Our people outside this Parliament are not
only made up of Christians, they also include people of other religions,
who stay in during our prayers so why can we not sit in during their
prayers also?

The ID also comes with this thing of playing the colour card, like the DA.
The DA has set up posters to “end racism”. When you listen to the news on
the radio, in the next programme that comes on you hear “the coloured
people”. We are not coloured people anymore, hon Mr Le Roux. This view is
keeping us in bondage in this country. We are not in bondage anymore. The
law on the population register has been taken off the Statute Book of South
Africa long ago. So, why do you always refer to our people as coloureds? We
are not coloureds; we are South Africans in this country. Thank you very
much.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): I shall now put the question in
respect of the First Order. The question is that the report be adopted. As
the decision is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution I
shall first ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the
Chamber to cast their provinces’ votes.

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to
make their declaration of votes if they so wish. Is there any province that
wants to make a declaration or vote? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question and I shall do so in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please indicate to
the Chair whether they vote in favour or against, or abstain from voting.
Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?
Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Elethu. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Kunjalo. [Support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo re e thekga ka diatla tše pedi. [Limpopo
supports.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Support.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Steun. [Support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.

Report accordingly adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

I shall now put the question in respect of the Second Order. The question
is that the report be adopted. As the decision is dealt with in terms of
section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first ascertain whether all
delegation heads are present in the Chamber. In accordance with Rule 71 I
shall first allow provinces an opportunity to make their declarations of
vote if they so wish. Is there any province that wishes to make a
declaration? None.

We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order. Eastern Cape?

Ms B N DLULANE: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Support.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyaxhasa. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Re a e amogela. [Support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [Support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: Ke ya rona. [Support.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): All nine provinces voted in favour.

Report accordingly adopted in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Hon members, the business of the House will now be suspended. The House
will resume after the Joint Sitting.


                           ANNIVERSARY OF THE NCOP


                               (Announcement)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr T S Setona): Before hon members proceed, I want
to make the following announcement: There will be a very brief function – I
am told it is to observe the anniversary of the NCOP. You know that the
Constitution was also adopted in 1996, the Constitution that currently
guides us. This function will be in the Queen’s Hall at 12:30. According to
the note I have, all members of the NCOP are invited to join that
particular function. [Interjections.]

I am confused; I had 11:40, but I received another order from somewhere
that says 12:40. Now 12:30 is the latest one that I have. [Interjections.]
The correct time is 12:30 at the same venue.

Business suspended at 11:24 and resumed at 15:58.

                              AFTERNOON SITTING

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon members, we will now continue with the
business of the House. The Secretary will read the Third Order of the day.


    DECISION ON REPORT FROM PARLIAMENTARY PROCESS ON AFRICAN PEER REVIEW
                                  MECHANISM


The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As there is no speakers’ list, I shall now put
the question. The question is that the report be adopted. As the decision
is dealt with in terms of section 65 of the Constitution, I shall first
ascertain whether all delegation heads are present in the Chamber to cast
their provinces’ votes. Are the delegation heads all present?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes. It’s the first time I have heard you
responding to this question. Congratulations!

In accordance with Rule 71 I shall first allow provinces the opportunity to
make their declarations of vote if they so wish. Is there any province that
wishes to do so? None. We shall now proceed to voting on the question. I
shall do so in alphabetic order per province. Delegation heads must please
indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour, against or abstain.
Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: We vote in favour. We support the report.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Steun. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyawuxhasa. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Limpopo votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga votes in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?
Mr M C GOEIEMAN: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: North West is in favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces have voted in favour. I
therefore declare the report adopted in terms of section 65 of the
Constitution.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  REFERRAL OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCESS REPORT ON AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM
  TO SOUTH AFRICA’S FOCAL POINT FOR INCORPORATION INTO SELF-ASSESSMENT AND
                             PROGRAMME OF ACTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I move without notice: That –

as the report has been duly adopted by this House, it be formally referred
to South Africa’s focal point on the African Peer Review Mechanism so that
it can be incorporated into South Africa’s self-assessment country report
and programme of action.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We shall now proceed to voting on the
question. I shall do so in alphabetic order per province. Delegation heads
must please indicate to the Chair whether they vote in favour or against or
abstain from voting. Eastern Cape?

Mr A T MANYOSI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Free State?

Mr C J VAN ROOYEN: Supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Gauteng?

Mr E M SOGONI: Siyavuma. [We support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: KwaZulu-Natal?

Mr Z C NTULI: Elethu. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Limpopo?
Ms H F MATLANYANE: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Mpumalanga?

Ms F NYANDA: Mpumalanga supports.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Northern Cape?

Mr M C GOEIEMAN: Steun. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: North West?

Mr Z S KOLWENI: In favour.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Western Cape?

Mr N J MACK: Steun. [Support.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Nine provinces voted in favour. I therefore
declare the motion agreed to in terms of section 65 of the Constitution.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 16:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                          THURSDAY, 19 JANUARY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Constitution Twelfth Amendment Bill [B 33B – 2005] Constitution
         Twelfth Amendment Act of 2005 (assented to and signed by President
         on 22 December 2005);
      2) Cross-boundary Municipalities Laws Repeal and Related Matters Bill
         [B 36B – 2005] – Act No 23 of 2005 (assented to and signed by
         President on 22 December 2005);
      3) Road Accident Fund Amendment Bill [B 64B – 2003] – Act No 19 of
         2005 (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2005);
      4) Judicial Matters Amendment Bill [B 2B – 2005] – Act No 22 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 23 December 2005);
      5) Close Corporations Amendment Bill [B 6B – 2005] – Act No 25 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 8 January 2006);
      6) Auditing Profession Bill [B 31B – 2005] – Act No 26 of 2005
         (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2006); and
     (7)    Special Pensions Amendment Bill [B 28B – 2005] – Act No 27 of
        2005 (assented to and signed by President on 12 January 2006).


National Council of Provinces


1.    Referral to committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following papers are referred to the  Select  Committee  on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration and report:

        a)  Report  on  the  provisional  suspension   from   office   with
           remuneration of Mr M K Chauke, an additional magistrate  at  the
           Pretoria Magistrate’s Court.


        b) Progress report in terms of section 13(3)(f) of the  Magistrates
           Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993) on magistrates (M S E  Khumalo;  K
           Sulliman and M F Mathe) suspended for alleged misconduct.


        c) Proclamation No R.51 published in Government  Gazette  No  28039
           dated 23 September 2005: Notification by President in respect of
           entities identified by the United Nations  Security  Council  in
           terms  of  section  25  of  the  Protection  of   Constitutional
           Democracy Against Terrorist and  Related  activities  Act,  2004
           (Act No 33 of 2004).


        d) Proclamation No R.57 published in Government  Gazette  No  28136
           dated 14 October 2005: Notification by President in  respect  of
           entities identified by the United Nations  Security  Council  in
           terms  of  section  25  of  the  Protection  of   Constitutional
           Democracy Against Terrorist and  Related  activities  Act,  2004
           (Act No 33 of 2004).

      2.    The following paper is  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
        Public Services for consideration and report:

        a)  Report  and  Financial  Statements   of   the   Home   Builders
             Registration Council for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for  2004-2005  [RP
             185-2005].


    3. The following papers are referred to the Select  Committee  on  Land
       and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

        a) Government Notice No 1040 published  in  Government  Gazette  No
           28150 dated 28 October 2005: Borrowing powers  of  water  boards
           listed under Schedule 3 Part B of the Public Finance  Management
           Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

        b) Report and Financial Statements of Botshelo Water for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005.


        c) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuck Ridge Water for  the
           year ended 30 June 2005.


        d) Report and Financial Statements of Albany Coast  Water  for  the
           year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


        e) Report and Financial Statements of Amatola Water  for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005.
        f) Report and Financial Statements of Lepelle  Northern  Water  for
           the year ended  30  June  2005,  including  the  Report  of  the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements  for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005.


        g) Report and Financial Statements of Mhlathuze Water for the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005.


        h) Report and Financial Statements of Namaqua Water Board  for  the
           year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 2005.


        i) Report and Financial Statements of Overberg Water for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005.


        j) Report and Financial Statements of the  Pelladrift  Water  Board
           for the year ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements  for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005.


        k) Report and Financial Statements of Rand Water for the year ended
           30 June 2005, including the Report of the  Independent  Auditors
           on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.


        l) Report and Financial Statements of Sedibeng Water for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005.


        m) Report and Financial Statements of Umgeni  Water  for  the  year
           ended 30 June 2005, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
           Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30  June
           2005


    4. The following  papers  are  referred  to  the  Select  Committee  on
       Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a) Report and Financial Statements of the  South  African  Forestry
            Company Limited (SAFCOL) for  the  year  ended  30  June  2005,
            including  the  Report  of  the  Independent  Auditors  on  the
            Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2005.


        (b) Report and Financial Statements of Alexkor  Limited  for  the  9
            months period ending 31 March 2005, including the Report of the
            Independent Auditors on the  Financial  Statements  for  the  9
            months period ending 31 March 2005.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

         Government Notice No R 1105  published  in  Government  Gazette  No
         28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees, made in
         terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act  No  24  of
         1956).


2. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development

         Notice of Regulations made in terms  of  section  44(1)(a)  of  the
         Regulation of  Interception  of  Communications  and  Provision  of
         Communication-related  Information,  2002  (Act  No  70  of  2002),
         submitted in terms of section 44(4) of the Act.


3. The Minister of Education

   a) Government Notice No 1056 published in  Government  Gazette  No  28159
      dated 25 October 2005: National Policy regarding Further Education and
      Training programmes: Approval of the amended schools policy  document,
      namely a resume of instructional programmes  in  schools,  Report  550
      (2005/09), made in terms of sections 3(4)(l) and  7  of  the  National
      Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and sections 6(A) and 61  of  the
      Schools Act, 1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


   b) Government Notice No 1175 published in  Government  Gazette  No  28300
      dated 7 December 2005: National Policy regarding Further Education and
      Training programmes: Approval of additional Agricultural  subjects  to
      be listed in the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (General),
      made in terms of sections 3(4)(l) and 7 of the  National  Policy  Act,
      1996 (Act No 27 of 1996) and sections 6(A) and 61 of the Schools  Act,
      1996 (Act No 84 of 1996).


National Council of Provinces


 1. The Chairperson

                                  REPORT ON
         “TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE: PUTTING OUR PEOPLE FIRST”

                            Executive Summary[1]


                        Kwazulu-natal Follow-up Visit
                              15-19 AUGUST 2005

1. Background

The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) embarked on its “Taking  Parliament
to the People” programme in November  2004  and  visited  the  KwaZulu-Natal
province. The communities  that  were  visited  raised  various  issues  and
concerns and the NCOP undertook that  the  relevant  government  departments
would attend to these matters of concern. The NCOP indicated that  it  would
return to the province to provide feedback to the  communities  on  progress
regarding the issues raised.

2. Introduction

This report reflects the key issues that emerged during the  course  of  the
follow up visit by the NCOP to KwaZulu-Natal during 14-19 August  2005.  The
visit constituted part of a broader initiative to “Take  Parliament  to  the
People” and to engage in parliamentary oversight  initiatives.  This  report
is therefore constituted of several  sub-sections,  including  each  of  the
various meetings that took place during the course of the  oversight  visit.
It is structured as follows:

    • Report back by provincial leaders on the current  situation  regarding
      Local Government and Educational issues (14 August 2005).
    • Meeting with SALGA and local government (15 August 2005).
    • Visit to the Tholukuhle, Macekane Primary and Bhekulwazi High  Schools
      (16 August 2005).
    • Visit to Phezukomkhono Women’s Co-operative and Thathunyawo  Cane  and
      Citrus farm (16 August 2005).
    • Visit to Disability Centres Eskhawini and Jabulani centre  (16  August
      2005).
    • Meeting on Agricultural issues, report by MEC of Agriculture  and  the
      MEC of Public Works (16 August 2005).
    • Visit to Mbonambi and Ntambanani Municipalities (17 August 2005).
    • Visit to EPWP projects Nkonjane road (17 August 2005).
    • Visit to Sokhulu farm, Amangwe Village & Ethembeni Centre  (18  August
      2005).
    • Public hearings - a summary of the meeting (19 August 2005).

3. Report back by provincial leaders  on  the  current  situation  regarding
   Local Government and Educational issues

The Chairperson of the NCOP presented a  report  back  on  reports  received
from National Departments regarding  progress  made  on  issues  of  concern
raised during the initial visit.  He  informed  the  meeting  that  the  ATC
containing the report of  the  initial  visit  was  sent  to  each  Minister
reflecting issues that were raised by communities. Furthermore, he  restated
the matters of  concern/key  issues  that  were  raised  under  the  various
departments.

The following progress reports were submitted by the individual MEC’s:

3.1. Report by the MEC for Education in KZN

 • The MEC for education in KZN reported that the province  is  in  need  of
   approximately      14  000  new  classrooms   and   toilets   to   reduce
   overcrowding in schools; that schools require  essential  major  repairs;
   that old classrooms that do not comply with current specification  caused
   major backlogs; that an additional 250 classrooms are damaged and in need
   of  major  repairs;  and  that  the  Department  has  devised  a  complex
   infrastructure development plan, which  will  provide  an  indication  of
   which schools are worse off than others.

 • In terms of the Fast Track Programme  (Learners  under  trees),  Zululand
   region will receive:
    ➢ 181 classrooms at 41 schools,
    ➢ 670 toilets to 117 school,
    ➢ 160 mobile classrooms
 • In conclusion the MEC stated that there is  progress  but  also  lots  of
   outstanding issues. He said that one of the  major  challenges  that  the
   Department is facing is its relationship with the  Department  of  Public
   Works.

Challenges

 • The under expenditure of the capital budget by the Provincial  Department
   of Education.
 • Perceived lack of infrastructure planning.
 • Lack of sufficient classrooms.
 • Department’s relationship with the Department of Public Works.
 • Lack of psychological support services at schools.
 • Lack of a transport budget at schools.

3.2. Report by the MEC for Local Government in KZN

The  following  progress  report  was  submitted  by  the  MEC   for   Local
Government:

 • The MEC for Local Government in KZN reported that a summit was held  from
   19-20 April with 51 municipalities where guidelines  were  developed  and
   functions of ward committees were established;  that  there  are  ninety-
   seven wards in total and thirty-two out  of  those  are  established;  in
   Mbonambi 8 out of 30 ward committees  have  been  established  whilst  in
   Inkandla no ward committees have been established; that  a  general  plan
   has been developed to assist municipalities to establish ward committees;
   that community participation training was rolled out as part  of  Project
   Consolidate and that councillors were approached to attend the training.
 • With regard to corporate governance, the MEC reported that  the  District
   Mayor should  establish  a  moral  forum  to  co-ordinate  functions  and
   activities; that the district manager attends the community participation
   training; that a shared  services  model  was  established  in  Uthungulu
   District. This district helps the municipalities that  do  not  have  the
   human resources by pooling the skills and resources for service  delivery
   from the districts; that there is a  District  Information  System  which
   allows access to software information from the provincial level;  through
   the Management Assistance Programme (MAP), that a Plan of Action was  set
   up consisting of (twenty-nine) 29 municipalities.

 • The MEC provided the following statistical  information  with  regard  to
   access to basic services:
      ➢ Water 72%
      ➢ Electricity 20%
      ➢ Sanitation 25%
      ➢ Refuse removal 22%
   The MEC said  that  summits  would  be  held  on  26-27  August  2005  on
   electricity and the 28th September 2005 on water provisioning.

 •  During  discussions  between  the  delegation  and  the  department  the
   following issues were raised:
      ➢ The progress made with the  establishment  of  a  disability  desk.
        Information in this regard will be provided at a later stage.
      ➢ The backlog  with  regard  to  access  to  basic  services  in  the
        Mbonambi and Mtambanana municipalities.
      ➢ The lack of a revenue base within these municipalities.
      ➢ The partnership between municipalities and DPSA.
      ➢ The lack of resources to address the backlogs.

Conclusion

The Chairperson stated that Members will be given time to read the  reports.
The key issues that had to be considered were:

     • What is achievable in  the  short-term  with  the  current  resources
       allocation?
     • Medium term  issues  –  to  be  isolated  and  identified  to  enable
       allocation of a budget.
     • The issues that needs to be addressed over the long term.
     • The establishment of ward committees  to  be  attended  to  since  it
       speaks to the core of public participation.

4. Meeting with SALGA and Local Government

Background and purpose of the meeting

The Chairperson of the NCOP, Hon. Mr M J  Mahlangu  (MP),  referred  to  the
report of the initial  visit  and  highlighted  the  following  concerns  in
respect of Local Government:

      • Lack of capacity by some municipalities, which results  in  service
        backlogs.
      • Lack of effective management systems – he requested a briefing from
        Local Government on whether this has improved.
      • Improper use of funds.
      • Strengthening of public participation through ward  committees.  He
        enquired about the status of ward committees as they play a crucial
        role in public participation, ICDs and CDWs.
      • Lack of co-ordination between Local Government and other spheres of
        government.
      • Lack of capacity to raise revenue.
      • Absence of sufficient local development programmes.

The Chairperson requested the Provincial Department of Local  Government  to
provide feedback on progress to the meeting. In  addition,  the  Chairperson
indicated that the visits to Mbonambi and  Ntambanani  municipalities  would
continue as planned as the NCOP was interested to  see  the  functioning  of
municipalities under Project Consolidate. He added that Members  would  also
look at the District Information Management System (DIMS) at the  Unthungulu
District  Municipality  and  interact  with   ward   committees   at   these
municipalities.

4.1. Report by the Department of Local Government

Presentation by Mr F Brooks, General Manager from the Provincial Department
of Local Government and Traditional Leadership

The General Manager in the Provincial Department  of  Local  Government  and
Traditional Leadership, made a presentation regarding progress made  by  the
Department in addressing the areas of concerns raised.

The General Manager provided the following progress report:
 • There are 29 Project Consolidate municipalities in the province.
 • Project Consolidate received great attention  in  KwaZulu-Natal  and  the
   Department had been requested to  make  a  presentation  at  the  Cabinet
   Legotla around the Project.
 •  A  special  programme  was  launched  to   improve   relations   between
   municipalities and the traditional leadership.
 • There were  still  challenges  regarding  the  training  of  councillors.
   However, there were a number of training programmes running.
 • Tensions between administrators and the political leadership resulted  in
   deficiency in service delivery.
 • Co-operation between the different spheres  of  government  was  still  a
   challenge.
 • With regard to the budget, there were only 10 out of 61  qualified  audit
   reports from municipalities.
 • The implementation of the Municipal Finance Management Act  and  Property
   Rates Act were still a challenge. The Property Rates Act was the next big
   hurdle.
 • With respect to the backlogs, since 1997/98 the municipality received R2,
   8 million for infrastructure development. There was  a  problem  to  meet
   backlog targets and a total amount of R14, 6  billion  was  required  for
   2005. The budget over the  MTEF  amounted  to  R4,  2  billion  and  this
   allocation played a role in addressing backlogs.
 •  In  response  to  the  issue  around  capacity  of  municipalities,  the
   municipalities had established good capacity to manage their IDPs.
 • The District Information Management System (DIMS), complies with not only
   national but international best practice and members  were  requested  to
   allocate  time  to  view  its  functioning  at  the  Unthungulu  District
   Municipality.

4.2. Presentation by Mr N Duze, Project Manager for Project  Consolidate  in
    KwaZulu-Natal

Background

Project Consolidate is a national imperative that finds innovative  ways  to
improve and strengthen Local Government service  delivery.  Its  aim  is  to
ensure a more proficient use of resources  derived  from  nationally  raised
revenue, to benefit the indigent and to implement government policy  on  the
provision  of  basic  services.  The  focus  is  on  hands-on  interventions
addressing critical gaps in eight high level focus areas identified  by  the
Department of Local Government. The initial two-year programme involved  136
municipalities  nationwide,  with   29   municipalities   participating   at
provincial level.

Progress and Challenges regarding Project Consolidate

    • A Provincial  Project  Consolidate  Task  Team  (PPCTT)  and  Regional
      Project Consolidate Task Team (RPCTT) had been established  to  manage
      the project at provincial and regional levels respectively.
    •  A  Programme  Management  Unit  had  been   established   to   assist
      municipalities to formulate and facilitate Projects and interventions,
      as well as work closely with stakeholder representatives.
    • The province is currently at  Phase  3  level  and  it’s  expected  to
      complete Phase 4 by end of March 2007.
    • A Provincial Programme of Action (PPA) was prepared and adopted by the
      Provincial Cabinet in October 2004. The PPA  sets  out  the  strategic
      objectives of the provincial responses to the eight  high-level  focus
      areas identified by DPLG.
    • The PPA articulates specific target interventions and  timeframes  for
      delivery and it also strengthened the MAP programme. The PPA undergoes
      regular review and refinement and progress against targets is reported
      on a monthly basis.
    •  A  communications  strategy  was  developed  to   inform   government
      departments, targeted municipalities and external  stakeholders  about
      Project Consolidate.
    • Key communication mediums included  ongoing  meetings  with  Municipal
      Managers, information and updates on the provincial  website,  project
      brochures,  targeted  media  and  conferences   and   exhibitions   as
      appropriate.
    • A Project Launch took place in Indaka regarding the eradication of the
      bucket system on 13 August, which was attended by the  MEC  for  Local
      Government and Traditional Affairs and other senior officials.
    • With regard to  the  MPAs,  in  each  of  the  29  municipalities  the
      participant municipalities have developed their MPAs.
    • The participant municipalities have  endorsed  all  MPAs  and  Council
      resolutions have been received. This was one of the  mechanisms  aimed
      at ensuring buy-in  by  the  participating  municipalities.  The  MPAs
      highlight the key priority  areas  of  the  municipality  and  suggest
      actions to be taken to address the issue. The MPA also forms the basis
      on which  appropriate  interventions  are  determined  and  developed,
      taking into account identified priorities and available resources.

The following challenges/issues were raised during the discussion session:

    •  The   relationship   between   Local   Government   and   traditional
      institutions.
    • The lack of capacity within municipalities to spend their budget.
    • The co-ordination between Local  Government  activities  and  that  of
      other spheres of government.
    • The ability of municipalities to utilise the Municipal  Infrastructure
      Grant.
    • The uniform provision of free basic services.
    • The integration of gender mainstreaming into Project  Consolidate  and
      IDP’s.
    • The Department will contribute R90 million over  the  MTEF  period  to
      Project Consolidate.
    • Four provincial departments will become actively involved in IDPs. The
      Department of Water Affairs and Forestry are already participating.
    • The implementation of the Property Rates Act in rural areas.
    • The uneven distribution of free basic services.

4.3.  Presentation by Ms A Reddy – Chief Director: Ward  Committees  in  the
    Provincial Department of Local Government

Ms Reddy provided a presentation on the  establishment  of  ward  committees
and the role of the DPLGTA in this process.

The following issues were raised during the discussion session:

    •  Whether  there  was  any  training  for  the  ward   committees   and
      councillors.
    • If compensation is offered to ward committees in rural areas.
    •  A  concern  was  raised  regarding   the   structures,   powers   and
      clarification of roles of ward committees in rural areas.
    • The impact of the  political  dynamics  on  the  functioning  of  ward
      committees.
    • That there are no legislative guidelines regarding  the  frequency  of
      meetings of ward committees.

4.4.  Closing Remarks by the Hon.  Mr  M  J  Mahlangu,  Chairperson  of  the
    National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson thanked all for participating in the meeting and  said  that
it was the electorate that was responsible to pass laws and not  government.
He said that when the NCOP embarked on the visit, its members came  to  work
and assist their counterparts and the people  of  the  province.  He  stated
that a number of matters were raised which  could  be  related  to  National
Government.

The Chairperson requested the Chief Whip of the  NCOP  to  ensure  that  the
policy be placed as a Subject for Discussion for debate in the NCOP.

Mr  Brookes  from  the  DPLG  undertook  to  co-operate  with  the  Standing
Committee to address issues raised during the visit.

Meeting  with  SALGA,  Representatives   of   Small   Business   and   Local
Entrepreneurs.

4.5 Presentation by Mr Sbu Myeze:  Department of  Economic  Development  and
      Local Economic Development
The  presentation  focussed  on  the  questions  raised  by  NCOP  regarding
strategies  employed  by  the  Department  to  assist  women   in   economic
development.

The report contained the following:
 • There is a  women  empowerment  subprogramme  contained  within  the  BEE
   programme.
 • The Department provides support in terms of training.
 • The Department is in partnership with NPI to improve productivity.
 • The Department provides assistance to women by  identifying  markets  and
   equity partnerships.
 • The recently established co-operatives programme focuses specifically  on
   women in rural areas.
 • The Department is working on establishing BEE district forums  to  assist
   people in the urban forums to interact and exchange views.
 • The Department is assisting in making access to finance easier.
 • The Department is involved in assisting with indirect financing.
 • In response to the question of support, the  MME  promotion  targets  two
   categories, namely youth and persons with disabilities.

The following issues were raised during the discussion session:

 • What municipalities are doing to inculcate a culture of saving.
 • The role of industries in Local Economic Development.
 • If relevant training is taking place with regard to co-operatives.
 • If any tender advice centres were established and how they interact  with
   other centres and DPLG.
4.6.  Presentation by Thabiso Ntshala on Local Economic Development (LED)

The presentation included the following points:

The KZN LED Support Programme aims to promote economic  growth  in  KZN.  It
assists the KZN Department of Economic Development (DED) and a  broad  range
of stakeholders to more effectively implement LED policies,  programmes  and
project within the province.

It comprises a number of LED funding and  technical  assistance  instruments
briefly outlined below:

The Business Enabling Fund (BEF) assists provincial,  local  government  and
public  entities  create  an  enabling  environment   for   Local   Economic
Development.

The  Local  Competitiveness  Fund  (LCF)  promotes  the  competitiveness  of
businesses and  sectors  in  the  local  economy  through  partnerships  and
facilitates private and  public  sector  involvement  in  sustainable  local
economic projects.

Networking  and  Communication  Funding   (NFC)   provides   marketing   and
communicating  for  the  programme,  establish  a   provincial   Monitoring,
Learning and Research Facility (MLFR) and provide  specific  provincial-wide
institutional support for the programme. The NCF is not  a  grant  fund  and
the Programme Co-ordinating Unit  (PCU)  will  procure  services  for  these
activities.

The Programme Co-ordinating Unit (PCU) will provide technical assistance  to
local  and  provincial  government  and  partnership  groups  to  assist  in
preparation, packaging and implementation of BEF and LCF projects.

The following issues were raised during the discussion session:

 • The impact of the programmes on the second economy.
 •  If  strategies  were  in  place  to  address  the  lack  of  skills   in
   municipalities regarding LEDs.
 • What the department is doing to make women aware of how to get access  to
   finance.

5. Visits to Schools

Three schools were visited by  the  NCOP  namely  Tholokuhle,  Macekane  and
Bhekulwesi.

5.1.  Tholokuhle

The Chief Whip of the NCOP, the Hon.  Mr  V  V  Z  Windvoël,  requested  the
principal to highlight the progress that was made with regard to the  issues
previously raised.

Issues raised at previous visit:
 • Lack of classrooms, which resulted in overcrowding of the classrooms.
 • Lack of motivation for educators.
 • No laboratory facilities.
 • Lack of qualified educators.

Progress made
 • Scientific equipment and chemicals have been provided to the  school  now
   since they have a laboratory where these chemicals can be stored.
 • The Department of Education has since embarked on providing  training  to
   the educators at the school.

Current challenges
 • Drug abuse by students.
 • Lack of motivation by educators.
 • Funding for the tuck shop needed.
 • The implementation of the new curriculum was costly to the school, as the
   books needed by students are very expensive.

Recommendations
 • The Department of Education to consider deploying social workers  to  the
   school.
 • Educators should be paid overtime for the  extra  effort  they  put  into
   enhancing the students’ knowledge.
 • Business within the community should be sought as a  source  of  external
   funding for the tuck shop.

5.2.  Macekane Primary School

The Hon. Mr B  J  Tolo  started  the  programme  by  mentioning  the  issues
previously raised by the school.

Previous issues raised:
 • No chalkboards.
 • No desks and chairs.
 • Shortage of water.
 • No food storage.
 • No electricity.

Progress made
 • Classrooms that were in a dilapidated state have been repaired.
 • With the classrooms being repaired, the problem of overcrowding has  been
   eliminated.
 • Plans for the  renovation  of  the  rest  of  the  school  are  currently
   considered by the Department of Education.
 • Two of the classrooms have since been fitted with electricity and as  the
   rest of the renovations take place; electricity will be supplied to those
   renovated classrooms.
 • The department has also provided the school with two water tanks.

Current challenges
 • Renovations to the school need to be fast- tracked.
 • Students come from poverty stricken homes; therefore the children  cannot
   afford to pay school fees.
 • The problem of the food storage facility has not yet been attended to.

5.3.  Bekhulwesi High School

The  Principal  of  the  school  and  the  District   Mayor   received   the
parliamentary delegation at the school.

Previous issues raised:
 • The water supply to the school was not sufficient.
 • No laboratory for the students to carry out their experiments.

Progress made
 • New classrooms were erected and the ones that were in  a  poor  condition
   were repaired.
 • The water supply to the school has been rectified by  the  Department  of
   Public Works.
 • The construction of a science laboratory has been undertaken.

6. Visit to Farms

Two farms namely the Phezukomkhono Women’s Co-operative and the  Thathunyawo
Citrus Farm were visited by the NCOP.

6.1.  Phezukomkhono Women’s Co-operative

The school reported the following progress:

 • The Department contributed 3 000 chickens together with chicken feed. The
   project managed to sell the first batch for R52 000.00.
 • The Department provided training on business management.
 • There is a poultry mentor that has been provided.
 • The implementation of an abattoir is currently underway.
 • Institutional markets including hospitals, business and schools  as  well
   as other retail stores will be approached.
 • There are 30 hectares of Paprika. The  aim  is  to  market  this  product
   overseas.
 • There are other projects that  have  been  started,  for  example  a  tea
   project and dry land rice.
 • Realising that the women needed equipment,  they  were  given  a  tractor
   through the Department’s mechanisation programme and this was launched by
   the MEC in June 2004.
 • The co-operative was expecting a person sent by the  CPPP  to  help  them
   with the packing of the paprika.
 • The irrigation is to continue.
 • The fishponds are not  yet  completed  but  will  be  finished  (conflict
   between the service  provider  and  the  co-operative  members  regarding
   payments).

Challenges

 • The conditional grants are below 70%.
 • Land care is below 70% in terms of conditional grants.
 • The removal of fencing.
 • A need for an overall project manager was identified.
 • Implementation of a marketing plan.
 • Skills development, budgeting.
 • Theft.
 • Transport for co-operative members who lived in  villages  far  from  the
   farm.
 • Disaster Management.

Recommendations

 • It was stated that the local markets should get preference before  moving
   to the international markets.
 • It was further noted that not much has been spent on poverty  at  schools
   (integration of services, food alleviation – primary school nutrition).
 • The Department of Transport must work towards constructing roads.

6.2.  Thathunyawo Citrus Farm

Thathunyawo Women’s Co-operative purchased  a  valley  farm  to  grow  sugar
cane, citrus  and  vegetables  for  the  benefit  of  the  members  and  the
community. The co-op has 46 members. The farm is 16  km  west  of  Enkwaleni
Road and has the following crops namely sugar cane  (129  hectares),  citrus
(11,74  hectares),  vegetables  (20,6  hectares),  irrigated  crops   (161,6
hectares) and bushveld. The rationale for the purchase of  the  farm  is  to
build the economy, to develop project managers and to ensure  that  children
are developed to be able to do things for themselves.

Challenges

 • A mentorship  programme  needs  to  be  implemented  to  assist  the  co-
   operative.
 • Training on management of farms.
 • Tractor needed by the co-operative.
 • The project needs to be in the IDP.
 • Transportation of products.

Recommendations

 • The MEC  to  talk  to  Eskom  regarding  the  co-operative’s  outstanding
   electricity bill.
 • The house building that is vacant  can  be  used  for  training  purposes
   instead of having people paying a fare to go for training far away.

7. Visit to Centres for People with Disabilities

The parliamentary delegation visited  two  centres,  namely  Esikhawini  and
Jabulani Centres.

7.1. Presentation by Mr Ncube, Chairperson of the Zamani  Disabled  People’s
    Organisation group

The  organisation  was  founded  in  June  2000.  The  membership   of   the
organisation comprises of people with  and  without  disabilities.  After  a
number of attempts of trying to find accommodation, the National  Department
of  Education  under  the  leadership  of  Prof.  Kader  Asmal   agreed   to
accommodate the group in one of the buildings that was used  as  a  Teachers
Training College.

Challenges

 • Lack of assistance from the Provincial Department of Social Development.
 • Lack of training.
 • Exploitation of their members by private sector.
 • Some government departments marginalise  companies  that  are  formed  by
   people with disabilities when it comes to awarding tenders.
 • Lack of empowerment in the disability sector.
 • Lack of employment opportunities.

Recommendations

 • The need to form  one  central  unifying  body  that  will  look  at  the
   interests of people with disabilities.
 • The urgency of addressing social issues was also emphasised.
 • A return visit by the Committee.

7.2.  Jabulani Skills Centre

A representative from the  association  informed  the  delegation  that  the
association was founded in 1964 and has 10 branches around  Kwa-Zulu  Natal.
Jabulani is one of their projects. Jabulani Skills Centre started  in  1942,
since then the association has been receiving a subsidy from the  department
of R8,00 per person  until  they  privatised  the  centre  in  1996  due  to
financial crisis.

Mr. Makhaya, a representative  from  the  Provincial  Department  of  Social
Development reported that this decision was going to have a negative  impact
on the residents as they do not have anywhere to go if  the  centre  closes.
On  24  March  2005,  a  meeting  was  held  between  the  department,  APC,
Resident’s Committee and Hon. Gamede, where  the  association  was  informed
that the department had approved the amount of R308 000 for renovations  and
R50 000 for electricity, the salary for a  security  guard  and  a  cleaning
staff. The department will pay this amount until the centre’s  problems  are
resolved.

Challenges

 • Lack of assistance to residents by the association.
 • The residents and the association do not own the property.
 • The residents made most of the interventions when they approached the MEC
   of Social Development, who has since intervened and is trying to  address
   the problem.
 • Lack of cooperation between residence and association.

Recommendations

 • The delegation urged the Department to investigate the  possibilities  to
   open the centre and assist the people.

8. Meeting on Agricultural issues

8.1.  Report by the MEC for Agriculture

The MEC for Agriculture gave a brief presentation as to  what  has  happened
during the last year. He  said  that  the  department  has  progressed  even
though there are still some limitations. One of the  achievements  that  the
Department can identify  is  the  Phezukomkhono  Women’s  Co-operative.  The
department also created a number  of  jobs  for  the  youth  as  some  small
agricultural projects for the youth  have  taken  off.  The  NCOP  has  been
invited to visit these youth projects next year.

With regard to the mechanisation  programme,  he  said  that  tractors  were
given to the  community  and  mentors  were  sent  to  help  them  with  the
maintenance of the tractors and  how  to  use  them.  With  regard  to  post
settlement support, there are mentors who will teach them to weed  the  land
and soil scientists to test if the land is good for a particular crop.

The following issues were raised during the discussion session:

 • The inability of farmers to move their produce to the markets.
 • The shortage of water and the plans of the Department to provide water to
   this district.
 • The impact of golf estates on the availability of agricultural land.

8.2.  Report by the MEC for Public Works

The MEC responded to questions  raised  by  the  delegates  earlier  in  the
morning regarding the storm damages that they saw  in  one  of  the  schools
they visited. He said  that  there  were  conflicting  signals  between  the
Department of Education and that of Public Works. Clarity is needed on  this
issue because Education is saying Public Works is delaying them  and  Public
Works  is  saying  they  have  not  received  a  request  for  service  from
Education. This was referred to the Public Works and Education Committees.

On the question of contractors not being paid on  time  by  the  Department,
the MEC said only those whose work had not been certified by  the  officials
would have a problem with payment.

Recommendation

 • The MEC proposed that when the NCOP calls a  meeting  again  all  parties
   should be invited (that is both Education and Public Works) so that  they
   are able to respond to the allegations that they are slowing down service
   delivery.

9. Visit to Municipalities under Project Consolidate

Uthungulu District Municipality

The members visited the Uthungulu District Municipality where they  received
a full briefing and demonstration on  the  District  Information  Management
System (DIMS).

9.1.  Ntambanana Municipality

The purpose of the visit to the municipality was to  establish  whether  the
municipality has the capacity  to  do  the  work  that  it  is  mandated  by
government to do.

The following information was supplied to Members by the Municipality:

 • The Ntambanana Municipality is one of the poor municipalities. They  have
   inherited 45 workers from the Department of Local  Government.  The  land
   the municipality is responsible for is 90% tribal land  and  10%  farming
   community. The municipality is under four tribal  authorities  which  are
   Somopho, Obizo, Obuka and Mambuka; 73% of the municipalities’  population
   has no access to water and 70% does not have proper sanitation. There  is
   a 100% backlog on electricity.

 • The municipality has a number of projects that are run by women  and  the
   youth. Included in these projects are block making, poultry  farming  and
   ceramic products. They are all registered  into  co-operatives  and  have
   been referred to Ithala for funding.

Challenges

 • Communication between the municipalities  and  the  Department  of  Local
   Government.
 • 90% of the property is not assessable.
 • 5% employed and 95% unemployed (less than 8000 people are employed)
 • The community qualifies to be put in the indigent policy
 • Generation of income.
 • The municipality has a problem with the alignment of the IDP  with  their
   budget.
 • The municipality needs to find out what projects the departments have  in
   their area.
 • Lack of free basic services.
 • There is no clinic servicing the area and surrounding areas.

9.2.  Mbonambi Local Municipality

The Municipal Mayor, Mr M E Mthethwa remarked that it has been a year  since
the initial NCOP visit where an indication has been given of  the  situation
of  the  roads,  the  lack  of  health  services,  lack  of  electrification
services, as well as the lack of potable water in the area.

The Municipal Manager, in his presentation stated that the challenge  facing
councillors was to create job opportunities  and  reform  Mbonambi  into  an
attractive investment opportunity to  alleviate  poverty;  that  agriculture
and tourism have great potential in development of  the  municipality;  that
Mbonambi is a natural location for importers and  exporters  and  they  have
investor incentives such as inexpensive water and a lot  of  vital  services
run by trained people; that partnerships were fused between the  Independent
Developing Trust (IDT), UN Agencies and EU Funders. These  partnerships  are
constantly planning development.  There  is  a  plan  to  establish  a  R120
million service centre on N2;  that  40  projects  were  launched  including
poultry farms, production of  house  products  and  community  gardens.  The
municipality also has impressive tourism opportunities and dune forests,  as
well as the Greater St Lucia Wetlands Park and deep sea fishing.

On the occasion of a meeting between the public and  the  municipality,  the
following concerns were raised:

 • Whether the municipality has communicated  with  the  MEC  regarding  the
   building of the roads subsequent to the MEC’s undertaking.
 • The issue around the ward committees.
 • When the DPLG made their presentation, a different picture  was  painted.
   For instance, why does the DPLG not know what the municipality is doing?
 • The 100% increase in expenditure for salaries.
 • Whether the Municipal Programme of Action is in line with the  Provincial
   Programme of Action.
 • The progress regarding implementation of sanitation services in terms  of
   addressing health hazards.
 • The existence of a progress report regarding the expenditure  on  housing
   since the municipality received a R17 million  injection  and  built  100
   houses.
 • The role of the Demarcation Board in the development of municipalities.

The municipality responded as follows to the aforementioned challenges:

 • The Mayor responded that  the  municipality  had  expressed  the  concern
   regarding the roads and also wrote a letter to the director.
 • In response to the question around ward committees, they were established
   in 2001.
 • The contribution of R3 million in the budget refers to MIG.  With  regard
   to housing, the provincial treasury had indicated that  the  municipality
   should not indicate any housing allocations on their budgets.
 • He explained that the increase in salaries is due to the increase in  the
   number of staff; 50% more staff have been employed.
 • The municipality is currently appointing consulting engineers  and  there
   is a specific time frame set out with regards to sanitation.
 • In response to the question regarding the Demarcation Board, its role  is
   to assess, on yearly basis, the functions of municipality.

9.3.  Meeting with the Ward Committees

The Chairperson of the NCOP, the Honourable Mr M J Mahlangu,  MP,  addressed
the meeting. Mr Mahlangu said that Local Government is mandated to  work  in
such a manner as to deliver  services  to  the  people  on  the  ground.  He
acknowledged the role and functions of ward committees and said  that  these
committees are statutory bodies. A number  of  issues  were  raised  by  the
representatives of the ward committees, more specifically  funding  of  ward
committees by the municipalities.

Challenges facing Local Government

 •  Powers  between  local  and  district  municipalities  and   effectively
   integrating  Community  Development  Workers  to  support  the  work   of
   Municipal Councils.
 • Capacity of Municipalities.
 • Interaction between the municipalities and provincial departments

The general picture that emerged from the municipalities visited during  the
NCOP follow up visit is that  they  are  functioning  well,  are  delivering
quality services and making  genuine  contributions  towards  improving  the
quality of lives of the communities they  serve.  However,  there  are  some
municipalities that continue to face severe constraints in  delivering  even
the most basic services to the communities they serve.  Many  municipalities
have no capacity to raise their own revenue and the challenge is to  empower
these municipalities to be able to raise their own revenue.

The following recommendations were proposed:

 • The NCOP to strengthen its oversight work so that it can respond  to  the
   challenges faced by Local Government.
 • Municipalities to ensure that they add value to the efforts being put  in
   by national and provincial government to capacitate  them,  by  enhancing
   their delivery of services to communities.

Response by the Deputy  Minister  of  Provincial  and  Local  Government  to
challenges facing Local Government

The profiling exercise indicates that municipalities face  legal,  financial
and administrative challenges in the following areas:

 • Public empowerment, participation and community development.
 • Capacity building,  systems,  human  resource  development  and  improved
   organisational culture.
 • The provision  of  free  basic  services  that  target  poor  households,
   appropriate billing systems and reducing municipal debt.
 • Local Economic Development, job  creation,  Public  Works  Programme  and
   municipal infrastructure.
 • Anti-corruption initiatives.
 • Rural and urban development nodes.
 • Performance monitoring, evaluation and communication.
 • The low rate of payment of services. Communities need to be  educated  on
   why they should pay for services.
 • In terms of the management of municipalities, many Municipal Managers and
   senior managers are not adhering to Batho Pele principles.
 • Councillors also face certain capacity challenges.  Since  the  Municipal
   Finance  Management  Act  provides   for   the   shift   of   power   and
   responsibilities  to  councillors,  they  require  training   on   budget
   management,  planning  (drawing  up  of  Integrated  Development  Plans),
   financial management and general management issues.
 • Councillors should be able to  communicate  Council  resolutions  to  the
   community. They should be able to identify  challenges  and  draw  up  an
   appropriate Programme of Action to deal with those challenges.

10. Visit to the Expanded Public Works Projects (EPWP)

10.1.  Nkonjane Road Project

The project entailed the construction of a 5km road using  labour  intensive
methods. The budget for  the  project  was  R1,2  million.  The  project  is
community-based. The Department  of  Transport  worked  with  the  community
through the Steering Committee. The Project employed 362 people of whom  146
were women, 146 youth  and  2  disabled  persons.  The  project  is  on  the
Infrastructure Development Plan.

The budget allocation for this project is as follows:
 • 70%      Labour Intensive
 • 8%       Hiring of machinery
 • 22%      Purchase of material

Learnerships were provided  to  three  engineering  students  to  assist  in
construction management of the contract. The project is 99% complete,  first
delivery will be taken on Friday, 19 August 2005. Maintenance  of  the  road
will create job opportunities to the community.

Challenges

 • Inter-departmental co-ordination is still very difficult.
 • Continuity of the infrastructure (Road has been built who  must  maintain
   it)
 • Departments should commit to ensuring that there is an exit strategy  for
   sustainability
 • Monitoring and evaluation


11. Visit to Amangwe Village,  Ethembeni  Health  Care  Centre  and  Sokhulu
    Community Farm

11.1.  Amangwe Village

Amangwe village is a partnership  driven  initiative  and  aims  to  provide
support to adults and children infected and affected by HIV/Aids  through  a
range of interventions. The primary function  for  Amangwe  village  is  the
protection of children and that of improving the capacity of  caregivers  to
give the basic need of the children in their care ensuring self reliance  of
care givers and ensuring that traumatised  children  are  dealt  with  in  a
professional and holistic manner. The last time the NCOP  was  there,  there
were two foster homes that were built in the village, and a  third  one  has
since been added. Caregivers who are sometimes  the  eldest  member  of  the
family head these homes.  For example in one home lived  a  family  that  is
headed by the eldest sister.  These are called Youth Headed Homes.

The service that the village provides is not only confined  in  Amangwe  but
also to communities that are outside its confines through  its  Homes  Based
Care, which comprises well trained  volunteer  caregivers  who  daily  visit
poverty stricken households to assist in caring  for  critically  ill  loved
ones. Not every child has a grant; and the centre is trying  to  assist  the
children to get foster care grants. Amangwe village has a toy  library  that
is linked up with 14  rural  crèches.  This  library  works  like  a  normal
library. The village has a herb and vegetable  garden.  Some  of  the  herbs
that are planted are pesticides and immune boosters.

11.2.  Ethembeni Health Care Centre

The original intention of the health care centre  was  to  address  HIV/AIDS
related problems that Occupational  Health  Clinics  were  experiencing.  In
2002, Ethembeni Care Centre relocated to Amangwe Village, which was a  Mondi
Kraft  property.  Ethembeni  was  established  primarily  for  use  by   the
employees of local industries  and  was  intended  to  be  self-sustainable.
Ethembeni’s services spread through word of mouth, and the clinic  began  to
admit “private patients”. Bayside  and  Hillside  Aluminium  (BHP  Billiton)
became then the main funder of  infrastructure  as  well  as  the  “indigent
patients” i.e. those patients who could not afford the fees.

At present,  Ethembeni  is  operating  as  an  18-bed  step  down,  subacute
facility with a 45-bed facility. The building of the 18 bed Paediatric  Ward
is also sponsored by Bayside  and  Hillside  Aluminium  and  has  just  been
completed. With effect from 1st July 2005, the management of Ethembeni  Care
Centre, was given the Dream Centre, with support  and  assistance  from  the
Department of Health

The  health  care  centre  under  discussion  has  reported  the   following
achievements:

 • The manner under which the staff were working  several  months  ago,  has
   been changed and results can be seen by the way staff  at  Ethembeni  are
   conducting themselves, in response to structured management  and  further
   more, people who do what they say they will do.
 • At the end of May 2005, 13 Nursing posts were  advertised,  short-listed,
   and more than 30 out of 200 applicants were interviewed.
 • More staff in other departments will be employed at the  end  of  October
   2005,  this   includes   kitchen,   social   workers,   physiotherapists,
   occupational therapist and psychologists.
 • Memorandum of  agreement  is  in  place  between  the  Regional  Hospital
   (Ngwelezane) and Ethembeni for the transfer of patients  from  Ngwelezane
   to Ethembeni Care Centre.
 • Uthungulu District has expressed interest in their programme.

The health care centre reported the following challenges:

 • 95% of patients are indigents. Each patient’s stay costs  ±  R200,00  per
   day excluding drugs and tests done.
 • Anti-retroviral drugs  are  not  freely  available  especially  to  those
   patients that have been admitted. They are expensive for  such  patients,
   triple therapy is ± R730,00 upwards.
 • Running costs e.g. electricity telephone photocopying including  salaries
   and maintenance are also a big challenge.
 • Transporting of patients to satellite  hospital  (Ngwelezane)  is  a  big
   problem. Presently patients are being transported in a bakkie – the  back
   padded with a mattress.
 • Insufficient equipment or unavailability  of  equipments  such  as  beds,
   cotbeds, trolleys, bedside lockers, dripstands, etc, especially  for  the
   Paediatric Ward.

11.3.  Sokhulu Community Farm

The farms visited were within the Mbonambi municipal area and is rural.  The
farms are operated by the community and supported by the Uthungulu  District
Municipality.

The community reported the following challenges:

 • Requests tabled to the NCOP in 2004 have not been fulfilled. The requests
   are still as follows:
     ➢ Drainage system for the fields.
     ➢ Roads for the field produce to be transported.
     ➢ Water for the irrigation and the homesteads.
     ➢ Electricity.
     ➢ Market for the produce.
 •  There  are  no  ward  committees.  This  contributes  to  the  lack   of
   communication between the community and the municipality.

The Department of Agriculture reported that a budget of R10 million  was  to
be allocated over the next 3-year period  to  the  farming  project  of  the
community. Once the Environmental Impact Assessment has been completed,  the
implementation will begin.
The following recommendations where made:

 • That the Agriculture Portfolio Committees and the  provincial  department
   to meet the community within two weeks to address the unresolved issues.
 • The Portfolio Committee on Local Government to look into the issue of non-
   establishment of the ward committees.

12. PUBLIC MEETING

An Overview of the Response of the Leader of the NCOP Delegation

The visit was concluded with a public Meeting at which the Premier  and  the
Chairperson of the NCOP addressed the public regarding the follow-up  visit.


The Chairperson, in his presentation, indicated  that  the  purpose  of  the
follow-up visit was to assess progress made since the initial visit  by  the
NCOP in 2004. The public meeting was convened to give the public  a  summary
of  what  transpired  during  the  week.  The  presentation  summarised  the
weeklong follow up visit, the meetings and activities that were embarked  on
and the progress the NCOP had noted.

The presentation highlighted a few matters with regard  to  each  area  that
was focussed on during the week.

12.1.  Local Government

Visits were undertaken to the Uthungulu District  Municipality  as  well  as
the Mbonambi and Nthambanana local municipalities.
 •  Special  programmes  were  launched  to   improve   relations   between
   municipalities and traditional leadership.
 • A number of training programmes were running for councillors.
 • Some  ward  committees  have  been  established.  DIMS  is  national  and
   international best practice and this is one of the  achievements  of  the
   Uthungulu District Municipality.
 •  A  Provincial  Project  Consolidate  Task  Team  and  regional   project
   consolidate task teams had been established to manage Project Consolidate
   at provincial and regional levels.
 • A programme management unit had been established to assist municipalities
   with the formulation and facilitation of projects and  interventions  and
   to work closely with stakeholder representatives.
 • A Provincial  Programme  of  Action  was  prepared  and  adopted  by  the
   provincial Cabinet.

12.2.  Education

The Tholokhule, Macekane and Bhekulwasi Schools  were  visited.  Substantial
progress had been made  regarding  the  issues  raised  during  the  initial
visit.
 • At Tholokhule High School additional classrooms were built to address the
   problem of over crowding.
 • Extensive training of teachers in Mathematics and Science had taken place
   and  the  school  now  has  modern  technology  to  facilitate  effective
   learning.
 • At Macekane  and  Bhekulwasi  schools  classrooms  have  been  built  and
   renovated which provides children with a decent learning environment.
 • Electrification and provision of water and sanitation is underway.
 • Interim water tanks have been installed to provide  children  with  clean
   water.
 • Ablution facilities have been made available in some schools.
 • By September 2005, 90 classrooms will be completed.  The  target  is  133
   classrooms, most schools that were damaged have been repaired.
 • The provision of libraries, admin offices,  administration  officers  and
   laboratories will be attended to in the next financial year budget.

12.3.  Expanded Public Works Programme

The delegation visited the Madlebe  water  project  and  the  Nkonjane  road
project.
 • The Madlebe water project  is  near  completion  and  the  Nkonjane  road
   construction is almost completed.
 • Both projects are labour intensive and local labour was used.   The  main
   focus for job allocation was on women and the youth.
 • The process was community driven.

12.4.  Social Development

The  delegation  visited  the  Esikhawini  and  Jabulani  Centres  for   the
disabled.
 • The department approved an amount of R308 000 for renovations and R50 000
   for electricity, salary for security guard  and  cleaning  staff  at  the
   Jabulani centre.
 • The department is looking into converting the centre into a home for  the
   disabled.
 • It was noted that out of the  23  people  staying  there,  14  would  not
   qualify to continue living in the home if it was to be converted.
 • The process of issuing tenders for renovations is unfolding  and  tenders
   will be awarded in due time.

The delegation also visited the Amangwe Village and Ethembeni Centres.
 • The department is assisting the Amangwe centre with foster care grants.
 • Another family unit was built that offers additional accommodation.
 • They have a health food store as well as an organic garden.
 • A toy library that is shared with 14 other day care  centres  within  the
   surrounding community was built.
 • Volunteers provide home-based  care  for  people  who  are  infected  and
   affected by HIV and AIDS.
 • When visited initially the Ethembeni Centre was under threat  of  closure
   due to finances.  By September 2005 it will be registered as a Section 21
   Company.
 • Services expanded to include other communities.
 • A memorandum of understanding exists between the department of health and
   Ethembeni.
 • Thandukuphila drop-in centre  was  established  to  look  after  orphans,
   HIV/AIDS affected and infected and abused children.
 • They provide a laundry service for child and female headed homes.
 • Volunteers provide home-based care to  those  infected  and  affected  by
   HIV/AIDS.

12.5.  Agriculture

The delegation visited Thathunyawo and Phezukomkhono farms.
 •  The  department  is  providing  the  co-operatives  with  machinery   to
   facilitate effective farming through its mechanization program.
 • The Phezukomkhono women’s co-operative has been a role model  for  female
   farmers  by  mobilizing  women  from  remote  areas  to  participate   in
   sustainable agriculture business.
 • The project produces catfish, poultry and fresh produce.
 • A project manager will be appointed by the  department  to  assist  women
   with running of the farm.

The Chairperson concluded by indicating that much progress has been made  in
the different areas. However, some challenges still needed  to  be  attended
to. He stated that the role of the  Standing  Committee  and  the  Portfolio
Committees in the Provincial  Legislatures  are  crucial  in  ensuring  that
those challenges that still existing are attended to.

13. Conclusion

The NCOP follow-up visit to KwaZulu-Natal proved to be very  successful  and
yielded many critical insights. Many valuable lessons were learnt as to  how
to improve upon service delivery.

 2. The Chairperson

                                  REPORT ON
         “TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE: PUTTING OUR PEOPLE FIRST”

                            Executive Summary[2]

                         North West Follow-up Visit
                              15-19 AUGUST 2005

1.    The focal areas of the NCOP’s Taking Parliament to the People
    Programme

 • Education.
 • Local Government.
 • Home Affairs.
 • Social Development.
 • Agriculture.
 • Water Affairs and Forestry.
 • Public Enterprises.
 • Trade and Industry.
 • Minerals and Energy.
 • The Presidency.
 • Safety and Security.
 • Justice and Constitutional Development.

2.    Rationale for the NCOP’s follow-up visit to the North West Province

The rationale for the NCOP’s visit to the  aforementioned  province  was  to
follow up on its March 2003  visit  to  the  province,  which  afforded  the
community  an  opportunity  to  interact  with  political  leaders  on   the
economic, social and other issues they deemed important. Ideally  the  three
spheres  of  government  should  be  brought  together  to  discuss  matters
affecting communities. For this reason one sphere of government  should  not
pass on its responsibility to other spheres of government. The task  of  the
NCOP, therefore, is  to  promote  intergovernmental  relations  between  the
spheres of government. The challenge to the NCOP is  to  familiarise  itself
with the challenges facing local government, and to  assist  in  creating  a
people’s  contract  aimed  at  employment  creation  and  fighting  poverty.
Members of the community should use the follow-up visit to the  province  as
an opportunity to address their political leaders on issues that  lie  close
to their hearts.

3.    The Office on the Status of Disabled Persons (OSDP)

Despite the obstacles encountered by  the  OSDP,  established  in  1999,  it
succeeded  in  focusing  on  the   co-ordination   and   implementation   of
Government’s disability policies. Its main areas of concern  are  disability
awareness, capacity-building,  monitoring  and  evaluation,  networking  and
liaison, policy development, and planning, co-ordination,  consultation  and
advice. The OSDP reported a number of achievements, including  the  adoption
of the Integrated Development Disability Strategy (IDDS), the  establishment
of  an  Inter-departmental  Committee  on  Disability   and   a   Provincial
Disability Strategy, the launching of the Provincial Disability  Forum,  the
establishment of the North-West Disability Unit and the  training  of  line-
function departments on diversity management and the implementation  of  the
IDDS.
4.    Strengthening the Municipalities

Since co-ordination on municipal level appears to be  poor,  the  legislator
wishes to strengthen municipalities in order to enable them to deliver.  The
North  West  Province  has  21  local  municipalities  and   four   district
municipalities. Legislation (the Local Government:  Municipal  Systems  Act,
Act 32 of  2000)  determines  that  local  municipalities  are  required  to
establish and develop ward committees to  ensure  their  functionality.  The
province,  at  the  same  time,  is  constitutionally  obliged  to   support
municipalities and strengthen their capacity to  manage  their  own  affairs
and to perform their functions. Some municipalities in  the  province  under
consideration have financial problems  which  hamper  the  effectiveness  of
their ward committees. The province,  nonetheless,  is  satisfied  with  the
report it received on the functioning of ward committees. Despite  this,  it
was reported that some ward committees were  falling  behind  and  were  not
able to function effectively. Dedicated officials have been  assigned  to  a
number of wards to ensure that  their  wards  meet  and  are  able  to  keep
records. The following municipalities were identified as those  who  require
special  attention:  The  Naledi  Local  Municipality,  the   Mamusa   Local
Municipality, Lekwa Teemane, and Greater Taung.

5.    Economic Development

The economic development agenda focuses  on  the  following:  Assistance  to
women enterprises and businesses, including  tenders,  financial  assistance
to  businesses,  with  particular  reference  to  women  in   business   and
initiatives to  facilitate  access  to  finance,  progress  made  by  mining
companies in reaching the target of 10% women employees within  five  years,
support to local  economic  development  and  entrepreneurship  projects  or
programmes,  and  challenges  faced  by   the   youth   regarding   business
opportunities and employment.

The Office on the Status of Women (OSW) in the  Office  of  the  Premier  of
North West  centres  on  local  economic  development  strategies  aimed  as
assisting women. For this reason, co-ordination  is  crucial,  but  no  easy
task. Women, particularly those in rural areas, need  to  be  supplied  with
information on how and where to access services and information.  It  should
be noted that the province falls under the authority of  the  Commission  on
Gender Equity. The mission of the OSW,  therefore,  is  to  enhance  women’s
empowerment  and  gender  equality.  In  support   of   the   aforementioned
challenge, the following figures were highlighted:

 • Just over 50% of the province’s population is female.
 • There has been an increase in the divorce rate  and  a  tendency  towards
   cohabitation. As a result, more households are currently headed by women.
 • In the province under consideration, the HIV and AIDS infection  rate  is
   lower among women.
 • In general, women in the North West Province are more educated than  men,
   although  the  mining,  manufacturing,   agriculture,   electricity   and
   construction sectors employ more  males  than  females,  with  particular
   reference to the mining sector.

In order to assist the province’s female population, six projects  had  been
launched,  and  R2,8  million  has  been  set  aside  to  assist  women   in
particular. During November  2003,  the  North  West  Provincial  Government
adopted an Integrated  Provincial  Gender  Strategy  and  an  Implementation
Matrix in order  to  address  gender  mainstreaming  in  the  province.  The
strategy is clear on the economic empowerment of women, the  achievement  of
women’s economic growth, equal earning power and full participation  in  all
aspects and on all levels of  the  economy.  In  August,  the  OSW  and  the
national Department of Provincial and Local Government ran  a  programme  to
train women with an interest in business in writing skills and the  drafting
of business plans, and the completion of procurement and  tender  documents.
It was resolved that the OSW must co-operate with the  Gender  Focal  Points
(GFPs)  in  the  provincial  departments.  The  NCOP  stressed   that   each
municipality must establish a GFP. In doing so, finalised  policies  can  be
implemented at the local  level.  The  NCOP  indicated  that,  on  follow-up
visits to the province, it would like to see that the GFPs are in place  and
that implementation is taking place. The OSW has to co-ordinate this,  while
the GFPs need to see to implementation.

6.    Education

During the March 2003 visit, the focal areas in this sector  were  the  need
to address poverty and illiteracy in areas under the control of  traditional
leaders, the large number of poorly educated and  unemployed  youth  in  the
area, the absence of career guidance at schools, insufficient  water  supply
to  schools,  and  insufficient  support  to  orphaned  and/or  child-headed
households as a result of HIV and AIDS. Briefly, the following  developments
have been reported:

 •  A  new  Integrated  Social  Development  Security  Services  Grant   was
   introduced to phase  out  and/or  replace  the  National  Food  Emergency
   Scheme, introduced and sanctioned by Cabinet in 2002.
 • The uptake of social  grants,  particularly  child  support  grants,  has
   increased enormously as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  the  age-group
   qualification (currently 14 years). There  are  at  present  3 269  child
   support grant beneficiaries in Greater Taung.
 • The provincial department has embarked on a school  uniform  distribution
   programme which saw 252 tracksuits distributed to needy children in 2004.
 • Seventeen Early Childhood Development  Centres  have  received  donations
   from the Lottery Fund through the assistance of the  North  West  Welfare
   Forum.
 • Pay-point facilities have been upgraded to assist  pensioners  and  other
   beneficiaries of state social security  grants  to  receive  these  in  a
   conducive environment. It was  proposed  that  the  Dithakong,  Lokaleng,
   Pudumong, Kgomotso and Manthestad pay-point facilities be renovated.
 • Victim of Domestic Violence Support Centres  have  been  established  and
   equipped in order to deal with issues at hand.

Since the  NCOP’s  initial  (March  2003)  provincial  visit,  a  number  of
developments were reported. These include:

 • The establishment of the North West Provincial Development Trust.
 • An amount of R1,4 billion earmarked  for  the  nutritional  programme  as
   primary schools in the province.
 • An amount of R375 million for 385 farm schools in the province.
 • An amount of R10 million for the provision of Adult Basic  Education  and
   Training (ABET).
 • The Career Guidance and Counselling Project had to be  postponed  due  to
   financial and budgetary constraints, although  quotations  have  recently
   been called for and submitted.
 • Learner support material is being distributed to schools.

7.    A focus on Schools in the North West Province

In August 2005 (as part of the follow-up visit),  four  delegations  visited
four schools in different regions of the Bophirima district, the purpose  of
which was to provide  the  delegation  with  first-hand  experience  of  the
conditions under which the schools operated and the challenges  they  faced.
Not all the schools have, however, been visited on  the  previous  occasion.
The delegations met  with  the  principals,  the  school  management  teams,
representatives of the school governing bodies and  representatives  of  the
learner representative councils. The following schools  in  the  North  West
Province were visited, in alphabetical order:

 • The Gabobidiwe High School.
 • The Jospeh Saku Secondary School.
 • The Reveilo High School.
 • The Walter Letsie High School.

For the sake of brevity and ease of reference,  obstacles  reported  by  the
aforementioned schools are grouped together, in alphabetical order:

 • A shortage of computers, printers and fax machines.
 • A shortage of educators.
 • Alcohol abuse by some learners.
 • Delays by the Department of Education.
 • Drug abuse (particularly dagga) remains a problem.
 • Education on HIV and AIDS.
 • Fluctuating matric results.
 • High teenage pregnancy rates.
 • In some schools, most of the learners are between the ages of 19 and 22.
 • Inadequate fencing.
 • Insufficient electrification.
 • Insufficient involvement of parents in the school.
 • Insufficient library, laboratory, administration and hostel facilities.
 • Insufficient sports facilities.
 • Insufficient toilet facilities.
 • Insufficient water taps.
 • Lack of joint curriculum planning.
 • Lack of suitably qualified mathematics and science educators.
 • Lack of transport for some of the learners.
 • Learners have to walk up to 15 km per day to and from school.
 • Low morale among learners.
 • Maintenance is not provided by the Department of Public Works.
 • Many learners have not applied for exemption, although they cannot afford
   to pay school fees.
 • Problems with disciplining learners.
 • Schools  being  unable  to  pay  their  accounts  because  of  inadequate
   budgeting.
 • The late delivery of learner material.
 • The location of schools is such that they are vulnerable to burglary  and
   vandalism (especially during school holidays and over weekends).
 • The representation of learners in school governing bodies.
 • The retention of educators with scarce skills.

8.    Municipalities visited under Project Consolidate

The following municipalities were visited:

 • The Greater Taung Municipality.
 • The Naledi Local Municipality.
 • The Lekwa Teemane Municipality.
 • The Mamusa Municipality.

8.1 The Greater Taung Municipality

The Greater Taung Municipality is a typically rural municipality  consisting
of 106 villages, with 7,2% of its 201 683 residents urbanised. The  majority
(53%) of its municipal population is female, and the  municipality  has  the
highest population  density  within  the  Bophirima  district,  which  spans
almost 36 km². In fterms of the 2005/06 Budget Summary,  the  total  of  the
budget from Government grants is R41 648 957-00. In 2000,  the  municipality
started from a zero-based income, and currently its budget from own  revenue
collected stands at R4 125 058-00.

The main issues confronting the Greater Taung Municipality are:

 • Access to land for developmental purposes. Most of the land (almost  90%)
   falls  under  tribal  authorities,  and  development  is  delayed   since
   negotiations to obtain land from traditional leaders often are  drawn-out
   processes. In addition, it was reported that the national  Department  of
   Land Affairs is slow in assisting municipalities  to  access  land.  Some
   investors are willing to set up a project to the  value  of  R14  to  R16
   million, but cannot proceed due to the aforementioned challenges.
 • The municipality’s budget for the provision of water and electricity  has
   been reduced. The initial target was to provide electricity to a  further
   5 000  houses.  As  a  result  of  the   aforementioned   obstacle,   the
   municipality can provide electricity to only approximately 1 200  houses.
   At present, 6 000 houses in the region are still without electricity.
 • Five housing projects are running simultaneously in order to address  the
   challenge of housing. This process was hampered due to poorly  integrated
   planning.
 • The municipality’s relations with other departments, is not supported  in
   the form of formal  structures.  The  municipalities  should,  therefore,
   establish such structures and enter  into  memorandums  of  understanding
   with departments in order to advance agricultural development.
 • Skills and education levels in Greater Taung must  be  raised  since  the
   majority of the inhabitants have only received primary school education.
 • The current unemployment rate of 65%  is  high.  This  matter  should  be
   addressed by means of intergovernmental relations.
 • More than 97% of the inhabitants in Greater Taung earn less than  R1 600-
   00 per month, as compared to the national level of  R1 100-00,  which  is
   regarded as the minimum level to survive.
 • Salaries paid by  the  municipality  (at  the  Grade  3  level)  are  not
   attractive enough to retain employees with scarce skills.
 • Continuous municipal infrastructure grant changes  impose  stringent  and
   unrealistic conditions.

8.2 The Naledi Local Municipality

The Naledi Local Municipality reported that as from 1 July 2005, free  basic
services are provided to all indigent  households  (household  earning  less
than R1 600-00  per  month).  The  municipality  procured  the  Zeus  Credit
Control debt collection management system, and has entered into  a  twinning
agreement with the Assen  Gemeente  (Congregation)  in  the  Netherlands  in
order to strengthen the housing capacity  of  the  municipality.  The  Assen
Gemeente committed itself to provide  €45 000  annually  over  a  period  of
three years to  be  invested  in  capacity-building,  training,  and  policy
planning and implementation.

Apart from  the  aforementioned  matter,  the  main  challenges  facing  the
municipality include:

 • Extending the fundamental benefits of basic water supply and  sanitation,
   electricity and housing.
 • Pushing back poverty and providing basic household services.
 • Raising the municipality’s income levels.
 • Addressing the lack of transparency  and  accountability  in  respect  of
   housing provision.
 • Acquiring  and  retaining  the  services  of  professionals  with  senior
   management, technical  ICT  (information  communication  technology)  and
   financial management skills.
 • Securing funds for roads.
 • Addressing the challenge of obsolete plant, machinery and equipment.

8.3 The Lekwa Teemane Municipality

The  Lekwa  Teemane  Municipality  highlighted  problems  resulting  from  a
section 12 amendment of the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act,  Act
117  of  1998.  This  resulted  in  confusion  regarding   the   roles   and
responsibilities of the Mayor and the previously newly  elected  Speaker  of
the Council, which caused discord in the Council. Subsequently the  MEC  for
the  Department  of  Local  Government  invoked  section  139(1)(c)  of  the
Constitution, Act 108 of 1996.

The municipality under discussion has reported  progress  in  the  following
activities:

 • Functional ward committees have been established in all six wards.
 • There has been improvement in community participation in the IDP and  the
   budgeting process.
 • An organogram has been developed for the amalgamation and integration  of
   the administrations of Bloemhof and Christiana.
 • The municipality’s financial position has improved to the extent that  it
   has been able to service its loans with the Development Bank of  Southern
   Africa and the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. At present,  the
   municipality’s current account stands at R1,2 million.
 • Eight Community Development Workers (CDWs) have been appointed  and  have
   received training.

On the occasion of a meeting between the public and  the  municipality,  the
following concerns were raised:

 •  The  municipality  does  not  deliver  the  necessary  services  to  the
   community, and an explanation was requested as to whether  the  cause  of
   the delay was at the national, provincial or local level.
 • The media reported that Expanded Public Works Programme  (EPWP)  projects
   are taking place in other parts of the country, but there  were  no  such
   projects in Lekwa Teemane.
 • There is still infighting in the Council, and contracts were allocated to
   only a few people in the community, some of whom had not  even  completed
   previous contracts awarded to them. The NCOP was requested to ensure that
   a forensic audit be conducted into the affairs of the municipality.
 • The members of the ward committees received only four  days  of  training
   and expressed the concern that they  were  not  taken  seriously  by  the
   municipality. They were not able to meet with the Municipal Manager.

The  municipality  responded  that  the  new  Council,  which  has  been  in
operation for the past  18  months,  was  unable  to  resolve  most  of  the
problems caused by the previous Council. It was argued that the new  Council
should be given  more  time  to  deal  with  other  matters  raised  by  the
community. The Municipal Manager  indicated  that  he  had  met  with  small
contractors who were unsuccessful in their tenders. He had  encouraged  them
to  form  partnerships  with   other   companies   and   then   operate   as
subcontractors  on  projects,  to  the  benefit  of  all.  The  municipality
indicated that it would approach  the  various  finance  agencies  (such  as
Khula and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund) to brief the community on  the  services
they offer and the funding that  could  be  accessed.  In  the  event  of  a
forensic audit being  conducted,  the  Municipal  Manager  would  fully  co-
operate.

8.4 The Mamusa Municipality

The Mamusa Municipality reported that ward committees have been  established
in most areas, and that training has taken place. The provision of  services
in some  remote  areas  is  problematic,  and  ward  councillors  have  been
encouraged to raise  the  issue  of  payment  for  services  in  their  ward
committee meetings. CDWs have been employed to  assist  communities  and  an
external  contractor  has  been  appointed  to  recover  outstanding  debts.
Although the Council meets monthly, limited space in  the  Council  Chambers
makes it difficult for the community to actively  participate  in  meetings.
The Department of Local Government  and  Housing  will  build  approximately
6 785 houses this year, people earning less than R800,00 will  receive  free
basic services, an agreement has been signed with Eskom  for  the  provision
of electricity, and 687 houses were built in Amalia.

The municipality currently faces the following problems:

 • There  is  a  population  explosion  as  a  result  of  the  eviction  of
   farmworkers and farmers changing to mining.
 • There is an escalation in informal settlements.
 • Unemployment remains a problem.
 • The rail passenger service was terminated.
 • Roads require upgrading.
 • Refuse removal,  sanitation,  water  provision  and  storm  drainage  are
   serious challenges.
 • The municipality still owes an  amount  of  R38  million,  although  some
   Government departments owe the municipality money.
 • The municipality is required to provide counter-funding when it  receives
   money  from  national  Government,  which  is   problematic   since   the
   municipality does not have a strong revenue base.

Other challenges include:

 • The poor quality of the RDP houses.
 • There appear to be disparities among municipalities in dealing with  free
   basic services – some supply free water but no free electricity.
 • The stadium has not been finalised and handed over to the community.
 • It is not clear whether  6 000  employment  opportunities  were  created,
   followed by another 1 300.
 • The salary component should  be  less  than  40%  of  the  municipality’s
   budget.
 • Should a tollgate be erected to make up for damage  caused  to  roads  by
   heavy vehicles?
 • Should the municipality approach national departments to assist with  the
   provision of equipment and emergency vehicles?
 • Some members of the community live in inhumane conditions, which are  not
   being addressed.

The municipality responded as follows to the aforementioned challenges:

 • The municipality stopped further work  on  those  houses  where  inferior
   material was used and refused to pay the contractors.
 • An agreement is drawn up with Eskom to  provide  electricity  in  certain
   areas that are currently not covered. Although people receive free  basic
   services, they consume more than what is allowed for.
 • Members of the community vandalised the stadium. For that reason it could
   not be handed over to the community after the damage was done.
 • The jobs which were created were temporary, and women were part  of  this
   process. The municipality has awarded  bursaries  to  students,  but  has
   difficulty in tracing some of them.
 •  Although  the  municipality  does  require  staff  to  deliver  services
   effectively, it will look into the issue of  the  budget  for  the  staff
   component.
 • The proposed toll road is to be discussed at a Council meeting.
 • The municipality will  address  national  departments  on  the  issue  of
   assistance regarding vehicles, etc.

9.    Background to the Expanded Public Works Projects (EPWPs)

Since its official launch on 16 September 2004, the province has managed  to
create a total of 18 450 employment opportunities  (in  the  past  financial
year) through the EPWP. The EPWP first quarterly report indicates  that  the
province created over 9 000 employment opportunities from 93  projects.  The
total budget for the aforementioned 93 projects stands at R279 472 818,  and
the total actual expenditure (at the end of the quarter) was R102 870 493.

The following EPWPs are highlighted:

 • The Grass-cutting and Bush-clearing Project (the  Hartswater  to  Vryburg
   Road).
 • The Grass-cutting and Bush-clearing Project (the Taung to Reivilo Road).
 • The Taung CBD (Central Business District) Paving Project.
 • The Community Health Worker Programme.

9.1 The Grass-cutting and Bush-clearing Project (the Hartswater  to  Vryburg
Road)

Commenced on 30 June 2005 and covers  the  P4/1  section  of  the  N18  from
Hartswater to Vryburg, spanning a distance of 30 km. The  project  value  is
R211 380,00, and involves 42  employment  opportunities  (26  women  and  16
men). Thirty-three of those involved  consist  of  young  people  (male  and
female), and beneficiaries were recruited from all the wards in the  Greater
Taung Local Municipality, selected from people without any other  source  of
income. Beneficiaries earned an income of R40,00 per day  per  task.  Temoso
Trading 175, an SMME with 70%  shareholding  belonging  to  women,  won  the
tender.

Challenges related to the aforementioned project include  incomplete  skills
training and transfer, insufficient attention to health and safety  standard
requirements, a lack of sufficient funding for all  EPWP  beneficiaries  and
equipment, and questions related to earning R40,00 per day.

9.2 The Grass-cutting and Bush-clearing Project (the Taung to Reivilo  Road)


Commenced on 8 August 2005 and employs 38 people (17 women and 21 men).

The challenges related to the  aforementioned  project  include  a  lack  of
toilet facilities, developing entrepreneurial skills;  for  instance,  empty
tins and bottles could be collected for recycling  purposes  and,  in  doing
so, much-needed additional money could be earned. The Department  of  Labour
did not respond to the  request  to  identify  service  providers  to  offer
training to workers. Workers indicated their  dissatisfaction  with  earning
R40 per day. The project manager from the Department of Roads and  Transport
informed the  delegation  that  it  would  cost  approximately  R140 000  to
purchase protective clothing  for  the  workers,  which  was  currently  not
available.

9.3 The Taung CBD Paving Project

This project is mainly focused on providing informal traders  in  the  Taung
CBD with a conducive and healthy environment where they can trade and  where
pedestrians are safe. The  aforementioned  contract  commenced  on  1  April
2005. The duration of the project was set for three months, but  the  actual
completion date was 31 July 2005. A total of 111 staff was employed,  43  of
the employees received accredited training  in  doing  paving,  kerbing  and
multi-skilling development, while the rest of  the  staff  received  on-site
training.

The challenges related to  the  aforementioned  project  include  unforeseen
additional work and costs as work progressed,  a  lack  of  co-operation  by
hawkers to remove their stalls in time  (causing  unnecessary  delays),  and
poor performance as well as unrealistic demands by  the  employer  (stifling
progress).

9.4 The Community Health Worker Programme

The Greater Taung subdistrict comprises  84  villages,  catered  for  by  22
clinics and 35 NGOs (Non-governmental  Organisations).  Based  in  Number  1
Village behind the Taung District Hospital,  the  Boineelo  Home-based  Care
was  established  in  November  2001.  Currently  it  has  approximately  74
beneficiaries who are chronically ill, suffering from ailments such  as  HIV
and  AIDS,  mental  disease,  diabetes  mellitus,  hypertension,   etc.   In
addition,  orphans  are  catered  for  by  linking  them   with   Government
departments such as Home Affairs and Social Development. The  Department  of
Health trained 147 care-givers over a period of 59 days towards the  end  of
2004 and the beginning of 2005, and placed them at hospital and clinics  for
a period of 10 and 44 days, respectively, for practical  training  in  care-
giving, competency and health-related issues.

The  challenges  related  to  the   aforementioned   project   include   the
unavailability of funding  for  2005/06  due  to  the  need  to  adjust  the
business plan according to available funding. Starting with garden  activity
on the land remains a problem, since consensus had  not  been  reached  with
the owner of the land as to who would pay the electricity and water bills.

10.   Agricultural issues

A number of matters were highlighted when consideration was given to  issues
affecting agriculture in the province. These include:

 • The availability of water in the Crocodile-Marine Water  Management  Area
   should be addressed. The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry  (DWAF)
   realises that  the  aforementioned  water  management  area  has  been  a
   stressed area in respect of the availability of water.
 • DWAF is of the opinion that no new allocations will be made from  surface
   and dolomitic water resources in the aforementioned area.
 • DWAF has recently launched a Reconciliation and Modelling  Study  in  the
   Crocodile  River  Catchment  area  to  determine  more   accurately   the
   availability of water in the area.
 • From 2003 to 2005, the availability of water at Government Water  Schemes
   and Irrigation Board Schemes has generally been very good, despite  water
   restrictions as a result of the severe drought conditions which prevailed
   in the country during this period.
 •  DWAF  is  actively  involved  in  pursuing  activities  related  to  the
   implementation of the National Water Act, Act 36 of 1998, particularly in
   identifying and addressing unlawful water use.
 • Institutional development will  continue,  and  financial  assistance  to
   resource poor farmers is being implemented in the Crocodile-Marico  Water
   management Area.

The following agricultural programmes had been put in place:

 • The Post Settlement  Farmer  Support  Programme,  focusing  on  providing
   assistance and support to the land-reform beneficiaries so that they will
   become self-reliant and  financially  viable  farmers.  A  total  of  R40
   million for the  2005/06  financial  year  was  set  aside  for  planning
   support, production inputs, on and off-farm infrastructure and  capacity-
   building.
 • The Comprehensive Agricultural  Support  Programme  (CASP),  focusing  on
   assisting land-reform beneficiaries,  amongst  other  things,  with  farm
   infrastructure,  market  access,  extension   services,   research,   and
   technology development. A total of R30 million was set aside for  2005/06
   for this purpose.

 • The Land Care Programme, focusing on promoting the  sustainable  use  and
   management of natural resources, such as soil, water resources and  veld.
   For this purpose, approximately R5 million has been budgeted for 2005/06.
 • The Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme, which endeavours to
   alleviate poverty and to ensure households’  food  security  amongst  the
   destitute people in the North West Province.
 • The Communal Farmer Support Programme, focusing on  providing  assistance
   and support to all farmers on communal land. An amount of R10 million for
   the 2005/06 financial year was set aside to cater for this.
 • The  Agricultural  Development  Intervention  in  Taung  in  the  2005/06
   financial year is  to  focus  on  a  Comprehensive  Agricultural  Support
   Programme, the Land Care Project and Post Settlement Projects.

10.1 Challenges in the agricultural sector

These include:

 • Insufficient water supply in some areas for people and livestock.
 • Dams which have been built are running out of water.
 • Water tap installation inside yards.
 • Theft of diesel used for pumping water, and stock theft.
 •  Lack  of  funding  for  pensioners  who  would  like  to  venture   into
   agriculture.
 • The vandalisation of stand pipes.

11.   A focus on Child and Female-headed Households

This involves visits by the NCOP delegation to  some  identified  households
of underprivileged people in the area headed by children, females  and  aged
persons, and forms part of the implementation of the  undertakings  made  in
the people’s Contract, with  particular  reference  to  halving  poverty  by
2014.

On 17 August 2005, four NCOP delegations,  accompanied  by  Members  of  the
Provincial Legislatures, Councillors, four social workers and four  service-
point managers, visited the following four service-point areas:

 • Pampierstad.
 • Naledi.
 • Taung.
 • Mamusa.

For  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  findings,  key  issues   and   challenges
highlighted by the various delegations are synopsised as follows:

 • Unemployment.
 • Overcrowded living conditions.
 • Younger people heading households because parents passed away.
 • The inability to pay school fees.
 • Applications for grants are sometimes cumbersome.
 • Children not being able to attend school because they do not  have  birth
   certificates.

The  aforementioned  challenges  resulted  in  a  number  of  decisions   or
recommendations, synopsised as follows:

 •  The  Child  Justice  Bill,  Bill  49  of  2002,  aimed  at  providing  a
   comprehensive  approach  to  dealing  with  children  and  assisting   in
   replacing the current system of various different pieces of  legislation,
   has to be finalised as a matter of priority.
 • The Department of Housing must  ensure  that  children  who  are  heading
   households are given priority with respect  to  employment  in  the  EPWP
   projects.
 • The finalisation of the Child Care Grants and the Foster Care Grant  with
   respect to families must be prioritised.

12.   An Overview by the Leader  of  the  NCOP  Delegation  and  the  Deputy
      Chairperson of Committees

The issues raised during the March 2003 visit to  the  North  West  Province
necessitated the NCOP’s follow-up visit to the province. While progress  was
made in some areas, the following matters remain challenges:

 • In terms of birth certificates,  death  certificates  and  ID  documents,
   without birth certificates, children cannot attend schools,  and  without
   ID documents the aged cannot access old-age pension.
 • A growing number of  people  are  recipients  of  grants,  together  with
   migration from neighbouring countries.  The  provincial  department  has,
   nonetheless, improved conditions at pay-out points by  putting  up  tents
   and setting out tables and chairs.
 • High-school children could also benefit from the school-feeding  schemes.
   Particularly the following challenges call for innovative solutions:  HIV
   and   AIDS,   underdevelopment,   child-headed   households    and    the
   unsustainability of the parcel hand-out system.
 •  The  society  should  become  aware  of  challenges  which  people  with
   disability face. Over the longer term, the  Department  of  Public  Works
   should make all public buildings accessible to people with disabilities.
 • Poverty is an ongoing challenge.
 • The high level of teenage pregnancy  in  the  province  is  a  particular
   challenge. Children should be encouraged not to become involved in sexual
   activities, and the Moral Regeneration Programme should continue.
 • The conditions in schools pose particular problems, including  inadequate
   sanitation, a lack of staff offices and the generally  bad  condition  of
   buildings. The Department of Education had addressed the challenges  that
   had been pointed out, but there are still challenges, also with regard to
   policy. These include the  concern  as  to  whether  the  department  has
   sufficient resources to roll out the new curriculum in 2006.
 • A number of children still  have  to  travel  considerable  distances  to
   schools.
 • Challenges in the agricultural sector are ongoing, particularly the  lack
   of water for irrigation.

13.   An Overview of challenges currently facing the North West Province

The  following  concerns,   challenges,   responses,   recommendations   and
undertakings are the most prominent ones emanating from the follow-up  visit
to the North West Province, listed sector by sector.[3]

13.1 Local Governance

Challenges

 • There is currently no legislation on  the  Statute  Book  which  enforces
   municipalities to establish disability units.
 • The establishment of  a  holistic  capacity-building  process  remains  a
   problem.
 • Institutional capacity-building is problematic since individuals are  not
   empowered to mainstream disability issues in their planning.

Recommendations

 • Legislation should be put in place to force municipalities  to  establish
   disability desks.
 • Capacity should be built at municipal and district levels to  ensure  the
   pertinence of disability issues.
 • Partnerships should be forged with the private sector, civil society  and
   Government to ensure a holistic approach by these organs.
 • Synergy should be developed across all spheres of Government to ensure  a
   co-ordinated approach to disability issues.
 • The rate of implementation should be expedited.
 • Institutions should be established to take disability issues forward.
 • The establishment  of  specialised  units  in  municipalities  to  advise
   departments on how to include disability issues in their planning.
 • The work on making public buildings accessible should be fast-tracked.
 • All Government departments should have plans in  place  in  dealing  with
   service delivery to the disabled.

Challenges

 • The establishment of ward committees to allow communities to  participate
   is a priority.
 • Municipalities were requested to submit six-monthly progress  reports  on
   the functionality of ward committees, including information on the number
   of ward committees established, the  names  of  sectors  represented  and
   gender representation.
 • Ward committees face financial constraints.
 • Some municipalities do not succeed in identifying officials to assist  or
   deal with ward committees.
 • Record-keeping at municipal level is of a poor quality.
 • Some ward committees do not have suitable venues to hold meetings.

Recommendations

 • Municipalities should  grant  each  ward  committee  member  R300-00  for
   travelling and other expenses.
 • Each ward should have a central point to meet and to keep records.
 • In the event of housing developments, one house should be built to  serve
   as an office for ward committees.
 • Transport should be provided in sparsely occupied districts.
 • Basic infrastructure should be created for ward committees.
 • Municipality programmes should include one  ward  committee  meeting  per
   month and a public meeting every three months.
 • The department and SALGA (The South African Local Government Association)
   should assist  municipalities  where  ward  committees  do  not  function
   effectively.
 • Work sessions should be held with officials to ensure the functioning  of
   ward committees and citizen participation.

13.2 Economic Development

Challenges

 • It is important to assess what skills women have, whether they only  have
   reading and writing skills and whether they have other marketable skills.
 • Are quotas in place to force mining companies to ensure that they  employ
   women?
 • In the context of HIV and AIDS, many men work in mines  and  visit  their
   families once a year. Are they the carriers of this disease?
 • How do women obtain information about where to apply for business finance
   and assistance?
 • Very few municipalities have appointed gender focal points (GFPs) and the
   requisite staff.

Responses

 • The issue of HIV and AIDS is a political one and should be  left  to  the
   politicians.
 • In 2003, the North West Office on the Status  of  Women  (OSW)  conducted
   research based on the number of women enrolled at primary, secondary  and
   tertiary/diploma levels (during the period 2001 to  2004).  The  findings
   were that there were more women at schools and that women not only  study
   nursing but also engineering.
 • There is currently no mechanism in place to force the private  sector  to
   fill the quota of 10% women.
 •  Out  of  the  five  district  municipalities   only   the   Bophirithina
   Municipality has employed a special programme  person  to  implement  the
   gender  desk.   The   Central   Municipality,   Southern   and   Bojanala
   Municipalities have included gender desks in their budget, but  have  not
   yet implemented such desks.

13.3 Education

Challenges

 • Schools are inadequately electrified.
 • Classrooms are dilapidated.
 • There is  a  shortage  of  suitably  qualified  mathematics  and  science
   educators.
 • Learners at middle school are not  well  prepared  to  progress  to  high
   school, resulting in poor performance in high schools.
 • The environment at schools is not conducive to teaching, resulting in low
   morale among educators.
 • Abuse of alcohol by some learners and lack of transport to some learners.
 • Non-payment of school fees by learners’ parents.
 • Social problems impacting on the performance of learners.
 • Inadequate fencing provided at some schools.
 • A lack of laboratory facilities, libraries and administration buildings.
 • The matric pass rate decreased from 58,7% in 2002 to 42,9% in 2004.
 • Teenage pregnancies at schools are a matter of concern.
 • Parents do not involve themselves in school activities.
 • A low percentage of learners whose families cannot afford to  pay  school
   fees, but only a few of them have applied for exemption.
 • Discipline remains a problem.
 • Drug abuse, particularly dagga, remains a problem.
 • Some learners have to walk up to 15 km per day to and from school.
 • Since some schools are situated outside villages, they become  vulnerable
   to burglary and vandalism.
 • Insufficient equipment, such as computers, printers and fax machines.
 • Learners have not been able to use the flush toilets; these are only used
   by educators since there are frequent blockages and other problems.
 • There are no sports facilities.
 • The Department of Public Works cannot be relied upon to do maintenance.
 • The Department of Education pays the hostel fees but not the  class  fees
   of farm children.
 • Teachers teach English and Afrikaans in one class and need to  deal  with
   standard and high grades in the same period.

Responses, recommendations and undertakings

 • The drop in the matric pass rate in 2004 can partly be attributed to  the
   fact that at a particular school in the province, in the same year, seven
   educators had to be transferred from the school, which required  learners
   to adjust to many changes. This impacted on their performance.
 • Due to the low morale of learners, they are not committed to success, and
   although educators provide their services over weekends and during school
   holidays, learners do not attend extra classes, which causes  frustration
   among educators.
 • There was an appeal for the learners to  be  provided  with  bicycles  to
   enable them to travel to school because of the long distances.
 • Educators were encouraged to visit  the  constituency  offices  in  their
   neighbourhoods to raise their concerns with  the  public  representatives
   and to receive information.
 •  Due  to  the  delay  in  the  processing  of  foster  care   grants,   a
   recommendation would be made to the Department of Justice to set aside  a
   special day on a frequent basis to deal with this backlog.
 • The department has not yet  trained  maths  literacy  educators,  but  22
   educators are to participate in a programme over three years.
 • The department does not have norms or standards to deal with the  merging
   of schools.
 • Schools could negotiate with businesses to invest in them.

13.4 Municipalities (Project Consolidate)

Challenges

 • Access to land for development purposes is of paramount importance.
 • Since 90% of the land in Greater Taung falls  under  tribal  authorities,
   negotiations to obtain land from traditional leaders  result  in  lengthy
   processes.
 • The fundamental benefits of basic water supply,  sanitation,  electricity
   and housing should be extended to all people.
 • The lack of basic household services remains  an  obstacle  to  achieving
   sustainable development.
 • Some municipalities cannot raise sufficient revenue to function properly.
 •  Debt  collection  is  one  of  the  critical  challenges   facing   some
   municipalities.
 • Transparency and accountability in housing provision.
 • Retaining  professionals  with  senior  management,  technical,  ICT  and
   financial management skills.
 • Lack of capacity of the housing staff in key areas.
 • Lack of co-ordination and communication between  the  municipalities  and
   departments.
 • Obsolete plant, machinery and equipment.
 • The  removal  of  housing  from  the  list  of  responsibilities  of  the
   municipality because of the lack of delivery.
 • Transformation in the business sector and economic participation  by  the
   previously disadvantaged sectors of society.
 • An escalation in informal settlements.
 • Unemployment, despite attempts to address the problem.
 • The poor quality of RDP-built houses.

Responses:

 • No further work was done on houses where inferior material was used,  and
   the municipality refused to pay the contractors.
 • An agreement was entered  into  with  Eskom  to  provide  electricity  in
   certain areas that are currently not covered.
 • Due to vandalisation of the sport stadium, this  facility  could  not  be
   handed over to the community.
 • Employment opportunities created  were  temporary,  and  they  were  only
   created as the need arose.
 • The municipality require staff to deliver services effectively.

14.   The Expanded Public Works Projects (EPWPs)

Challenges

 • One of the four components of the EPWP – skills training and  transfer  –
   has not been implemented.
 • Health and safety standard requirements  are  not  complied  with  and/or
   enforced.
 • The reason for the aforementioned is lack of funding.
 • The remuneration of R40-00 is questioned.
 • In some instances, hawkers did not co-operate by not moving their  stalls
   in time, which caused unnecessary delays in the paving project.
 • Funding for the Community Health Worker  programmes  has  not  been  made
   available for 2005/06.

Responses

 • The availability of water needs in the Crocodile/Marino Water  Management
   Area has to be addressed, although DWAF accedes to  the  fact  that  this
   area has been a stressed area in respect of the availability of water.
 • DWAF recently launched  a  Reconciliation  and  Modelling  Study  in  the
   Crocodile River Catchment.
 • Financial assistance to resource  poor  farmers  is  in  the  process  of
   implementation.

15.   Female and Child-headed Households

As indicated, the NCOP delegation visited 15 families in four  service-point
areas.

Challenges

 • Unemployment.
 • Overcrowded living conditions.
 • Dependence on hand-outs from friends and neighbours.
 • Insufficient funds to pay school fees.
 • In the event of food parcels being distributed, delivery is dependent  on
   the availability of food parcels.
 • No identity documents.
 • In the event of food parcels being distributed, delivery is dependent  on
   the availability of food parcels.
 • No identity documents.

Responses

 • The department embarked on  the  following  initiatives:  funded  poverty
   alleviations projects, home-care based centres are funded at 6  villages,
   a Food  Security  Programme  (the  ICDSG),  and  the  development  and/or
   establishment of centres that will provide  secure  places  for  orphaned
   children.
 • Some school principals were to be contacted to arrange for exemption from
   school fees.
 • Learnership programmes and projects  should  provide  assistance  to  the
   indigent.
 • Applications for grants for babies.
 • Some children  from  indigent  households  should  receive  guidance  and
   counselling, where possible.
 • School feeding schemes could assist in alleviating some of the problems.
 • The Department of Housing must ensure that housing  delivery  prioritises
   child-headed households.
 • The Department of Public Works must ensure that children who are  heading
   households are given priority with respect  to  employment  in  the  EPWP
   projects.

16.   An Overview of the Response of the Leader of the NCOP Delegation

 •  Birth  certificates,  identity  documents  and  death  certificates  are
   essential in order to admit children to schools and to provide assistance
   in terms of grants.
 • An increasing number of people receive grants, partly  due  to  migration
   from neighbouring countries.
 • Apart from the school-feeding system, a direct focus must  be  placed  on
   HIV  and  AIDS,  underdevelopment,  child-headed   households   and   the
   sustainability of food parcel hand-outs.
 • Society should be sensitised to the needs of the disabled.
 • Poverty remains a challenge.
 • The incidence of teenage pregnancy remains a problem; for this reason the
   Moral Regeneration Programme should be proceeded with.
 • The general condition of schools remains a challenge, apart  from  proper
   sanitation, policy matters and the rolling out of the new  curriculum  in
   2006.
 • Some children still travel considerable distances to and from schools.
 • Insufficient water provision for irrigation purposes remains a challenge.

17.   An Overview of the Response of the Premier of the North West Province

 • Delivery in respect of the improvement of the lives of people  (including
   children) with disability must be fast-tracked.
 • The North West Province will continue to work closely with  the  national
   department in terms of the ongoing problems in respect of access to birth
   certificates, death certificates and identity documents.
 • The North West  Province  voiced  its  appreciation  for  the  assistance
   rendered by over 4 000 volunteers from  the  community  regarding  social
   development.
 • The North West Province  will  co-operate  closely  with  Government  and
   traditional leaders  to  ensure  that  the  challenge  of  illiteracy  is
   addressed.
 • The North  West  Province  identified  the  Bophirima  district  for  the
   provision of sanitation in schools.
 • Due to budget constraints, the maintenance of school buildings is part of
   a longer-term programme.
 • Unfortunately the North West Government had to  arrest  people  who  took
   some of the equipment  for  themselves.  Nonetheless,  delivery  in  this
   regard will proceed.
 • A lack of discipline in schools requires everyone’s attention.
 • The North West Province will attempt to remedy the lack of implementation
   of the indigent policies in communities.
 • The North  West  Government  recognises  that  it  has  to  proceed  with
   implementation of its Comprehensive Agriculture Programme.
 • In the previous year, more  than  16 000  employment  opportunities  were
   created in terms of the EPW Programme.
 • The North West Province  acknowledges  that  13  municipalities  have  no
   capacity.  These  municipalities  are  assisted  in  terms   of   Project
   Consolidate, and some progress is already noted.
 • The North West Government is giving attention to the issue of  Integrated
   Development  Plans  (IDPs),  the  need  to  budget  for  those  and   the
   functionality of the ward system. It is a matter  of  concern  that  ward
   councillors do not always inform communities about the projects that  are
   funded, and the North West Government has directed  departments  to  find
   remedies for this breakdown in communication.

 3. The Chairperson








                               LIMPOPO REPORT



           “PEOPLE’S PARLIAMENT AT WORK TOGETHER WITH OUR PEOPLE”


Acknowledgements

The delegation from the National Council of Provinces (NCOP), Parliament  of
the Republic of South Africa, would like to extend their appreciation to:

   • The people of Limpopo Province, specifically to people from the Tzaneen
     areas.
   • Traditional leaders and Religious leaders.
   • Ministers, Mayors, Premiers, Ward Councillors, Members of the Executive
     Committees  (MECs)  and  the  National  and   Provincial   Departmental
     officials.
   • The South African Police Services (SAPS).
   • All Traffic Departments that provided excellent security services.

The 2005 Taking Parliament to the People programme  was  a  success  due  to
this assistance. The generosity of spirit,  warmth,  and  security  provided
the delegation with the capacity to  undertake  this  crucial  component  of
their oversight work.



1. INTRODUCTION

Three years  ago,  the  National  Council  of  Provinces  (NCOP)  adopted  a
programme of Taking Parliament to the  People  with  the  aim  of  promoting
public participation in parliamentary affairs and  to  assist  the  NCOP  in
carrying out its oversight function. In order  to  facilitate  this  process
the NCOP has undertaken to visit two provinces each year. The  Programme  is
aimed  at  strengthening  Parliament’s  commitment   to   a   people-centred
Parliament that is responsive to the needs of the  electorate  in  order  to
realise a better life for all the people of South Africa. By visiting  these
rural  communities,  the  NCOP  gives  a  voice  to  those  who  would   not
necessarily have the opportunity  to  address  or  discuss  (in  their  home
language) issues  with  their  representatives.  Taking  Parliament  to  the
People began with a visit to Umtata in the Eastern Cape  Province  in  2002,
and was followed by Taung in the North West Province in 2003.  Earlier  this
year, the NCOP sat in KwaMhlanga in Mpumalanga Province, and  recently,  the
NCOP had sat in Tzaneen, in the Limpopo Province.


The NCOP had a sitting in Tzaneen  from  31  October  to  4  November  2005.
People gave their inputs on  a  wide  range  of  topics,  raising  important
issues of concern in areas such as social security, the provision  of  basic
services, poverty alleviation and gender equality. In  addition  to  Members
of  the  NCOP,  the  Premier  of  the  Province,  provincial  and  municipal
Speakers, Managers of government Departments, Mayors,  and  Councillors,  as
well as other relevant stakeholders participated  in  the  sitting.  Special
meetings  with  farmers,  youth,  people   with   disabilities   and   women
highlighted some of the challenges facing  government  in  the  delivery  of
services in their areas of  concern.  As  part  of  the  programme,  special
delegations comprising Members of the NCOP  carried  out  visits  to  health
centres, farms, schools and projects falling under the EWP, with the aim  of
ascertaining the situation on the ground.

2. AREAS OF FOCUS

The Limpopo Taking Parliament to the People programme was underpinned  by  a
strong human rights and service delivery  framework,  aimed  at  creating  a
platform for people to engage government and Parliament  on  various  issues
of concern.  The following themes underpinned the formal  inputs/submissions
and site visits:

   • The  creation  of  a  people-centred  Parliament  through  the  Taking
     Parliament to the People programme.
   • The state  of  municipalities  in  Limpopo  and  challenges  regarding
     capacity and delivery: Meeting with Councillors  on  local  government
     matters.
   • Poverty Alleviation and Educational and Social Needs:  public  hearing
     on social security.
   • Agricultural as a Tool  for  Poverty  Alleviation  and  Job  Creation:
     Meeting with Farmers.
    • Structures put in place to address the challenges faced  by  children,
      the youth and people with disabilities: Meeting with youth and  people
      with disabilities.
   • Structures and institutions set up by government in the past ten years
     of democracy towards the advancement of women: Meeting with women.
    • The provision  of  water  as  a  basic  human  right:   successes  and
      challenges facing the government.
    • The impact of Expanded Public Works programmes  and  other  programmes
      directed to the creation of jobs.
The sections that follow provide input from formal meetings and site visits
that broadly and specifically impact on the Limpopo Province.

2.  OVERVIEW OF THEMES UNDERPINNING THE PROGRAMME

2.1. Theme 1: People’s Parliament at work with our People

2.1.1.  Opening  Presentation  by  Executive  Mayor   of   Mopani   District
Municipality, the Hon MH Mokgobi

In his opening address, the Executive Mayor  expressed,  on  behalf  of  the
people of the Mopani District Municipality, a great  sense  of  appreciation
and honour that the NCOP decided to gather and hold  its  Taking  Parliament
to the People in Tzaneen. The Executive Mayor wished that  the  NCOP  would,
during its interaction with the people, gain a deeper understanding  of  the
issues confronting the area and the rest of the province. The NCOP,  through
its oversight role, will help to  highlight  and  overcome  the  constraints
faced by local municipalities. The gathering gives the NCOP  and  the  local
sphere of government the opportunity to enhance the spirit  of  co-operative
governance. Furthermore, the NCOP will be able to  assess  the  impact  that
the legislation it had passed has had on the development and empowerment  of
people and their communities. The biggest challenge  for  municipalities  is
providing adequate basic services to communities  and  meeting  expectations
and targets such as providing clean water to all  the  people  by  the  year
2008. The Executive Mayor appealed to all  participants  to  give  the  NCOP
support and use the opportunity to engage and raise issues of  concern  with
the delegation.

2.1.2. Presentation by the Chairperson of the House of  Traditional  Leaders
in Limpopo, the Hon Hosi M Ntwanwisi

The Hon Hosi M  Ntwanwisi  noted  that  while  there  has  been  significant
improvement  in  many  areas  of  governance  since  the   1994   democratic
elections, there is a need to rethink the meaning of  freedom,  so  that  it
encompasses  the  responsibilities  and  obligations  that  go   with   that
particular   freedom.   The   traditional   leadership   asked   the    NCOP
representatives  to  engage  their  constituencies,  in   their   respective
provinces, on issues of common  concern.  The  objective  of  such  meetings
should be to forge strong bonds and relationships between the NCOP  and  the
Houses of Traditional leadership in order to achieve the goal of a  people’s
parliament.

One of the challenges,  noted  by  Hosi  Ntwanwisi,  is  to  push  back  the
frontiers of  poverty.  In  order  to  achieve  this  objective,  the  local
government sphere needs to strengthen the involvement and  participation  of
the people. This would  assist  in  developing  a  sense  of  ownership  and
commitment by communities of projects and programmes aimed  at  raising  the
standard of living of poor people in the society. The  Hosi  noted  that  to
achieve these objectives, municipalities should submit  regular  reports  to
the  NCOP,  to  enable  it  to  evaluate  and  make  judgement  on   whether
satisfactory progress was being made in  achieving  objectives  set  out  by
government. One of  such  area  of  concern,  as  highlighted,  is  lack  of
infrastructure to support education. In Mopani, there are  still  classrooms
without roofs. Many children do not go to school and some  drop  out  early.
It is the obligation of all leaders to ensure that children  go  to  school.
It is through education that children will be able to take part in the  task
of nation building.

2.1.3. Address by the Premier of Limpopo, the Hon Mr S Moloto

The Premier of the Province, Mr S Moloto, pointed out that  the  sitting  of
the NCOP  in  the  province  provides  a  rare  opportunity  to  share  best
practices and insights on service delivery and intergovernmental  practices.
He indicated that  the  biggest  enemies  of  the  people  are  poverty  and
unemployment.  These  challenges   are   compounded   by   lack   of   basic
infrastructure and services such as roads, electricity and water.  It  is  a
fact that poverty has a race, age, geographic and gender dimension.  Poverty
and unemployment are found mostly among Africans who live  in  rural  areas,
and among women  and  the  youth.  This  also  includes  farm  workers,  who
continue to be subjected to evictions and harsh treatment, despite the  laws
that protect them.

One of the top priorities of government is to protect  the  most  vulnerable
in society. These include, women, children, the elderly  and  the  disabled.
The Limpopo government has created offices in the Premier’s Offices and  the
national government has also created  offices  in  the  Presidency  to  look
after the interests and concerns of these vulnerable groups. The  government
spends close to 90% of the Social Development Budget on social  security  in
the form of old age pensions, disability  and  support  grants,  and  social
relief interventions. The government  has  improved  access  to  the  social
grants and has been successful in its indemnification campaign to  weed  out
ghost pensioners.

The Premier acknowledged that land reform is one of  the  challenges  facing
the Provincial government, where approximately 80% of  the  productive  land
is under claim. The Provincial government is concerned about the  slow  pace
in the resolution of claims. The health care system is improving. There  are
a number of factors  that  hamper  speedy  progress  towards  a  sustainable
health care system. The health of our people is affected by factors such  as
proper housing, sanitation  and  access  to  safe  drinking  water,  and  an
effective and efficient public transport system.  There  is  a  need  for  a
closer working relationship between water authorities, local  municipalities
and the Department of Health. HIV and AIDS infections continue to  be  cause
for great concern. The Premier noted that  while  the  scientific  community
search for a cure,  government  must  insist  that  people  should  exercise
abstinence, be faithful and use  condoms.  He  recommended  that  government
should also increase the number of  accredited  sites  for  the  rollout  of
comprehensive management and treatment plan of HIV/AIDS.

Limpopo is currently facing a drought that is  ravaging  the  province.  The
Limpopo government has urged the national government  to  declare  parts  of
the province disaster areas. Preparations are at an advanced stage  to  make
a formal request for assistance to deal with  the  drought.  The  government
has provided water to more than 1.3 million people. He noted  that  this  is
good achievement, however, millions continue to be without water.  There  is
need to invest in water harvesting technologies. However, the Water Act  and
the Water Services Act pose a challenge in that they require  government  to
build the capacity of municipalities to deliver  water.  Inability  to  find
solutions to these problems will undermine  the  achievements  of  the  last
eleven years of our democracy.

The implementation of Project Consolidate is one of the  priorities  of  the
province. The  government  is  committed  to  giving  precise  and  decisive
support to municipalities. The recently  held  budget  Lekgotla  decided  on
three areas for intervention. R100 million would be  allocated  for  drought
relief and water provision. Another R100  million  would  be  allocated  for
electricity. Road and infrastructure would also be allocated  R100  million.
The Premier concluded with a quote from the late,  Honourable  President  of
the ANC, Mr Oliver R Tambo, “We have it within our power,  working  together
as fellow South Africans, to transform this land into a land of  plenty  for
all”.

2.1.4. Closing remarks by the Chairperson of the NCOP, the Hon J Mahlangu

The Chairperson of the NCOP, the Hon Mr J Mahlangu, dealt with the  role  of
the NCOP. He indicated that many people do not understand that the  NCOP  is
the National Council of Provinces and that it was designed to fit  into  the
constitutional framework of the country and to  address  the  needs  of  the
people on the ground. The NCOP is obliged by  the  Constitution  in  Section
42(4) to represent the provinces to ensure  that  provincial  interests  are
taken  into  account  in  the  national  sphere  of  government  mainly   by
participating in  the  national  Parliament  and  on  issues  affecting  the
provinces.

Parliament has adopted a number of programmes to ensure that the people  are
involved in influencing its decision making process.  He  said  it  is  very
important to interact with the people.

The majority of the citizenry cannot travel to Cape Town and  take  part  in
the decision making processes of the Parliament. The  NCOP  has  decided  to
create a opportunities and platforms for the  poor  and  the  illiterate  to
interact with their elected representatives.

The  purpose  of  Taking  Parliament  to  the  People  is  to  ensure   that
communities are aware of participatory democracy,  are  educated  about  how
Parliament and government functions. It is also  to  create  an  opportunity
for government to report progress with respect to its mandate.
2.1.5. Visits to Health Centres

A number of delegations of the NCOP visited clinics  or  health  centres  to
observe the delivery of health services  in  the  Tzaneen  area.  The  three
clinics or health centres visited were the  Grace  Mugodeni  Health  Centre,
the Mokgapeng Clinic and Nkowankowa Health Centre.

2.1.5.1. The Grace Mugodeni Health Centre

The Health Centre  was  established  in  1990  as  a  clinic  with  a  staff
component of four professional nurses.  The  number  has  increased  to  ten
professional nurses. It provides a twenty-four hour service to  a  community
of 36 000 people.

 It renders chronic and geriatric services, mental health, mother and  child
services, minor ailments,  growth  and  nutrition  monitoring.  It  performs
voluntary  counselling  and  testing,  pmtc,  health  promotion  and   youth
services.

The government departments have provided significant support to the  Centre.
The SAPS has a satellite police station at the Centre to ensure security  of
staff, patients and premises.

The Centre faces a number of challenges, including the following:

    • High staff turnover
    • Lack of transport of urgent transfers to neighbouring hospitals
    • Insufficient provision of water to the centre
    • Lack of resources such as telephone and faxes
    • Lack of security fence around the health centre
    • Dilapidated infrastructure, and
    • Insufficient office space

2.1.5.2. The Mokgapeng Clinic

The Clinic was established in  1997.  It  has  a  staff  component  of  five
professional nurses, two  enrolled  nurses,  one  social  worker  and  three
general assistants. It provides services to a population  of  about  15  000
people. It renders a 24-hour service using a call system.

It renders chronic and geriatric, mental health, mother and  child  service,
minor  ailments,  growth  and   nutrition   monitoring,   vct,   and   pmtc,
rehabilitation, health, promotion, youth and cancer screening services.

The Clinic has a wellness awareness programme,  which  has  a  co-ordinator,
with three staff  members  responsible  for  home  visits  and  referral  of
patients to the hospital.

The Clinic has observed that patients with HIV and AIDS  do  not  make  full
use of the wellness programme due to denial of their HIV status.

 Patients who  are  on  TB  treatment  do  not  comply  with  the  treatment
obligations. The home-based care givers are  concerned  that  the  community
does not assist them to monitor patients to  ensure  that  they  take  their
medication regularly.

The clinic faces a number of challenges, including the following:
    • Insufficient water supply
    • The problem of understaffing
    • There is no medical doctor assigned to the clinic
    • Lack of transport for urgent transfer of patients to hospitals
    • Lack of a proper waste system disposal

2.1.5.3. The Nkowankowa Health Centre

The Health Centre provides health services to about 5 villages. It  has  one
local area  supervisor,  16  professional  nurses,  10  enrolled  nurses,  3
administrative clerks and 10 general workers.

The services it  renders  include  chronic  and  geriatric,  mental  health,
mother and  child  services,  growth  and  nutrition  monitoring,  voluntary
counselling treatment and prevention of mother to child transmission.

The Centre has formed strategic partnerships with the Headman,  Councillors,
members of the community, traditional healers, Departments of Home  Affairs,
Education, Social Development, Agriculture and Public Works.

The Centre has registered the following successes:

    • Specific outreach for youth on matters of sexuality
    • Suggestion box
    • Family medicine programme
    • Immunisation has reached 93%
    • The centre is run successfully on a 24 hour basis

It faces the following challenges:

    • Insufficient water
    • In-transit theft of ordered medication
    • Unavailability of a social worker
    • overcrowding.

2.2. Theme 2:   The  State  of  Municipalities  in  Limpopo  and  Challenges
Regarding  Capacity  and  Delivery:  Meeting  with  Councillors   on   Local
Government Issues

2.2.1. Address by the Deputy Minister of Provincial  and  Local  Government,
the Hon Ms N E Hangana

The Deputy Minister indicated that  the  Project  Consolidate  programme  is
playing a significant role in highlighting some of the challenges  faced  by
rural  municipalities.  Through  the   Project   Consolidate   process   136
municipalities in need of support have been identified. The  knowledge  that
government is gathering  through  the  process  will  be  put  into  use  at
provincial  and  national  level  to  provide  better  support   for   rural
municipalities, and will also be used to make informed decisions on  how  to
improve the lives of the poor and to give guidance to municipalities.

Limpopo is one of the poorest provinces.  In  Sekhukhune,  the  unemployment
rate is at 69% and in the Capricorn region it is at 41%. These  figures  are
of great concern since it is more than the national unemployment number  and
needs serious attention. High rates of unemployment places a further  burden
on the Department as more and more people become part of the indigent.  This
limits a municipality to effectively collect  revenue.  National  government
is concerned that people will be trapped in the cycle of  poverty  and  will
be unable to live dignified lives. Budgets are diverted  away  from  capital
projects  to  cater  for  more  social  spending  and  lead   to   lack   of
infrastructural investments in areas.

The Deputy Minister noted that there is need for a cohesive approach by  all
three spheres of government to direct its strategies to  a  common  goal.  A
blueprint  was  created  consisting  of  the  National  Spatial  Development
Framework, the  Provincial  Growth  and  Development  Plan,  the  Integrated
Development Plan and the Local Economic  Development  (LED)  Strategy.  Only
Sekhukhune District Municipality has adopted a  Local  Economic  Development
Strategy. Bohlabla’s LED is under construction and  Capricorn  has  a  draft
LED strategy. These raise serious concerns as unemployment is high  and  yet
the municipalities are unable to finalise  their  LED  strategies.  The  LED
strategies should be used to promote the economic development  of  a  region
and  creating   job   opportunities   for   communities.   It   seems   like
municipalities that are unable to complete the development phase  will  face
even more serious concerns  when  it  comes  to  implementing  these  plans.
Questions that need to be  raised  include:  whether  the  drafting  of  the
strategies  are  too  complex;  are  there  too   many   requirements   that
municipalities need to comply with?  If  this  is  the  case  then  national
government should  assist  municipalities  and  release  them  to  focus  on
service delivery.

Sanitation, water and electricity seem to be the biggest challenges  in  the
region.  The  Ministry  is  concerned   with   the   reasons   provided   by
municipalities on their inability  to  deliver  services.  Reasons  provided
include: the finalisation of Section 78 (Which Act?),  which  stifles  water
provision and sanitation. Sekhukhune are awaiting council  approval  on  the
recommendations for water  provision.  Capricorn  Water  Services  Authority
gained status to provide water but the District Municipality were unable  to
adhere to all the provisions of the Act. Councils  need  to  accelerate  the
pace of decision-making and need to approve  or  disapprove  recommendations
made to them more swiftly. Policies should not remain in draft  form  as  it
paralyses the municipalities ability to deliver services.

Many municipalities cite the lack of skilled staff as  contributing  to  the
inability to deliver services. Municipalities  point  a  lack  of  technical
skills in project management, engineering  and  supervisory  disciplines  as
the main problems they face. Rural municipalities are  not  able  to  retain
staff from moving to bigger cities. More and more communities  take  to  the
street to voice their dissatisfaction  with  non-delivery  of  services.  It
seems like communication is problematic, as communities are not informed  on
the plans of municipalities. The issues that  municipalities  must  confront
include whether communities are part of the  Independent  Development  Plans
process;  are  IGR  Forums  creating  interaction  with   communities;   are
Community  Development  Workers  and  Ward  Committees  functioning?   These
structures should be used to communicate with communities  and  should  work
in conjunction with and not against municipalities.

The Deputy Minister indicated that there is enough information  to  indicate
the backlogs and the challenges of municipalities, but decisive  steps  need
to be taken by municipalities to  speed-up  the  service  delivery  process.
Municipalities  should  build   their   institutional   capacity   and   get
communities involved in the decision-making process. National government  is
aware  of  the  challenges  and  continuously  revisits  its  organisational
capability. Municipalities should follow this example  and  ensure  that  we
create a better life for all in this country.

The Deputy Minister  noted  that  136  municipalities  are  currently  being
assisted through  Project  Consolidate  to  improve  service  delivery.  She
stated lack of communication as  one  of  the  disadvantages  affecting  the
effectiveness of community participation. Ward  committees  should  interact
with communities and refer concerns to the Speaker. Ward committee  meetings
are  not  taking  place,  because  of  the  vast  areas   to   be   covered.
Municipalities are obliged by the Constitution to budget for this process.

2.2.2. Address by the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,  the
Hon MJ Mahlangu

The Chairperson indicated that the  visit  to  the  Limpopo  Province  is  a
Constitutional requirement in terms of Section 152  (1),  which  states  the
following functions for local government:

   a)  to  provide  democratic  and   accountable   government   for   local
      communities;
   b) to ensure the provision of services to communities  in  a  sustainable
      manner;
   c) to promote a social and economic development;
   d) to promote a safe and healthy environment; and
   e)  to  encourage  the   involvement   of   communities   and   community
      organisations in the matters of local government.

The Hon Mr Mahlangu indicated that municipalities need to deliver  efficient
and effective services to poor households. The indigent should  be  able  to
get free basic  services  delivered  to  them  efficiently  and  in  a  good
quality. A few positive highlights include: that  the  NCOP  visited  North-
West and KwaZulu-Natal and people were complaining that  they  did  not  see
their councillors and meetings were not happening. Two months ago, the  NCOP
visited the areas again, and was informed  that  councillors  are  now  more
visible and meetings  are  happening.  The  community  is  happy  with  this
because they are now part of the decision-making  structures.   It  is  only
through people working with  communities  and  where  citizen  participation
occurs that people understand and appreciate the  challenges  confronted  by
municipalities. In some provinces the ward system is still not  working  and
this creates problems and need serious interventions.

He noted that some municipalities spend most of  their  budget  on  salaries
and  not  on  developmental  programmes.  This  is  in  conflict  with   the
developmental nature of local government. There are municipalities that  are
not able to generate any income and are totally  reliant  on  the  equitable
share allocation. These municipalities are mostly  situated  in  poor  rural
areas where unemployment is rife. A number of municipalities  are  not  able
to attract skilled and experienced staff especially technical and  financial
staff. These municipalities are  unable  to  submit  financial  reports  and
build infrastructure.  The  high  rate  of  irregular  behaviour  by  public
officials is a point of concern. People that are involved  in  theft,  fraud
and corruption should be dealt with seriously. They need to be  exposed  and
acted on. Failure to do this will result  in  people’s  basic  rights  being
denied and the vicious cycle of poverty  repeating  itself.  People  should,
however, guard against labelling people as corrupt without any evidence.

The Hon Mr Mahlangu pointed out that  the  National  Government  passed  the
following laws:

    • Municipal Systems Act
    • Municipal Structures Act
    • Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act
    • Municipal Finance Management Act
    • Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act

The challenge now is to assess whether these laws assist  municipalities  or
hamper their ability to deliver services.  Municipalities  raised  the  fact
that the Municipal Finance Management Act poses a number of challenges.  The
reason for this is that they do not possess sufficiently  skilled  staff  to
deal with it.

2.2.3. Identified Challenges

    • Under/over-spending: There is a need to develop revenue bases  and  to
      ensure that revenue sources are neither over nor under-utilised.
    • Appropriate Service Levels: Municipalities  should  need  to  identify
      appropriate service levels (as these choices have long-term  financial
      implications).
    • Coherent Financial systems: In terms of equitable share,  there  is  a
      need to collect data on estimated costs of municipal service  delivery
      and the development of a reliable revenue-raising capacity measure.
    • Capacity Framework: There is  a  need  to  develop  a  framework  that
      recognises   the   different   circumstances   and    capacities    of
      municipalities.
    • Public Participation: The participation of people in poor  communities
      is undermined by lack of funds for the operation of  ward  committees.
      This challenge has impacted on the accountability of ward  councillors
      to their constituency. People should be educated  about  their  rights
      with regard to partaking in the local government process.
    • Provision of free basic services:  In most rural  areas,  there  is  a
      poor delivery mechanism of free basic services. As a result, the  Free
      Basic Services policy is not being implemented at  the  desired  level
      nor reaching the intended beneficiaries. This problem is compounded by
      the fact that most municipalities have limited funding  to  fund  free
      basic services programmes.  .

Lastly, it was indicated that the biggest challenge to local  government  is
to use the NCOP to assist  and  develop  frameworks  where  people  can  co-
operate meaningfully. Local government should  engage  fully  with  NCOP  to
address challenges and carve a  way  forward.  It  is  in  every  ones  best
interest that these processes happen to ensure that the lives of people  are
changed.

2.2.4. The Community Identified these Challenges

    • The impact of drought: The persistent drought in most  parts  of  the
      Limpopo Province is crippling  agricultural  activities  and  putting
      pressure on scarce water sources.  Most  dams  are  in  their  lowest
      levels in years and municipalities are struggling  to  provide  water
      services to communities due to severe lack of water.
    • Lack of water services: Countless issues were raised from  the  floor
      on the lack of water  services  in  most  rural  communities  in  the
      province.  It was noted that people often travel  long  distances  to
      fetch water from water points. This situation has resulted in  people
      in some other areas utilising water from polluted rivers,  increasing
      their  vulnerability  to  typhoid,  cholera  and  other   water-borne
      diseases.
    • Lack of sanitation services: While most community  members  recognise
      the efforts that local government is making on housing issues, it was
      noted that issues  around  sanitation  are  sometimes  neglected.   A
      suggestion was made that the sanitation programme be integrated  with
      the RDP housing programme  as  a  way  of  addressing  the  blockages
      regarding  the  provisioning  of  sanitation   services   to   poorer
      communities.
    • Sub-Standard Housing: RDP houses in some areas have been  built  with
      inferior material such as ‘sponge bricks’ which absorb water when  it
      rains[4]. Community members indicated  that  these  RDP  houses  have
      become a liability and a threat to their health and lives rather than
      developmental assets.
    •  Poor  Infrastructure:  It  was  noted  that  some  communities   are
      struggling  with  regard  to  access  to  public  transport  due   to
      inadequacy infrastructure. People travel long  distances  to  schools
      and bus stations, and thus increase their vulnerability to crime.  It
      was recommended that government ensure  that  poor  communities  have
      access to quality  infrastructure,  especially  roads,  as  this  has
      direct impact on the sustainability of their livelihood.
    •  Letaba  Fire  Protection  Association:  The  Letaba  Fire  Protection
      Association submitted a business  plan  for  approval  to  the  Mopani
      District Municipality, and for the last three months the  municipality
      has not responded. The Association wanted to know about  the  progress
      on the submitted business plan.
    • Unfinished RDP Houses:   In  some  areas  under  the  Greater  Tzaneen
      Municipality RDP houses were left unfinished due to lack of funds  and
      other problems. It was indicated that there is a lack of monitoring by
      the municipality on companies contracted to build RDP houses.
    • Electricity Services in Petanenge: Ten years after the electrification
      of  adjacent  villages[5],  Petanenge   village   is   still   without
      electricity.   As  a  result,  community  members  feel  isolated  and
      rejected by the Greater Tzaneen Municipality. It was asked  about  the
      progress that is being made to ensure that the community  have  access
      to electricity.
    • Sub-standard tarred road: The issue of a sub-standard tarred  road  in
      the Xihoko area  was  raised.  It  was  indicated  that  although  the
      construction of the road is complete, motorists do not  use  the  road
      due to the melting of the tar, since no concrete stones were  used  in
      the construction.


2.2.5. The Response of Government

    • The province has a plan to finish the incomplete houses and will
      address the issue of the poor quality of bricks and other building
      material
    • Learnerships and internships are there to address the issue of people
      not having qualifications. It is a universal issue that jobseekers
      should have experience and a degree for certain jobs. The NCOP should
      address the issue of the youth having degrees but no experience
    • The business plan for the Letaba Fire Protection service will be
      followed up
    • The province will make allocations to municipalities to build houses
      but it may not be enough to address the need for houses. Insufficient
      funds cause some of the delays in building more houses. Nepotism that
      occurs when making housing allocations will be addressed by the
      province
    • Communities should have meetings to discuss and monitor projects
      happening in their areas.
    • A problem occurred where tenders were given for contractors to supply
      water and then it was not provided. This issue is currently being
      addressed
    • About 70% of the villages in Greater Tzaneen have been supplied with
      electricity. The community was informed that the electrification would
      happen from a certain point and move onwards from there. Problems
      arose where Eskom started installation contrary to the agreements that
      were reached. The issue will be addressed with Eskom
    • The money that has been set aside by the Premier is for the whole
      region and not for a specific region. This will assist in addressing
      some of the challenges that exist
    • The quality of roads are bad and the issue will be addressed with the
      engineers are they should inspect the quality and report to the
      municipalities
    • The issue of remunerating ward committees is currently being discussed
      in Parliament. In the North West Province the council pay for out of
      pocket expenses of the ward committees. Government need a unified
      approach to deal with this issue
    • The allowances for councillors from the rural areas are less than that
      received by the councillors from urban areas. The discussion in
      National Government is to ensure that councillors are not left out of
      pocket for rendering a service to the community
    • Demarcation is a work in process. Communities should be consulted on
      the boundary changes affecting them. Provincial boundaries are the
      responsibility of the provinces concerned. Public hearings will be
      held in provinces for people to make submissions on boundaries in the
      affected areas.


2.3. Theme 3: Poverty  Alleviation,  Educational  and  Social  Needs  Public
Hearings on Social Security

2.3.1. Presentation by the Minister of Home Affairs, Hon. N Mapisa-Nqakula

Minister Mapisa-Nqakula  stated  that  to  access  the  different  services,
people need Identity Documents (IDs) and therefore the  Department  of  Home
Affairs plays a vital role in poverty alleviation. She  further  noted  that
there is an obligation on the State not to deprive people of these  services
and much has been done by the Department of Home Affairs  to  ensure  access
to these services.

The Minister stated that IDs and birth  certificates  play  a  key  role  to
obtain e.g. grants (Child Support  grants,  Foster  Care  Grants  etc).  She
stated that at times the mothers of these children do  not  themselves  have
IDs and this is a challenge for the Department.

The Lokisha Ditokomane campaign has been launched  to  rectify  mistakes  in
Identity Documents and these changes are made free of  charge  and  to  give
parents, who are not registered, an opportunity to do so. This campaign  has
been extended to the end of  December  2005  and  it  will  be  reviewed  if
necessary. The Minister also encouraged older persons  to  come  forward  to
rectify mistakes in their IDs.

Achievements  of  the  Department  include:  online  birth  registration  at
hospitals and extended hours of operation to 18:00 during weekdays.

The Minister’s Response to Questions

The Minister stated that with the programme of Lokisha  Ditokomane,  parents
may go to Home Affairs offices to rectify any changes/corrections that  need
to be made with regard to Identity Documents, free of charge.

The Minister further noted that there is no  need  for  people  to  wake  up
early in the morning and stand in long queues, the reason being  that  there
are multi-purpose centres, mobile units  that  are  being  utilized  in  the
province.

2.3.2. Presentation by Deputy Minister of Education, the Hon Mr E Surty

The Deputy Minister  stated  that  when  there  is  talk  about  educational
services provided for by the State, there is need to do so  in  the  context
of the challenges facing the nation.  A  major  challenge  is  to  create  a
functionally literate and numerate society possessing the  necessary  skills
that are required to stimulate and sustain a high level of  economic  growth
so as to deepen our  social  transformation.  The  Deputy  Minister  further
noted that the Department of Education will focus during the  coming  years,
on reducing the cost of education to the  poor   to  enhance  their  access,
whether  it  is  in  relation  to  early  childhood   development,   general
education, further education and training or tertiary education.

Parliament recently passed the Education Laws Amendment Bill, which for  the
first time in this country’s history creates a no  school  fee  system.  The
effect of this legislation is that poor parents,  who  want  to  give  their
children a good education but struggle to afford the expenses, will  now  be
able to do so.

According to the draft amended  National  Norms  and  Standards  for  School
Funding, the schools in a province must still be ranked from the poorest  to
the least poor school. However, only one criterion will be used  and  it  is
the poverty of the community around the school.

ECD services are divided into two main programmes: One programme deals  with
the expansion of Grade R as part of  the  Foundation  Phase  and  the  other
deals with the  development  and  coordination  of  the  integrated  service
delivery for children below the Grade R age group.

One of the activities that the Department has been engaged in, with all  the
provinces, is the upgrading of the qualifications and has started  with  ECD
level 4 qualification. A total number of 665 of the practitioners that  have
received the level 4 qualification are from Limpopo.

The Deputy Minister stated that it is essential for  the  State  to  provide
services  that  also  enhances  the  nutritional  status  of  learners.  The
Department has implemented a National School Nutrition Programme to  enhance
the nutritional  status  of  learners  from  impoverished  communities.  The
programme is currently feeding cooked meals to about 5 million  learners  at
16 000 of the poorest schools over 156 days.

The number of students who have received  financial  assistance  amounts  to
402 833  to  date  totalling  940  135  awards  from  the  National  Student
Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS).

The Department is putting initiatives in place that seek to ensure that  the
youth and the community are able to access information on  career  guidance.
The department in collaboration with the National  Information  Service  for
Higher Education (NISHE) project of  the  Higher  Education  SA  (HESA)  has
produced a career information booklet. This is a Grade 9 career  guide  into
higher education and has been distributed to all Grade  9  learners  in  the
public schooling system.

The Deputy Minister said that the  President  has  consistently  called  for
greater emphasis and investment in the teaching of mathematics  and  science
as means of responding to the acute skills shortages in critical sectors  of
the  economy.  The  department  has  responded  by  launching  the  National
Strategy for Mathematics, Science and Technology Education in 2001.

The Hon Surty reported that the number of specialist schools in  mathematics
and science has increased from the 102 to over 400. The curriculum has  been
redesigned to ensure increased proficiency in numeracy, and  from  2006  all
learners will still study mathematics or mathematical  literacy  beyond  the
compulsory phase of schooling.

The Deputy Minister’s Response to Questions

The Deputy Minister stated that funding is  given  to  students  who  excel.
Students also need to look at various tertiary education  institutions  e.g.
FET Colleges, Universities, and Universities of Technologies etc.

On the question of whether a school principal can expel a  learner  who  has
not paid his school fees, the Deputy Minister stated that this could not  be
done.


2.3.3. Presentation by the Deputy Minister of Social Development,  the  Hon.
Dr J Benjamin

The Department promotes social integration  through  strengthening  families
and communities. The Department has in the last 10 years been  concentrating
on the provision of various social grants,  like  old  age  pensions,  child
support  grant  and  other  forms  of  grants.  Recently,  in  view  of  the
establishment of the Social Security Agency that is going to be  responsible
for the distribution of social grants, the Department has been shifting  the
focus of its work to the other components of its mandate.

It is engaged  in  the  fight  against  poverty  through  the  promotion  of
sustainable livelihood. It is engaged in the  struggle  to  combat  HIV  and
AIDS by preventing and mitigating its consequences.

The scope of the Department’s services is as follows:
    • Promotion and prevention services.
    • Rehabilitation services.
    • Protection services.
    • Continuing care services.
    • Mental health and addiction services.
    • Youth Development: Socio-economic programmes  and  Moral  Regeneration
      programmes.
    • Poverty reduction programmes: facilitation of  developmental  centres,
      promotion and facilitation of the establishment  of  cooperatives  and
      integrated empowerment programmes.
    • Community profiling: assessment of community structures.
    •  Implementation:  facilitation   of   implementation   of   identified
      development activities, according to the plans developed by  involving
      the community.
    • Evaluation of implementation: monitoring of implementation of  jointly
      planned activities, giving feedback to the community  and  re-planning
      action where required.

The nature of social welfare services:
    • Childcare and protection:  services  to  abused,  neglected,  orphaned
      children.
    • Services to families: vulnerable, single parent/child headed.
    • Probation services to perpetrators  and  their  families  as  well  as
      children in conflict with the law.
    • Victim Empowerment Programme.
    • Services to youth at risk, in conflict with the  law,  out  of  school
      unemployed.
    • Services to women, victims of violence, poor and unemployed.
    • Services to protect and care for older persons.
    • Services to those affected /infected by HIV/AIDS.

The services of the Department could be accessed by people  approaching  any
of following offices or organisations:
    • Provincial office.
    • Regional, district office.
    • NGO’s, CBO’s
    • Local Government
    •  Civic  society   (Community   members,   councillors,   health   care
      practitioners)

The Deputy Minister’s Response to Questions

With regard to the gender parity why men receive Old  Age  pensions  at  the
age of 65 and woman 60, the Deputy  Minister  stated  that  it  is  positive
discrimination.

2.3.4. Presentation by the Deputy Minister of Health, the Hon Ms N  Madlala-
Routledge

The Deputy Minister stated that the Department has a  number  of  programmes
that assist children to grow up healthy  and,  which  provide  quality  care
when children get sick.

It is very  important  that  all  children  be  immunised  and  the  Limpopo
Province is a leading province in this regard, where 92% of  children  under
the age  of  one  are  fully  immunised.  Many  episodes  of  illnesses  are
prevented when children are fully immunised.

A school  health  project  has  been  implemented  that  provides  for  free
assessments and health promotion to learners. This is very important  as  it
enables the Department to pick up problems early, especially those  problems
that impact negatively on the ability of children to learn.

The health of the youth also needs to be looked  after.  In  order  to  make
services  more  user-friendly  the  Department  has   assisted   64   health
facilities to become more  youth  friendly.  There  are  7  of  these  youth
centres in the Limpopo province and the Department  has  trained  more  than
170 health workers in how to be youth friendly.

The Deputy Minister stated that the Department is proud of  the  initiatives
taken by the province to improve access, and  in  this  regard  the  Limpopo
Province has shown how to ensure greater access by opening a 24  hr  service
than any other province.

She further  noted  that  in  Tshilidzini  the  community  has  developed  a
programme that provides rape survivors with support  and  care  and  similar
levels of dedication need to find ways to other parts of the province.

Besides caring for physical health, it is also important  to  care  for  our
mental health. The province  has  done  well  in  strengthening  its  mental
health services, including the improving the integration  of  mental  health
into primary health care. This means that when a person to  the  clinic  the
nurse will be able to treat any mental health problems that he  or  she  may
have and  this  makes  possible  the  provision  of  holistic  care  in  our
facilities.

People also need nutritious food to  be  healthy.  With  the  assistance  of
government, communities have embarked on these  projects  with  passion  and
dedication - so much so that there are over 150  community  gardens  in  the
province, which benefit families. It must be ensured  that  every  community
in the province has a sustainable  community  garden  that  feeds  the  most
vulnerable members of that community

The Deputy Minister stated that the Department is aware that there are  many
community-based organisations in Limpopo e.g. the  fact  that  the  province
has established over 360 community/home-based care sites which have a  total
of 90 000 beneficiaries. The government has to ensure  that  these  projects
take care of our people who have all types of chronic diseases.
While there are successes in Limpopo,  there  certainly  are  challenges  as
well.

These include:
    • The creation of  sustainable  jobs  for  the  people,  especially  the
      vulnerable.
    • Making health service more accessible and the role  of  the  community
      leaders, including hospital boards and clinic committees.
    • Ensuring that our facilities are safe for health  personnel  and  that
      they treat patients with respect and vice a versa.

The Deputy Minister’s Response to Questions

A member of the public complained that she  was  not  treated  well  in  the
clinic where she had her baby and after giving birth to her child the  staff
at the clinic did not inform her what should be done.  The  Deputy  Minister
stated that the matter would be  referred  to  the  MEC  of  Health  in  the
province and that an investigation will be launched to  what  the  situation
was, but that the Department does apologise for what happened.

The Deputy Minister also stated that there is  a  programme  that  has  been
developed to pay volunteers a stipend or a salary.

The Deputy Minister further noted that the  department  is  aware  that  the
shortage of nurses is not only a problem in the Limpopo province,  but  that
it is a national challenge, but that the Minister is  working  hard  to  get
nurses back. It was agreed with all the MEC’s of Health in the provinces  to
open the nursing colleges in the provinces e.g. Limpopo  province  currently
has 3, but another 2 will be opening soon.

The Deputy Minister stated that from Limpopo there are currently 44  medical
students undergoing training in Cuba, and when  they  return  they  will  be
working in the Limpopo Province.

2.4. Theme 4:  Agriculture  as  a  Tool  for  Poverty  Alleviation  and  Job
Creation: Meeting with Farmers

2.4.1. Address by the Minister of Agriculture, the Hon Ms. T. Didiza

According to the Minister,  at  the  present  moment  land  prices  are  not
favourable to government to reach its objective of ensuring  a  speedy  land
reform delivery. The Land Summit deliberations exposed the  weaknesses  with
regard to the willing-buyer-willing-seller approach and its  impact  on  the
price of land required for  the  land  reform  programme.  One  of  the  key
disadvantages of this approach, apart from  inflated  land  prices,  is  the
fact that negotiations on the purchasing price often  take  too  long,  thus
affecting  the  pace  of  land  delivery  to  the  previously  disadvantaged
persons.  The  Land  Summit  recommended  that  other  alternatives  in  the
acquisition of land be  investigated,  and  government  is  already  in  the
process of identifying these alternatives.

The Minister  reiterated  and  confirmed  government’s  commitment  to  land
reform and the sustainable development and success of land reform  projects.
With the aim of achieving  that  objective,  government  has  initiated  the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support  Programme  (CASP)  and  Micro  Financial
Institution of South Africa (MAFISA) programmes to assist  emerging  farmers
with regard to access to finance and  technical  support.  Furthermore,  the
Department of Agriculture has prioritised  the  programme  around  extension
officers.

2.4.2. Address by the Minister of Labour, the Hon Mr. MS Mdladlana

In responding to issues raised by people on the floor,  the  Minister  noted
that the rights of workers are protected by the Constitution,  which  forbid
any form of discrimination and abuse of workers.  Hence,  nepotism  and  any
form of corruption is not acceptable in the  workplace  or  anywhere  within
the society. The  rights  of  workers  are  protected,  amongst  others,  by
legislations such as the:

    • Labour Relations Act
    • Basic Condition of Employment Act
    • Employment Equity Act
    • Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act

The Minister encouraged workers to make efforts to be aware of their  rights
as stipulated in these legislation. Workers have a right to  join  a  labour
union of their choice and be able to bargain for their salaries rather  than
beg to be paid.

2.4.3. Visit to Local Farms

The NCOP visited a number of farms to observe progress made with  regard  to
farms that have  been  the  subject  of  restitution,  challenges  that  the
emerging farmers are  encountering  and  general  conditions  of  people  on
farms.

2.4.3.1. Berlyn Farm

The farm is 1 900 hectares, of which 147 ha is set  aside  for  litchis  and
citrus farming, and 1 703 ha for grazing and sisal production. The farm  has
been under the caretakership of the  Provincial  Department  of  Agriculture
for the past 10 years. At the current moment, the  farm  is  not  productive
due to lack of  financial  capital,  after  the  Provincial  Department  had
substantially decreased its budget allocation.

The farm has 61 employees whose work is limited as the  farm  is  not  fully
operational. The farm is part of  a  land  claim  by  the  Berlyn  Community
Property  Association  and  a  counter  claim  by  the  Babirwa  ba  Mangena
community. These competing land claims were identified as key  obstacles  to
the development and functioning of the farm.

2.4.3.2. Nguvamuni Farm

The farm was acquired through a SLAG grant to the value  of  R600  000  with
the extent of 191 ha. In total, the farm has 90 beneficiaries, only ten  are
involved in the daily operation of the farm. Initially, the main  activities
of the farm were dairy and crop farming.  After  losing  the  dairy  cattle,
beneficiaries have resorted to crop farming only.

 The lack of involvement by  the  majority  (80)  of  beneficiaries  on  the
 farming project was found to be a crippling factor.  The ten  beneficiaries
 were unable to sign agreements with interested partners who want to  invest
 in the farm. At the moment, there is an opportunity to venture into chicken
 farming  with  an  interested  private  strategic  partner.  However,   the
 agreement cannot be signed without the approval  of  the  majority  of  the
 absent beneficiaries.


2.4.3.3. Mariveni Farm

This is a farmer’s settlement project comprising of 26 emerging farmers  (20
men and 6 women).  The farm produces mainly bananas and  citrus  fruits.  Of
all  three  projects  visited  by  the  NCOP,  Mariveni  farm  is  the  most
successful farming project, demonstrating  a  significant  upwards  business
growth trend. The farm is a cooperative  which  is  managed  by  an  elected
Board of Directors. More than half of its produce is exported to Europe  and
the Far East. The farm employs local people  and  has  also  made  available
land for a flourishing community garden.

2.4.3.4. The farming Community raised the following Challenges to  the  NCOP
Delegation:
    • Slow  pace  of  land  reform:  the  land  reform  process,  especially
      restitution was taking place at a slow pace.  Claimants  from  various
      claims in the province indicated that the Commission should  speed  up
      the resolution of claims.
    • Lack of Post-settlement support: Claimants  alluded  to  the  lack  of
      adequate post-settlement support, especially with  regard  to  farming
      skills and business planning. As a  result  restitution  beneficiaries
      are not able to take full advantage of the restored farmland.
    • Employment for the  Youth:  it  was  indicated  that,  whenever  local
      municipalities advertise vacant positions, an emphasis is put  on  the
      candidate’s extensive experience.  As  a  result,  recently  qualified
      graduates are excluded from these opportunities and but have no  other
      alternative than to migrate to cities.
    • Lack of funds: The implementation of both CASP and  MAFISA  is  taking
      place at a slow pace. Land Reform projects  have  limited  sources  of
      financial assistance, and most of them rely on both MAFISA and CASP as
      an answer to this challenge.
    • Marketing of Agricultural Produce: Farmers indicated  that  government
      should do more with regard to making sure that emerging  farmers  have
      access to markets for their produce.
    •  Exploitation  of  Workers:  Local  people  were  being  exploited  by
      unscrupulous business people who refuse to allow them  to  join  trade
      unions and do not adhere to the Labour Relations Act.
    • Job Losses: An issue about the once flourishing local industrial  area
      was raised. For the last ten years,  most  factories  have  relocated,
      leaving empty infrastructure and thousands of retrenched local  people
      stranded without employment. Members of the community wanted to  know,
      from the municipality, the cause of relocations and what government is
      doing to address this problem.

2.5. Theme 5: Structures Put in Place to Address  the  Challenges  Faced  by
Children,
    the Youth and People with Disability: Meeting with Youth and People with
    Disability

 2.5.1. Presentation by the Deputy Minister of Sport & Recreation,  the  Hon
       Mr CG Oosthuizen

The Deputy Minister stated that  government  wants  an  active  and  willing
nation. He stated that the Department currently has  14  programmes  running
in the Limpopo Province. He noted that a major challenge for the  Department
is finances and therefore programmes have to be prioritised.

He informed the people that the Department has formed a partnership with  SA
Confederation and Olympic Committee (SACOC), to ensure  that  the  Olympians
win some medals at the Olympics and these include the disabled Olympians  as
well.

The Deputy Minister stated that the Department has made a survey  and  found
that they need R14 Billion for sports facilities in  the  country  and  that
the department is addressing this challenge pro-actively.

The Deputy Minister stated that the department has built  100  facilities  a
year in  the  country,  but  these  funds  have  been  moved  to  the  local
government. He further noted that if the local government in the region  has
prioritised  the  building  of  sports  facilities   in   their   Integrated
Development Programme (IDP), whether to upgrade or build  new  ones,  people
should interact with the local government in their area.

He further noted that the backlog must be eradicated and that the  need  for
sports facilities is imperative to identify potential and talent.

The Deputy Minister stated that the Department is  in  the  process  of  re-
introducing school sports, and as he stated, that this is the nursery  where
talent can be  identified.  He  further  noted  that  sport  ensures  social
cohesion.

2.5.2. Dr E Kornegay – Policy Coordination and Advisory Services
Dr Kornegay explained that it is important that  people  who  want  to  open
their own business have to look at a targeted assistance programme, as  well
as the skills development programme.

She stated that wheelchairs are available at hospitals and clinics. Also  if
people see that fraud is  being  committed  regarding  obtaining  fraudulent
disability grants that they should report this.

Dr Kornegay explained that there is a means  test  to  determine  whether  a
person qualifies to get a grant and which grant will be  applicable  to  the
applicant.

She further noted that  municipalities  need  to  address  issues  regarding
access to buildings. She urged members of the public to raise  these  issues
during meetings with their local municipalities.

She informed people to contact the person  in  the  office  of  the  Premier
dealing with the Status of People with Disabilities.

2.5.3. Mr J Mbalula, Chairperson of the National Youth Commission

The major challenge facing the National Youth Commission is the question  of
access to its service by young people. It has decided to address  the  issue
partly by setting up a toll free number. It  hopes  that  that  will  enable
young people to access its services more than they had done in the past.

The Chairperson indicated that  the  other  challenge  facing  the  National
Youth Commission is the question of skill development. It  is  committed  to
the implementation of the National Youth Service Programme  to  address  the
lack of skills among the youth. In terms of the youth skills programme,  the
youth will be given not only skills but relevant experience.

2.5.4. Mr M Kekana, CEO of the Umsobomvu Youth Fund (Fund)

The Umsobombu Youth Fund has embarked on a campaign to increase  the  extent
of its funding for projects. Mr Kekana informed the members  of  the  public
that as from 1 November 2005, people applying for funding would be  required
to pay R200 and not R500

The Fund has reached an agreement with the  Limpopo  Development  Agency  on
various programmes. Agreements have been reached with  First  National  Bank
and if members of the public want  access  to  these  funds,  they  have  to
liaise with the FNB branch in their region.

The Youth Fund has established a solid network with all  the  municipalities
in Limpopo and young people should utilise the  local  government  in  their
areas.

With regard to learnerships, Mr  Kekana  conceded  that  the  absorption  of
students into the labour market is low, but  that  the  training  for  young
people must continue.

He said that with respect to crime, communities, working the members of  the
SAPS, must continue to be vigilant and assist the police in identifying  the
perpetrators.

2.5.5. Mr Modjadji, Provincial  Chairperson  of  Disabled  People  of  South
Africa (DPSA)
Mr Modjadji encouraged disabled people to make use of structures  that  have
been put in place to deal with their needs. He urged them to speak with  one
voice.

One of the issues  or  challenges  facing  transformation  is  fronting  for
tenders. He urged people with disabilities to be  vigilant  and  not  to  be
used by fraudsters. He urged them to work very closely  with  government  to
curb the problem of fronting.

In his conclusion, Mr Modjadji urged people  to  seek  more  information  on
entrepreneurships and their rights. The offices of the DPSA are always  open
to people who need assistance on a range of issues raised in the  course  of
the meeting.

2.5.6. Mr B Ngcaweni, Policy Coordination and Advisory in the Office of  the
Presidency

Mr Ngaweni, on the issue of rural  development,  encouraged  the  people  to
utilise their land for agricultural purposes. He urged  the  communities  to
make use of SMEs. Lastly, he highlighted the importance for  communities  to
work closely with their municipalities and to  obtain  more  information  of
entrepreneurship.

2.5.7. Presentation by the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs, the  Hon  M  KMN
Gigaba

The Deputy Minister said that the  people  should  be  proud  of  the  South
African democracy because it has given  them  a  voice  and  opportunity  to
interact with their leaders. He urged the communities to use the  structures
that have been put in place to deal with their needs.

On the issue of fraudulent Identity Documents, he said that  his  Department
is in the process of producing new identity cards to curb  the  problem.  He
urged  communities  to  exercise  great  care  when  using  their   Identity
Documents.

He warned people that are selling fraudulent  Identity  Documents  that  the
law will deal with them when they are caught.

2.5.8. Presentation by the Member of  the  Limpopo  Provincial  Legislature,
the Hon Ms A Makosana

She urged people with disabilities to assert their needs. She  responded  to
a question on why there is a need for special schools for disabled  persons.
She said that special schools are  necessary  for  those  who  need  special
help. Those who do not need special schools are able to  attend  schools  of
their own choice.

She informed the meeting that her office is always open for the people  that
need special assistance, whether it is bursaries or business  opportunities.


2.5.9. Visits to Schools by Delegation of the NCOP

The NCOP visited the Letaba Special School, and Yingisani School to observe
and interact with the schools which are providing services to children with
special educational needs.

2.5.9.1 Letaba Special School

The principal, Mr Easters, welcomed  the  delegation  and  extended  a  warm
appreciation for the fact that their school is  being  visited.  The  school
was established in 1969 and the first learners admitted in July 1969. On  15
November 1969, the buildings were officially opened.

Letaba currently has 210 learners who are resident in  the  hostels.  Letaba
has 25 teaching staff and 61 non-teaching staff. The school is  financed  by
the Department of  Education,  but  is  heavily  reliant  on  donations  and
sponsors.

The motto of the school is: “because of your light, we see the  light”,  and
the principal equated this visit by Parliament to be that  light  that  they
can see.

Mr Leonard Madantsyela  made  the  presentation  on  behalf  of  the  School
Governing Board. He thanked the NCOP for visiting the school and wished  the
delegates well during their interactions with different stakeholders.

The school identified the following challenges:
    • The woodwork of the roofs needs urgent attention.
    • The roofs of the walkways need to be replaced.
    • The server in the computer room is too small to handle the volume that
      the school uses and this negatively affects the training that  can  be
      given.
    • A recreation hall is needed to promote drama, music and indoor sport.
    • The sport field needs to be upgraded.

The growth of  Letaba has been seriously hampered by  the  aftercare  centre
for adults, which is occupying  two  of  the  hostels.  There  are  concerns
around the fact that adults and children share the  same  premises  and  are
being exposed to liquor, sexual activities, etc. The problem is  exacerbated
by the lack of security measures.

2.5.9.2 Visit to Yingisani School

Mr J Nkuna did the presentation on behalf of the school. The school has  265
learners with multiple disabilities. The school, like Letaba  School,  faces
a number of challenges which include the following:
    • Classroom shortages.
    • Lack of hostel accommodation.
    • Inadequate computers.
    • A library that is well equipped.
    • An administrative block.
    • A need for a diagnostic and audiology block.

The school is experiencing the problem of being vandalised and  this  causes
a security threat to both learners and staff. The school is requesting  that
the DOE erect a security fence around the school to minimise the damages  to
the fencing.

The neighboring school, Letaba, has  a  tarred  road  and  Yingisani  has  a
gravel road. Submissions were made for the road to  be  tarred.  During  the
rainy period the gravel road becomes inaccessible.

There is a need for recreational activities and  athletic,  soccer,  netball
and volleyball fields are urgently needed. It  is  important  that  students
are able to use recreational facilities to  integrate  them  and  make  sure
that they do not feel marginalized.

2.6. Theme 6: Structures and Institution Set-up by Government: The  Past  10
Years of Democracy towards the Advancement of Women: Meeting with Women

2.6.1. Presentation by Deputy Chairperson of  the  NCOP,  the  Hon.  Mrs.  P
Hollander

The Deputy Chairperson commended government and the country  in  general  on
the progress  that  is  being  made  with  regard  to  the  empowerment  and
emancipation of women.  However, it  was  quickly  pointed  out  that  while
progress  has  been  made  in  enacting  gender  sensitive  legislation  and
establishing organisations to address women’s issues, more needs to be  done
in  ensuring  that  those  legislations  are   adequately   and   coherently
implemented.

It was noted that despite the structures put up by  government  with  regard
to the empowerment of women in the workplace, the private sector still  lags
behind when coming to advancement of women. State organs need  to  lead  the
way in the empowerment of women as  examples  to  the  private  sector.  The
Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act also advocates for  preference
for black women when it  comes  to  issues  of  procurement.  Tender  Advice
Centres  (TACS)  are  also  highlighted  as  mechanisms  to   increase   the
participation  of  marginalised  groups  (including  women)  in  the  public
procurement system.  With  the  increasing  emphasis  on  broad-based  Black
Economic Empowerment (BEE), it is foreseen that black  women  will  be  more
empowered in the future. To that effect, section 2(d) of the BEE Act  53  of
2003 provides this as one of  its  objectives:  “to  facilitate  broad-based
economic empowerment by increasing the extent to which black women  own  and
manage  existing  and  new  enterprises,  and  increasing  their  access  to
economic activities, infrastructure and skills training.”

The government has committed itself to the adoption of  the  entire  Beijing
Platform  for  Action.  Thus,  women’s  equal  access   to   resources   and
opportunities and equal treatment in economic and social life are, in  turn,
necessary for the full realisation of their  human  rights.  Lack  of  equal
access to resources and opportunity is a denial of rights, which results  in
the perpetuation of poverty for many women.

There have also been major achievements in government  at  higher  decision-
making level. In 1997, women  were  only  31,57%  of  the  total  number  of
ministers and deputy ministers, at the moment the  figure  lies  at  44,89%.
Seven out of nine provinces have now met the minimum  30%  quota  for  women
representation.  Furthermore,  about  27%  of  women  are  in   the   senior
management level in the  public  service.  Currently,  there  is  a  process
involving government, working together  with  civil  society  organisations,
the Commission  on  Gender  Equality  and  the  Legislatures  to  develop  a
National Programme of Action on Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality  for
the next ten years. There is also the Presidential Working  Group  on  Women
as well as Women’s Parliament to deal solely with women issues.

2.6.2. Presentation by Dr. T Maitse, Gender Commission

The Commission on Gender Equality (CGE) is an  independent,  statutory  body
established in terms of Section 187 of  the  Constitution  of  South  Africa
(Act 108 of 1996). The role of the CGE is  to  promote  respect  for  gender
equality and the protection, development and attainment of gender  equality.
The powers and functions of the  CGE  are  outlined  in  the  Commission  on
Gender Equality Act 39 of 1996. In terms of Section 11(1)(a)  of  this  Act,
the CGE must, inter alia:

    • Monitor and evaluate policies and practices of organs of State at  any
      level, public bodies, private businesses and  other  institutions.  In
      order to promote gender equality and make any recommendations that  it
      deems necessary.
    •  Conduct  information  and  education  programmes  to  foster   public
      awareness  on  gender  equality,  and  to  communicate  its   research
      findings.
    • Investigate gender-related complaints, subpoena if individuals do  not
      volunteer information that will help it to do its work effectively.
    • Have the ability to on its own  and/or  with  others  institute  legal
      action that will impact on the promotion of gender equality and/or the
      rights of women.

Dr Maitse stated that the  existence  of  the  institutional  framework  for
gender  equality  is  a  key  component  of  the  Government’s   commitment.
Structures such as the Commission on Gender  Equality,  the  Office  on  the
Status of Women in the Presidency as well as in the Premiers’ offices and  a
Minister responsible for gender are  an  important  framework  that  ensures
that issues that affect women are not left out of the  national  agenda  for
transformation. However, all sectors of society need to commit to  promoting
and  protecting  gender  equality.  The  private  sector   and   traditional
authority should be the key partners in this task.

One of the most serious challenges for bringing about effective equality  is
poverty. Poverty has the potential to undermine the advances that were  made
with regard to women issues, hence programmes that are  meant  to  alleviate
poverty have to take  cognisance  of  its  gendered  nature.  This  includes
planning budgets in a way that addresses the  feminisation  of  poverty  and
the efforts to address the economic empowerment of women.

The implementation of the Domestic Violence Act (DVA)  and  the  Maintenance
is inconsistent, and officials are culprits in this regard.  The  corruption
and ineffectiveness  of  some  officials  discourage  women  from  accessing
support that they deserve.   The  CGE  conducts  education  and  information
programmes, very often in collaboration with  other  stakeholders.  The  CGE
intervenes in litigation as a friend of the court, such  as  the  Omar  case
where the constitutionality of a certain section of the  DVA  was  explored.
It must be clear that the Domestic Violence Act does not only protect  women
but also includes men who are abused by their wives.

2.6.3. Presentation by the Hon  Ms  L  M  T  Xingwana,  Deputy  Minister  of
Minerals and Energy

The  Hon  Xingwana  stated  that  from  the  dawn  of  democracy  in   1994,
government’s commitment and dedication to the restoration of women’s  rights
has always been a priority. The Deputy Minister congratulated the NCOP,  for
creating a platform that gives communities and  government  the  opportunity
to engage in issues that will further make democracy a reality. In  addition
to this process, a need was realised by the government to reach out  to  get
a clear understanding of what is critical for the  people  through  engaging
with them through Imbizos,  and  bringing  Parliament  to  the  People.  The
process of development in South Africa has generally marginalised women  and
deprived them of their control over economic resources  in  spite  the  fact
that South African women are approximately  22  million,  over  50%  of  the
population.
The economic empowerment of women remains a  significant  challenge  in  our
society.  The government and society  in  general,  must  involve  women  in
economic empowerment projects to enable them to improve the lives  of  their
communities. Women,  especially  those  in  rural  areas,  are  amongst  the
poorest and the most marginalised section of society.  With  regard  to  the
role of women in  the  mining  industry,  the  newly  enacted  Minerals  and
Petroleum  Resources  Development   Act,   entrenches   and   provides   for
substantial and meaningful expansion of opportunities for  women  and  their
participation in management, ownership and  procurement  from  existing  and
future mining exploration, and  production  operations.  The  Department  is
aggressive in transforming the mining industry with regard to the  inclusion
of all historically disadvantaged people, women included.

According the Deputy Minister, Limpopo Province is experiencing  a  boom  in
mining and minerals development, which is  the  highest  in  the  last  five
years. A total of 732 applications have been received by the region:

    • 516 Prospecting Rights
    • 35 Mining Rights
    • 36 Conversions (Prospecting)
    • 11 Conversions (Mining)
    • 130 Mining Permits

One of the critical terms and conditions of granting  all  these  rights  is
the inclusion of women before a right  is  granted.  There  is  a  need  for
provincial support to the Regional  Procurement  Strategy  designed  by  the
Regional Office together  with  Trade  and  Investment  Lampoon.  Government
would like women to prepare themselves to participate in  this  strategy  as
soon as it unfolds. Historically  mine  environmental  management  and  mine
rehabilitation have primarily been a white-male-dominated career  discipline
and business in South Africa. However, strategies were developed  to  enable
black women to enter the business of mine environmental management  as  well
as the rehabilitation of mines. The  Department  has  also  adopted  a  pro-
active strategy of change to ensure the  participation  and  involvement  of
black women at the  tiers  of  ownership,  management,  skills  development,
employment  equity,  procurement   and   rural   development   within   mine
environmental management and rehabilitation.

2.6.4. The Community Identified the following Challenges:

    • Child Abuse and Abuse of Grants: the abuse of  children  is  rife  and
      usually comes in the form of  neglect.  While  people  appreciate  the
      effort that government is showing to protect women from  harm,  little
      is being done to ensure that children benefit from the  monthly  child
      support grant. The fact is mothers (usually  young  girls)  spend  the
      money on themselves buying clothes and most often beer.
    • Role of Fathers in Raising Children: It was indicated that the  gender
      awareness that government has undertaken is biased towards  women  and
      does not take into consideration the role that  men  play  in  raising
      children. As a result there is confusion as to the various roles  that
      parents should take in raising their children. For  example,  men  are
      often hiding behind the ‘50/50 principle’ to  avoid  supporting  their
      children.
    • Rape and Rape Offenders: Community members revealed their  unhappiness
      with the early release of rape  offenders.  When  rape  offenders  are
      released early or given light sentences government is actually sending
      the message that rape is not a serious crime,  which  is  contrary  to
      what this government is trying to portray.
    • Empowerment of Women: While government is encouraging women to venture
      into business and become entrepreneurs, the Provincial government must
      ensure that rural women have access  to  information  and  much  more,
      financial resources that government is offering is doing little.
    • Access to Health: It was noted that most local clinics are  not  user-
      friendly (to women) with regard to family planning  and  contraception
      issues. Young girls prefer not to go  to  clinics  for  contraceptives
      (condoms, pills, injections, etc.), because nurses at these facilities
      are not welcoming.  Government  should  also  distribute  condoms  for
      women, which is  known  as  ‘femidom’  to  ensure  that  women  become
      proactive in the process of protecting themselves, and not rely solely
      on men.

2.7. Theme 7: Public Hearing on the Provision of Water and Service  Delivery
by Municipalities

2.7.1 Presentation by the Minister of Water Affairs and  Forestry,  the  Hon
Ms BP Sonjica

The Minister  pointed  out  that  from  1994  to  2003  the  Department  was
responsible for the provision of water to the communities.  The  reason  was
that the other spheres of government did not have the capacity to  implement
this function. However, this function has  since  been  transferred  to  the
district municipalities. The Department remains the custodian of  water  and
is obliged by the Constitution to ensure an equitable provision to  all  the
communities.

She said that before 1994, water was linked  to  landownership.  The  person
who owns the land, by virtue of such ownership, owned  the  water  found  on
that piece of land. The Department has developed a White Paper  and  enacted
the Water Services Act to transform the  situation  where  our  people  have
land, but have no access to water.

She stated that it  is  the  government’s  objective  to  ensure  a  minimum
quality  of  water  in  order  to  prevent  diseases.  The   Department   is
responsible for developing  norms  and  standards.  The  municipalities  are
responsible for the provision from the water resources to the  taps  in  the
households. However, the reality is that  the  local  sphere  of  government
lacks the capacity  and  many  municipalities  do  not  have  the  technical
capacity. It is the Department’s goal to  transfer  the  function  of  water
provision to local government with resources, together with personnel.

Some of the problems relate to the issue  of  cooperative  governance.   The
Minister hopes that the recently  passed  Inter-governmental  Relations  Act
will  go  a  long  way  towards  addressing   the   problems   relating   to
intergovernmental relations.

In her response to questions, the Minister addressed a range of  issues.  In
relation to the Water Boards, the Minister said that although cost  recovery
was  important,  the  emphasis,  as  government  policy,  was  not   profit.
Government wanted the Water Boards to respond to the government policy.

2.7.2 The Honourable Cllr H Mokgobi, Deputy Chairperson of SALGA in Limpopo

The Hone Mokgodie noted that the issues that the local sphere of  government
is seized with are complex, and varied, and are also emotive in nature.

The colonial and apartheid era was not only characterised by the  denial  of
franchise to the majority of our  people,  but  also  the  denial  of  basic
services such as the provision of water. In  1995  a  new  system  of  local
government was put in place. It replaced  the  unelected  and  non-statutory
bodies called the Interim Transitional Councils.

The Deputy Chairperson of SALGA stated  that  when  the  new  municipalities
were elected into office, they were struck by realty  of  the  size  of  the
backlog prevalent in the communities. This showed itself in the  form  of  a
lack of basic infrastructure, lack of resources and institutional  capacity.
In Limpopo, the  problems  were  aggravated  by  the  rural  nature  of  the
province.

Approximately, about half of the municipalities in the  province  are  under
Project Consolidate. They need targeted  and  continuous  institutional  and
administrative  support  to  enable  them  to  fulfil  their  constitutional
mandate.

SALGA continues to play a crucial role in supporting municipalities. In  the
province, sector collaboration has been strengthened  with  the  setting  of
the Provincial water Sector Collaborative Committee, which  is  made  up  of
the Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, the Department  of  Provincial
and Local Government and other interested parties.

The backlogs on water services are as follows:
    • 2,7 million people to be served on RDP standard for the Domestic Water
      Supply.
    • 4,2 million to be served on RDP standard for Domestic Sanitation.
    • 140 Clinics to be served with water supply infrastructure.
    • 326 schools to be served with sanitary facilities.
    • 1 573 schools to be served with water supply infrastructure.
The province has also registered successes:
    • Lephalale Local Municipality is a best case on transfers.
    • The District Municipalities of Sekhukhume,  Mogalakwena  ,  Bohlabela,
      Polokwane, Capricorn and Vhembe have signed transfer agreements.
    • Sector collaboration has been  strengthened  and  aligned  efforts  to
      support water service authorities are in place.
    • The total poor population benefiting from free basic  water  provision
      has increased from 45% to 58%.

SALGA joins the call to declare certain parts of the province struck by  the
drought as disaster areas in order to entitle them national resources.

2.7.3. Mr MT Lehong, CEO of the Lepelle Northern Water Board

Mr Lehong stated that the Water Board was set up in 1997  as  the  successor
to the Phalaborwa, Northern Transvaal and Bosveld Water Boards. Its area  of
jurisdiction covers 72% of the Limpopo Province. A 15 member Board, who  are
appointed by the Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry for a  4-year  term,
constitute its governing structure.

The Water Boards  have  developed  capacity  and  expertise  of  bulk  water
purification and distribution. They operate across municipal boundaries  and
are therefore able to distribute water equitably. Because the  Water  Boards
are focused, they are able to optimally utilise the  benefits  of  economies
of scale, which enhances affordability of water.

He stated that  the  Water  Boards  are  self-financing.  They  raise  their
capital from the open market. Because of  these  considerations,  they  must
generate enough revenues to maintain and sustain their operations, and  meet
their financial obligations.

Mr Lehong emphasised that it is therefore important that water services  are
paid for. Local municipalities, when adopting free basic water policy,  must
make provision to finance them.

The Water Board  intend  to  spent  R67  million  on  the  refurbishment  of
infrastructure.

2.8. Theme 8: Public Hearing On Poverty Alleviation And  Job  Creation:  The
Impact Of EPWP Programme and Other Programmes Directed To  The  Creation  Of
Jobs

2.8.1 Presentation by Mr M. Chauke (Chief Director  for  the  Department  of
Housing)

Mr Chauke said that the March 2005 Labour  Force  Survey  by  Statistics  SA
indicates that recently the employment rate has improved  slightly  in  that
the number of people employed increased from 11,4million in  March  2004  to
11,6 million in September 2004. From September to March  2005  it  increased
to 11,9 million. The  period  between  September  2004  and  March  2005  in
particular showed an increase in employment opportunities of over 250 000.

However, unemployment generally remained high.  In  terms  of  the  expanded
definition, the unemployment rate is still  above  40%.  The  situation  was
made worse by job losses in industries such as construction, which  lost  11
000 jobs within the same  period.  In  Limpopo,  the  trend  has  manifested
itself in slight increase in the rate of unemployment from 31, 2%  in  March
2004 to 32,4 % in March 2005. Predominantly, in Limpopo (and the country  in
general), those that are mostly discouraged from seeking work are women.

The Department of Housing has taken a conscious decision to enhance  efforts
that are aimed at employment  creation,  targeting  people  from  low-income
households. The Comprehensive Plan on Sustainable Human  Settlements,  which
was approved by Cabinet  last year, would utilise the opportunities  created
in housing delivery such as the installation of infrastructure,  the  actual
construction of houses, the construction  of  socio-economic  infrastructure
and the management and maintenance of housing  stock,  to  create  jobs.  It
prescribes for the labour intensive construction  methods  in  the  building
and the development of human settlements including the facilitation  of  job
creation through the establishment of on-site housing  materials  production
activities. In delivery of top structures in the current financial year  for
2004/5, for example, the construction of houses  created  over  30  000  job
opportunities nationally.

On the EPWP programme,  Mr  Chauke,  noted  that  municipalities  have  been
allocated specific responsibilities for developing plans that  will  achieve
the  objectives  of  government.  In  addition,  housing’s  contribution  to
fighting unemployment comes also in the form of EPWP.  Nationally,  a  total
of R2 039 847 043 has been budgeted for the  programme.  For  Limpopo,  five
projects that are estimated to  cost  R32  104  088  have  been  identified.
Government estimates that these will provide 1 325  job  opportunities  with
the targeted jobs including 359 given to youth, 269 to women, and 13 to  the
disabled.

Through the comprehensive  plan,  the  Department  has  put  in  place  some
measures that will  boost  the  performance  of  housing  sector  to  enable
government to achieve the objectives  of  its  programme  of  action.  Among
other  things,  funding  has  been  increased  in  relation  to   subsidies.
Limitations regarding the selling of state subsidies have been reduced  from
8 to 5 years to create more demand in the housing market. The Department  is
confident that the demand for residential property generally will boost  the
construction industry and thereby create more  job  opportunities  for  both
semi-skilled and the unskilled.

Mr Chauke stated that on 30 March 2005, a Memorandum of Understanding  (MoU)
with the Banking Council had been concluded as  part  of  the  work  of  the
Financial Service Charter. Through the MoU banks pledged to invest a  target
of R 42billion in 2008 in the form of various  options  of  housing  finance
for the low to  middle  income  sector.  This  will  enable  increased  home
ownership  for  those  sectors  of  the  society  that  had  been   excluded
previously by  banks;  a  development  that  in  turn  should  increase  the
construction activity. The intention is to  strengthen  the  performance  of
the industry to ensure the creation of jobs.

2.8.2. Presentation by the Hon N Khanyago, Deputy Minister of Public Works

The Deputy Minister indicated that the Expanded Public  Works  Programme  is
aimed at giving people jobs and  skills  that  they  can  use  in  the  near
future. The programme is  not  aimed  at  providing  people  with  permanent
employment. People were  advised  to  go  to  Labour  Centres  for  relevant
advice. On local roads,  the  communities  should  take  an  initiative  and
assist  with  providing  the  services.  Youth  should  be   encouraged   to
participate in EPWP especially those that cannot afford  going  to  tertiary
institutions.

2.8.3. Presentation  by  the  Hon  S  Motimele  MEC  for  Roads  and  Public
Transport

The MEC, referred to road shows held in June yearly on  road  constructions.
The province is  currently  involved  into  two  programmes  (Limpopo  Roads
Agency and Gundu Lashu programmes), which is meant  for  those  who  do  not
have a source of income and women. Eight projects  have  been  completed  in
the Mopani district. There is a Provincial Growth Strategy that is aimed  at
improving people’s lives. Mr Motimele also indicated that not all the  roads
are the responsibility of the province; there are  municipal,  national  and
provincial roads. He indicated that roads to  hospitals  would  be  given  a
priority.

2.8.4. Presentation by the Hon OC Chabane,  MEC  for  Economic  Development,
Environment and Tourism

Mr Chabane reported that there are different projects  directed  to  poverty
alleviation. Most of them emanate from Social Development, Public Works  and
Agriculture departments. Mr Chabane admitted that  some  projects  inherited
problems since their inception and sometimes the profit  that  is  generated
cannot sustain them. Projects were never assessed  for  sustainability.  The
province is currently reviewing the projects that have  faltering  in  order
to link them to the job market.

In relation to skills training and finance, there  are  offices  located  in
most municipalities. They  provide  business  advice  and  how  to  draw  up
business plans for free. They are funded by the State  and  provide  finance
for farmers.

2.8.5. Presentation by the Minister of Housing, the Hon Ms L Sisulu

In responding to the public, the Hon Minister  admitted  that  between  1994
and 2001 most  housing  projects  went  wrong.  Some  contractors  were  not
adequately capacitated to do  the  job.  As  a  result  some  projects  were
blocked. Those  blocked  projects  will  commence  as  soon  as  funding  is
available and that will also lead to job creation.

Furthermore, houses that have problems will be repaired. The  community  was
requested to assist in identifying the houses. Currently, municipalities  do
not have sufficient  personnel  to  deal  with  housing  issues.   In  2006,
approximately  200  000  emergency  houses  will  be  built  to  cater   for
vulnerable groups.

2.8.6. Presentation by the MEC for Local Government and Housing, the Hon  Ms
M Mashabane

The honourable Ms Mashabane reported that emergency houses  would  be  built
in 2006. Houses for the poor will also be built in cities and  suburbs.  She
admitted that some houses were built in wrong  places  hence  relocation  is
considered.  Communities  will  be  visited  to  verify  beneficiary  lists.
Learnerships are meant to provide skills  to  those  who  have  not  started
working. She concluded by encouraging the communities to  report  all  fraud
and corruption practices.

2.8.7. Visit to local EPWP Projects

The NCOP visited the three EPWP projects to observe progress that was  being
made in the implementation of projects, and challenges facing government.

2.8.7.1. Myakayaka to Mafarana Road Project

This road project is one of the EPWP pilot  projects  awarded  to  13  local
contractors by the Department of Public Works. The project  has  employed  a
total of 86 local residents, of  which  51  are  women  and  25  are  youth.
Employees are paid R30 per completed task,  and  they  can  only  perform  a
maximum of two tasks per day. The going  rate  of  R30  was  informed  by  a
survey wherein the  Department  of  Public  Works  established  the  payment
trends for farm and community workers. Currently, the project cost R550  000
per kilometer, and the lifespan of the  constructed  road  is  estimated  at
least 5 years.

2.8.7.2. Lefara Road Project

The Lefara Road Project is part  of  the  Local  Municipalities’  Integrated
Development  Planning  Programme  (IDP)   funded   through   the   Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG). Initially, in the implementation process of  the
project, EPWP guidelines were not  adhered  to  as  stipulated  in  the  MIG
policy.  For  example,  contractors   used   labour   reductive   technology
(machinery) in the construction of the road to cut  down  labour  costs  and
increase profit, which is contrary  to  EPWP  objectives.    Currently,  the
project cost R350 000 per kilometre, and the  lifespan  of  the  constructed
road is estimated at least 5 years.

2.8.7.3. Petanenge Project

The Petanenge Road Project is also a MIG funded project which forms part  of
the R2,9 million grant  allocated  to  four  surrounding  villages  (Serare,
Lusaka, and Refara). The road project is complete;  however,  concerns  were
raised by the delegation.
2.8.7.4.  The  NCOP  Delegation  made   the   Following   Observations   and
Recommendations:
     • It was observed that pupils and teachers of Malwandla Primary  School
       used the nearby bush for ablutions. Toilets  could  not  be  utilised
       because of lack of water. It was recommended that  ‘dry’  toilets  be
       constructed as a matter of urgency.
     • Machinery was extensively used in the construction of both  Petanenge
       and Lefara Projects. Contractors used machinery to  cut  down  labour
       costs and increase profit margin. This is  clearly  contrary  to  the
       objectives of the EPWP programme, which is  to  create  jobs  through
       labour intensive construction methods.
     • It was noted that there was no budget allocated for  the  maintenance
       of the constructed roads.  The  roads  constructed  were  of  a  poor
       quality and poorly constructed.
     • Questions were raised by the delegation with regard to the manner  in
       which funds were allocated to projects. It seems the municipality was
       hurriedly allocating funds to projects to reduce under-spending.
     • The delegation recommended that an increase on the R30 per task  rate
       be increased in accordance with EPWP guidelines.
     • It was  recommended  that  the  Provincial  government  engage  local
       municipalities to  develop  maintenance  plans  for  the  constructed
       roads. The road from Koop-Letsitele should be given priority  in  the
       next financial year.
     •  The  Delegation  recommended  that  follow-up  be  made  on  matters
       pertaining to the tender committee terms of  reference,  whether  the
       municipality received the funds on time and the rational of the  1,5%
       deduction by the municipality from the contractors.

3: PRESIDENT  THABO  MBEKI’S  ANNUAL  ADDRESS  TO  THE  NCOP:  THE  PEOPLE’S
PARLIAMENT AT WORK WITH OUR PEOPLE

In his address to the NCOP, the President of the nation indicated  that  the
programme of Taking Parliament to the People must remain a  central  feature
of the country’s democracy. Taking in  consideration  the  inherited  legacy
and the challenges faced by  nation  on  issues  of  service  delivery,  the
institution of Parliament has to play a significant role with regard to  the
process of the reconstruction and development of  the  country.  Hence,  the
NCOP’s regular interaction with the people would contribute greatly  to  the
realisation of the objective  that  Government  should  be  transparent  and
accountable.  However  people  must  be  sufficiently  empowered  with   the
knowledge  they  need  to  enable  them  constructively  to  participate  in
determining their future.
He  indicated  that  the  NCOP  occupies  a  unique  position   within   the
constitutional system of governance. This derives from the fact that  it  is
the only institution within this system that straddles all three spheres  of
the co-operative  governance  construct  (the  three  tiers  of  government:
national, provincial and  local).  This  places  the  NCOP  in  a  strategic
oversight position. It has  the  possibility  and  the  mandate  to  keep  a
constant eye on the processes that must integrate legislative and  executive
decisions  in  all  spheres  of  government   and   ensure   the   practical
implementation of these decisions.
The President noted that municipalities must have the capacity to serve  all
people and have the requisite  capacity  to  provide  regular  and  reliable
services  to  citizens  as  well  as  being  at   the   forefront   of   the
reconstruction  and  development  of  the  country.  There  is  a  need  for
efficient and effective municipalities to ensure that poor  households  have
access to basic infrastructure and free basic services. Furthermore, as  the
EPWP programme is accelerated there is  a  need  for  municipalities  to  be
strong to be able to work in partnership with other spheres of government.
He indicated that the Cabinet is engaged in an Imbizo process that  involves
visits to municipalities. The central purpose of the  Izimbizo  is  to  hear
directly from the people about their  concerns  and  their  needs,  allowing
them to raise any issue on their minds, with no restrictions.  This  process
has helped greatly to sensitise the  Cabinet  to  the  expectations  of  the
people on many issues of immediate interest to them. The  people’s  response
confirmed that government  is  correct  in  its  emphasis  of  the  critical
importance of local government as the one sphere of  government  that  faces
the greatest challenge to maintain the closest  possible  contact  with  the
people, the best placed to give practical expression to the vision that  the
people shall govern.
The President expressed concern against people  who  seek  to  occupy  local
political office (in the coming local elections) for  personal  and  selfish
reasons:  he indicated that the unseemly scramble  for  political  power  in
municipal government appears to be driven by the  desire  to  abuse  elected
positions to lay hands on the economic resources that the local  authorities
have the possibility to access.  This  includes  the  power  of  members  of
municipal executive authorities  to  determine  the  outcomes  of  municipal
tendering processes, regardless of  the  fact  that  the  Municipal  Finance
Management Act  expressly  prohibits  the  involvement  of  councillors  and
mayors in adjudicating bids for municipal tenders. The nation  cannot  build
such a system of municipal government  by  electing  councillors  driven  by
criminally selfish motives, who have absolutely no interest in  serving  the
people and who do not belong among those determined to  occupy  the  forward
trenches in the difficult and complex struggle for  the  reconstruction  and
development of the country, focused on the achievement  of  the  goal  of  a
better life for all.
The  President  urged  the  NCOP  to  use  its  powerful  voice  as  elected
representatives of the people, to urge all parties and local communities  to
present as  candidate  councillors  people  they  are  convinced  are  truly
committed to serve the people of South Africa. The NCOP  must  indicate  the
kind of behaviour that is unacceptable in the nomination processes, as  well
as the behaviour that is acceptable in the nation’s democracy, to  help  the
masses  of  our  people  to  understand  the  kinds  of   activity   elected
legislative organs and the rest of governance system find impermissible.  As
the President noted, this would help to create  the  national  climate  that
will help people to elect an echelon of  municipal  leaders  who  enjoy  the
confidence of the people.
President Mbeki stated that it was indicated  that  the  Municipal  Izimbizo
differ  significantly  from  previous  provincial  Izimbizo.  The  strategic
objective of a Municiapl Imbizo is to  help  the  municipal  authorities  to
meet their obligations, regardless of their  size  and  resource  endowment.
This process has been greatly assisted by work done by  Project  Consolidate
and the Integrated Development Plan (IDP) Hearings Panel  Reports,  both  of
which detail the constraints impeding effective service delivery and  socio-
economic  development.  Part  of  the  problem  was  identified  by  Project
Consolidate, which said that almost 20%  of  municipal  posts  were  vacant,
significantly this included 15 of the top managerial  positions,  85  within
the Professional Category including engineers, town planners and so  on  and
130 skilled artisans required for maintenance and operations.
The President said that it is obvious that without these skilled  personnel,
the district will continue to experience  serious  shortfalls  in  terms  of
meeting its own IDP objectives. During the  Gert  Sibande  Imbizo  attention
was also drawn to gross imbalances in terms of the  staff  employed  by  the
various  local  municipalities  in   the   district.   Govan   Mbeki   Local
Municipality accounts for about 25%  of  the  population  of  the  district,
while Albert Luthuli Local Municipality has 21% of the population.  And  yet
Albert Luthuli Municipality employs only 191 people, compared to the  1  448
employed by the Govan Mbeki Municipality. It is perfectly obvious that  with
such a small staff, Albert Luthuli can never hope  to  achieve  any  of  its
development objectives.
The reason for this extraordinary disparity became very clear  when  it  was
explained that Govan Mbeki Municipality covered the town of  Secunda,  while
the Albert Luthuli Municipality  covered  the  former  KwaNdebele  bantustan
area. In order words, the democratic order has  permitted  the  perpetuation
of the gross imbalance that  existed  during  the  apartheid  years  between
white South Africa and bantustan South Africa.
The President recognised the the fact that  most  municipalities  have  made
significant efforts to ensure  that  they  establish  the  Ward  Committees.
However, it was noted that there are some problems that need  to  be  solved
to improve the effectiveness of these Committees, which play  a  vital  role
in ensuring the interaction between the people and  the  governance  system.
Ward Committee members raise such questions as the need to  ensure  adequate
funding of their Committees,  some  emolument  for  the  members,  improving
interaction between the Committee and the Councils  and  feedback  from  the
Councils, extending the mandates of  the  Committees  beyond  one  year  and
strengthening the Speakers’ Offices to improve  their  capacity  to  support
the ward committees.
The President stated that these  detailed  matters  about  local  government
were aimed at encouraging the NCOP to take the issue  of  strengthening  the
system of local government as one of its major challenges.  the  NCOP  would
necessarily also have to focus on the realisation of the  objective  of  co-
operative governance, without which it would not be  possible  to  build  an
effective system of local government. The President stated that the  central
task facing the nation during this Second Decade of  Freedom  is  to  ensure
the implementation of the policies and programmes that have  evloved  during
the eleven years of  liberation.  This  decade  must  see  the  nation  move
forward to achieve the targets set with regard to such important matters  as
the reduction of  unemployment  and  poverty  and  the  achievement  of  the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).


                           MONDAY, 26 JANUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism, on 25 January 2006 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


         (i)     Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and Prohibition and
              Regulation of Certain Activities in Areas of Armed Conflict
              Bill [B 42 – 2005] (National Assembly – sec 75).

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    1) Government Immovable Asset Management Bill, 2006, submitted by the
       Minister of Public Works on 7 December 2005. Referred to the
       Portfolio Committee on Public Works and the Select Committee on
       Public Services.
    2) Carriage by Air Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of
       Transport on 12 December 2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee
       on Transport and the Select Committee on Public Services.
    3) Constitution Fourteenth Amendment Bill, 2006, submitted by the
       Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development on 21 November
       2005. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
       Constitutional Development and the Select Committee on Security and
       Constitutional Affairs.

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance


      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board on
         the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year ended
         31 December 2004.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board on
         the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2004.


      c) Government Notice No 1179 published in Government Gazette No 28306
         dated 7 December 2005: Approval of allocations to provincial and
         local government spheres, in terms of the Division of Revenue Act,
         2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).


2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises


      a) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Ltd for 2004-2005,
         including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005.

3.    The Minister of Water Affairs and Forestry


      a) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.


      b) Report and Financial Statements of Ikangala Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.

      c) Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
         ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
         Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
         2005.

      d) Government Notice No 1180 published in Government Gazette No 28307
         dated 9 December 2005: Invitation to submit written comments on the
         proposed list of particular trees and particular group of trees
         under section 12(1)(a) and (b) of the National Forests Act, 1998
         (Act No 84 of 1998).


                           MONDAY, 30 JANUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

                 1. Assent by President in respect of Bill





    5 Education Laws Amendment Bill [B23D-2005] –Act No 24 of 2005 (assented
     to and signed by President on 23 December 2005).




TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development


      a) Medium-Term Strategic Framework for the Department of Justice and
         Constitutional Development for 2005/06 – 2008/09.


                          TUESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2006


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


       a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the Audit Outcomes for
          2004-2005 [RP 223-2005].

2.    The Minister of Sport and Recreation


      a) Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2004-
         2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
         Statements for 2004-2005.


National Council of Provinces


1.    The Chairperson


      a) Notice received from the MEC for Local Government, Housing and
         Traditional Affairs in KwaZulu-Natal regarding the investigation in
         the Newcastle Municipality in terms of section 106(3) of the Local
         Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000).
         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.

      b) Notice received from the Minister of Local Government, Housing and
         Traditional Affaris in KwaZulu-Natal regarding the investigation
         in the Umkhanyakhude District Municipality in terms of section
         106(3) of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act
         No 32 of 2000).

         Referred to the Select Committee on Local Government and
         Administration.


         Copies of the notices are available from the office of the Clerk
         of Papers.


                          THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

        1) Revenue Laws Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2005] – Act No 31 of 2005
           (assented to and signed by President on 27 January 2006); and
        2) Revenue Laws Second Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2005] – Act No 32 of
           2005 (assented to and signed by President on 27 January 2006).

                 2. Message from President
    The Speaker and the Chairperson received the following message, dated
    25 January 2006, from the President, calling a Joint Sitting of the
    National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces:


        CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE NATIONAL
        COUNCIL OF PROVINCES:


        In terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of
        South Africa, Act No 108 of 1996, read with Rule 7(1)(a) of the
        Joint Rules of Parliament, I hereby call a joint sitting of the
        National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on Friday,
        3 February 2006 at 11:00, in order to deliver my Third Annual
        Address to the Third Parliament.


        Regards,


        T M MBEKI

TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Communications


    (a)    Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary Conference in Marrakesh,
        Morocco in 2002 of the International Telecommunications Union,
        tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


     b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Final Acts of the Plenipotentiary
        Conference in Marrakesh, Marocco in 2002 of the International
        Telecommunications Union.


                           MONDAY, 6 FEBRUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bill


     (1)    The Minister of Public Works


            i) Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1 – 2006]
               (National Assembly – sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
               prior notice of its introduction published in Government
               Gazette No 28135 of 14 October 2005.]


         Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Public
         Works of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint
         Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule
         160, on 7 February 2006.


         In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification of
         the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three parliamentary
         working days.



                          TUESDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2006



ANNOUNCEMENTS:


National Council of Provinces

1.    Referral to committees of papers tabled

    1.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance and the Select Committee on Local Government and
        Administration:


          a) Government Notice No R 1105 published in Government Gazette No
             28226 dated 14 November 2005: Amendment of prescribed fees,
             made in terms of section 36 of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act
             No 24 of 1956).
    2.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Affairs for consideration:

          a) Notice of Regulations made in terms of section 44(1)(a) of  the
             Regulation of Interception of Communications and  Provision  of
             Communication-related Information, 2002 (Act No  70  of  2002),
             submitted in terms of section 44(4) of the Act.


          b) Medium-Term Strategic Framework for the Department  of  Justice
             and Constitutional Development for 2005/06 – 2008/09.



    3.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No 1056 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             28159 dated 25 October 2005: National Policy regarding  Further
             Education and Training  programmes:  Approval  of  the  amended
             schools policy  document,  namely  a  resume  of  instructional
             programmes in schools, Report 550 (2005/09), made in  terms  of
             sections 3(4)(l) and 7 of the National Policy Act, 1996 (Act No
             27 of 1996) and sections 6(A) and 61 of the Schools  Act,  1996
             (Act No 84 of 1996).


          b) Government Notice No 1175 published in  Government  Gazette  No
             28300 dated 7 December 2005: National Policy regarding  Further
             Education  and  Training  programmes:  Approval  of  additional
             Agricultural subjects to be listed in the  National  Curriculum
             Statement Grades 10-12 (General), made  in  terms  of  sections
             3(4)(l) and 7 of the National Policy Act, 1996 (Act  No  27  of
             1996) and sections 6(A) and 61 of the Schools Act, 1996 (Act No
             84 of 1996).

    4.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance:

        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services Board
           on the Registrar of Collective Investment Schemes for the year
           ended 31 December 2004.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Services
           Board on the Registrar of Pension Funds for 2004.


          c) Government Notice No 1179 published in Government Gazette No
             28306 dated 7 December 2005: Approval of allocations to
             provincial and local government spheres, in terms of the
             Division of Revenue Act, 2005 (Act No 1 of 2005).


    5.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Economic and Foreign Affairs for consideration and report:


        a) Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Pty) Ltd for 2004-
           2005, including the
           Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2004-2005.

    6.      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Land and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of Bushbuckridge Water for the
             year ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year
             ended 30 June 2005.

          b) Report and Financial Statements of Ikangala Water for the year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.


          c) Report and Financial Statements of Magalies Water for the year
             ended 30 June 2005, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June
             2005.

    7.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration:

          a) Government Notice No 1180 published in Government Gazette No
             28307 dated 9 December 2005: Invitation to submit written
             comments on the proposed list of particular trees and
             particular group of trees under section 12(1)(a) and (b) of the
             National Forests Act, 1998 (Act No 84 of 1998).

    8.      The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

          b) Report and Financial Statements of Boxing South Africa for 2004-
             2005, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements for 2004-2005.
TABLINGS:

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    Resolution adopted at the conference of the African Parliamentary
    Union, held in Dakar, Senegal on 4-5 December 2005, entitled “Violence
    against women, abandoning female genital mutilation: The role of
    national parliaments”.

    Referred to the Joint Monitoring Committee on Improvement of Quality of
     Life and Status of Women and the Joint Monitoring Committee on
     Improvement of Quality of Life and Status of Children, Youth and
     Disabled Persons.



                          FRIDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2006



TABLINGS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Safety and Security


     a) Proclamation No R.65 published in Government Gazette No 28279 dated
        2 December 2005: Notification by President in accordance with
        section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against
        Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

     b) Proclamation No R.66 published in Government Gazette No 28279 dated
        2 December 2005: Notification by President in accordance with
        section 25 of the Protection of Constitutional Democracy against
        Terrorist and Related Activities Act, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004).

COMMITTEE REPORTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces







                         Parliament of South Africa

      Joint Coordinating Committee on the African Peer Review Mechanism
       A Response to the African Peer Review Mechanism Self-Assessment
                                Questionnaire

                                  Synopsis


     For a copy of the full report, please consult Parliament’s website:
                        http://www.parliament.gov.za



|Contents                                                                 |
|                                                                |        |
|Foreword                                                        |5       |
|                                                                |        |
|Introduction                                                    |7       |
|                                                                |        |
|Democracy and Good Political Governance                         |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Methodology                                                     |9       |
|Limitations                                                     |9       |
|Key findings and recommendations                                |9       |
|                                                                |        |
|International Codes and Standards                               |10      |
|Objective 1: Prevention and reduction of intra- and inter-state |10      |
|conflict                                                        |        |
|Objective 2: Constitutional democracy, including periodic       |11      |
|political competition and opportunity for choice, the rule of   |        |
|law, citizen rights and supremacy of the Constitution           |        |
|Objective 3: Promotion and protection of economic, social and   |12      |
|cultural rights, civil and political rights as enshrined in     |        |
|African and international human instruments                     |        |
|Objective 4: Uphold the separation of powers, including the     |12      |
|protection of the independence of the judiciary and of an       |        |
|effective legislature                                           |        |
|Objective 5: Ensure accountable, efficient and effective public |13      |
|office holders and civil servants                               |        |
|Objective 6: Fighting corruption in the political sphere        |13      |
|Objective 7: Promotion and protection of the rights of women”   |14      |
|Objective 8: Promotion and protection of the rights of children |14      |
|and young persons                                               |        |
|Objective 9: Promotion and protection of the rights of          |15      |
|vulnerable persons, including internally displaced persons and  |        |
|refugees                                                        |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Economic Governance and Management                              |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Limitations and Challenges of the Committee                     |17      |
|                                                                |        |
|Key Findings and Recommendations                                |17      |
|                                                                |        |
|International codes and standards                               |17      |
|Objective 1: Promote macro-economic policies that support       |17      |
|sustainable development                                         |        |
|Objective 2: Implement sound, transparent and predictable       |18      |
|government economic policies                                    |        |
|Objective 3: Promote sound public finance management            |19      |
|Objective 4: Fight corruption and money laundering              |19      |
|Objective 5: Accelerate regional integration by participating in|19      |
|the harmonisation of monetary, trade and investment policies    |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Corporate Governance                                            |        |
|                                                                |        |
|South Africa’s Enabling Environment and Regulatory Framework    |22      |
|                                                                |        |
|Good Corporate Citizenship, Socially Responsible Investment     |24      |
|(SRI)                                                           |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Key Focus Areas of SRI in South Africa                          |25      |
|The impact of business on the environment                       |25      |
|Labour and the workplace                                        |27      |
|Disability and business                                         |28      |
|HIV/AIDS and the workplace                                      |28      |
|                                                                |        |
|Areas for further consideration                                 |29      |
|                                                                |        |
|Socio-economic Development                                      |        |
|                                                                |        |
|International Codes and Standards                               |30      |
|Objective 1: Promoting self-reliance in development and building|32      |
|capacity for self-sustainable development in South Africa       |        |
|Objective 2: Accelerating socio-economic development to achieve |33      |
|sustainable development and poverty eradication in South Africa |        |
|Objective 3: Strengthening policies, delivery mechanism and     |35      |
|outcomes in healthcare in South Africa                          |        |
|Strengthening policies, delivery mechanism and outcomes in      |36      |
|combating HIV and AIDS in South Africa                          |        |
|Strengthening policies, delivery mechanism and outcomes in      |37      |
|education in South Africa                                       |        |
|Objective 4: Ensuring Affordable Access to Water, Sanitation and|39      |
|Energy to all citizens in South Africa, especially the rural    |        |
|poor                                                            |        |
|Ensuring affordable access to information communication and     |40      |
|technology (ICT) in South Africa                                |        |
|Ensuring affordable access to housing (shelter) and land in     |41      |
|South Africa                                                    |        |
|Objective 5: Progress towards gender equality in all critical   |42      |
|areas of concern, including equal access to education for girls |        |
|at all levels in South Africa                                   |        |
|Objective 6: Encouraging broad-based participation in           |43      |
|development by all stakeholders at all levels in South Africa   |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Community Consultations                                         |        |
|                                                                |        |
|Key Findings                                                    |45      |
|Democracy & Good Political Governance                           |45      |
|Economic Governance and Management                              |46      |
|Corporate Governance                                            |47      |
|Socio-Economic Development                                      |47      |
|Social Assistance                                               |47      |
|Education                                                       |47      |
|Healthcare                                                      |48      |
|                                                                |        |
|Conclusion                                                      |48      |

Foreword

The Joint Coordinating Committee on the African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  is
proud to  table  its  final  report  as  the  culmination  of  an  intensive
parliamentary process.  The Self-Assessment  process  of  the  African  Peer
Review Mechanism is indeed a useful tool to assist our nation to conduct  an
honest analytical reflection on our  progress  as  a  developing  democracy.
Parliament takes this opportunity to applaud the architects of this  African
initiative.  In particular we acknowledge the leading  role  played  by  our
President, Thabo Mbeki in  the  conceptualisation  and  furtherance  of  the
‘peer review’ concept as a means for African  States  to  work  collectively
towards our common purpose of the  development  of  our  Continent  and  her
peoples.

In engaging with  the  African  Peer  Review  Mechanism  (APRM),  it  became
evident that the role of Parliaments in this continental mechanism  was  not
adequately elaborated.  We believe that South Africa’s contribution  to  the
further development of the APRM  has  been  an  important  consideration  in
defining our Parliament’s role in our country process.   It  is  hoped  that
using the South African context where the  independence  of  Parliament  and
its oversight of government are constitutionally  mandated,  to  define  the
active and independent  participation  of  Parliament  in  the  peer  review
process will contribute significantly to strengthening other Parliaments  in
Africa.

Parliament established formal structures to participate in the country self-
assessment and other processes of the  APRM.   In  determining  Parliament’s
approach  to  the  country  process,  careful  consideration  was  given  to
avoiding duplication with the process driven by the  Peer  Review  Governing
Council.  Parliament therefore considered the peer review  questionnaire  as
a guideline to focus on strategic issues where  Parliament  can  add  value.
In  particular,  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  Parliament  as   a
democratic institution in  South  Africa  was  considered  as  an  important
dimension of the review.  To this end Parliament  will  still  embark  on  a
comprehensive self-assessment  to  be  conducted  by  an  independent  panel
during 2006.

Parliament views our country’s peer review process as a beginning to an
ongoing assessment of our nation with a particular focus on democracy, good
governance, rights, freedoms and development.  Parliament will have an
ongoing role in overseeing the implementation of the programme of action
that will emanate from the peer review mechanism.

During this first assessment, many critical issues were highlighted and
many lessons learnt.  While Parliament placed great emphasis on engaging
civil society organisations, corporate South Africa and ordinary citizens,
the limited time for the completion of the process negatively affected the
extent of these engagements.  We are confident that we will do better in
subsequent peer review processes where we now have a better understanding
of what is required and the time needed to complete the process adequately.
 We are however encouraged by the positive public response to the process
and the invaluable outcomes.  We have highlighted critical issues that will
occupy the attention of Members of Parliament in vibrant debates on
policies, legislation and service delivery in our country for a while to
come.

Finally, we would like to thank the Chairpersons of the Joint Ad Hoc
Committees for their exceptional leadership, Members of the Joint
Coordinating Committee and Joint Ad Hoc Committees for their valuable
participation and the Parliamentary staff for their tireless assistance.

We are certain that the issues raised in this report will contribute
significantly and add value to the Country Self-Assessment Report and
Programme of Action for the good of our country.




B Mbete                           MJ Mahlangu

Speaker of the NA                            Chairperson on the NCOP


Introduction

President Mbeki formally submitted South Africa to  a  peer  review  process
under the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) on 28 September 2005.

The APRM is an African-owned and driven initiative  that  seeks  to  improve
governance and national management.  It is voluntarily  acceded  to  by  the
Member States of the African Union as an African self-monitoring  mechanism.
 The main purpose of the APRM is to encourage  participating  Member  States
to  ensure  that  their  policies  and  practices  conform  to  the   agreed
political, economic and corporate governance values,  codes  and  standards.
It further seeks to ensure that the mutually  agreed  objectives  in  socio-
economic  development  elaborated  in  the  New  Partnership  for   Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) are achieved.

The process of self-assessment and review is divided into five stages:

    ❑ Developing a country Self-Assessment report and a draft Programme of
      Action
    ❑ Drafting an Issues Paper by the African Peer Review Team
    ❑ Development of a Country Report and Programme of Action by the
      African Peer Review Team
    ❑ Consideration of the Country Report and Programme of Action by the
      African Peer Review Panel and recommendations to the African Peer
      Review Forum
    ❑ Public Tabling of the Country Report and Programme of Action
The  Country  Self-Assessment  for  the  African   Peer   Review   Mechanism
Questionnaire forms the basis of South Africa’s peer review.

The  questionnaire  is  divided  into  four  sections  containing   specific
objectives, questions and indicators.  The  Sections  of  the  questionnaire
are:

        a) Democracy & Good Political Governance
        b) Economic Governance and Management
        c) Corporate Governance
        d) Socio-economic Development

Parliament has played an active and independent role in the country self-
assessment and review.  In engaging with the African Peer Review Mechanism
(APRM), it became evident that the role of Parliaments in this continental
mechanism has not been adequately elaborated.  South Africa’s contribution
to the development of the APRM was an important consideration in defining
Parliament’s role in the country process.

Public participation in Parliament’s process was an obvious imperative.
Parliament is ideally placed to broaden public involvement in the peer
review process and stimulate public awareness and dialogue on the matters
to be reviewed.

Given the  timeframe  for  the  completion  of  the  review  process,  joint
structures were established to streamline Parliamentary processes:
    ❑ A Joint Coordinating Committee co-chaired by the Presiding Officers.

    ❑ The following Joint Ad-hoc Committees were established  based  on  the
      four sections of the questionnaire:

        a) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Democracy & Good Political Governance
        b) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Economic Governance & Management
        c) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Corporate Governance
        d) Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Socio-economic Development

The ad hoc Committees solicited public views through hearings and written
submissions. The Committees also conducted independent research and
received briefings from identified stakeholders.  Community consultations
were conducted in municipalities across the country.

The Report is organised into five chapters.  The chapters document the
processes, findings and recommendations of each of the Joint Ad Hoc
Committees and the community consultations.  The report does not provide a
complete account of the issues under the various sections of the
questionnaire due to the short timeframes and unavailability of
participants/stakeholders due primarily to the timing of the self-
assessment process.

The section of the questionnaire on democracy and good political  governance
required an assessment of  Parliament.   The  Joint  Coordinating  Committee
considered it most  appropriate  that  an  independent  panel  conduct  such
assessment.  Unfortunately, due to time constraints and  the  unavailability
of identified panellists at short notice, this assessment was  not  possible
for the purpose of Parliament’s APRM process.  The role  of  Parliament  and
Parliamentarians under the four thematic areas addressed  by  the  Joint  Ad
Hoc Committees has however been highlighted in each Section.  An  assessment
of  the  independence,  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  Parliament  will
however be conducted as a priority project for Parliament during 2006.




Democracy and Good Political Governance



The  mandate  of  the  Committee  derives  from  Section  1  of   the   APRM
Questionnaire containing the following objectives:


    ❑ Prevention and reduction of intra-and inter-state conflicts
    ❑ Constitutional Democracy,  including  periodic  political  competition
      and opportunity for choice, the  rule  of  law,  citizens  rights  and
      supremacy of the Constitution
    ❑ Promotion and protection of economic, social and cultural rights
    ❑  Uphold  separation  of  powers,  including  the  protection  of   the
      independence of the judiciary and of an effective legislature
    ❑ Accountable, efficient and effective public office holders  and  civil
      servants
    ❑ Fighting corruption in the political sphere
    ❑ Promotion and protection of the rights of women
    ❑ Promotion and protection of the rights of children
    ❑  Promotion  and  protection  of  the  rights  of  vulnerable   groups,
      including refugees and internally displaced persons

Methodology

The Committee undertook a number of  activities  between  October  2005  and
January 2006 to give effect to its mandate. These include  participating  in
an orientation workshop; identifying focus areas to  guide  the  Committee’s
work; conducting public hearings in three provinces; conducting an audit  of
all international instruments and standards relating to democracy  and  good
political governance that have been signed, ratified and/or  acceded  to  by
South Africa; as well as inviting written submissions on questions  relating
to the objectives of the Committee’s focus areas.

Limitations

The Committee noted with concern various  factors  that  limited  its  work,
such   as   tight   timeframes;   compromised   public   participation   and
unavailability of stakeholders.

Key findings and recommendations
The  following  comprises   an   overview   of   the   main   findings   and
recommendations of the Committee.


International Codes and Standards


The  Committee  found  that  South  Africa  is   generally   internationally
compliant, as it has signed and/or  ratified  or  acceded  to  most  of  the
relevant international instruments enumerated  in  the  APRM  questionnaire.
South Africa is also compliant with the reporting requirements contained  in
the instruments.  Furthermore,  various  pieces  of  legislation  have  been
passed to make human rights obligations  arising  from  these  international
instruments part of South African law. These are discussed in  the  relevant
sections below.

|Recommendation                                                  |
|                                                                |
|Parliament should develop mechanisms to proactively initiate    |
|signature and ratification of all outstanding international     |
|instruments.                                                    |

Objective 1: Prevention and Reduction of Intra and Inter-State Conflict

The Committee resolved that South Africa’s democracy is not currently  under
threat from external forces, as the country is  not  in  conflict  with  any
country. On the contrary,  South  Africa  has  cordial  relations  with  all
African States, from Algeria  to  Zimbabwe,  in  alphabetical  order.  Also,
South Africa plays a key role in peacekeeping missions  in  Africa,  and  is
presently listed as the tenth largest Troop Contributing  Country  (TCC)  to
the United Nations. At present a number of South  African  National  Defence
Force troops are deployed at various stations in the DRC, Burundi,  as  well
as in Ethiopia  and  Eritrea.1  The  challenge  that  remains  is  to  allay
society’s perception that the Government of South  Africa  spends  too  much
money on peacekeeping operations in other countries with  money  that  could
be used domestically to improve service delivery.

The Committee further resolved that  statistics  used  to  describe  poverty
levels  are  outdated,  and  thus  do  not  necessarily  constitute  a  true
reflection of the poverty situation in the country.  Moreover,  despite  the
fact that social grants are available as a mechanism to  alleviate  poverty,
many potential beneficiaries do not access it, as they are not aware of  its
existence. In instances where they are aware of such services, they  do  not
know how to access it practically.  Poverty and underdevelopment may pose  a
potential source of internal conflict.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|The Department of Foreign Affairs should provide Parliament with|
|regular reports on South African missions deployed in foreign   |
|countries.                                                      |
|The Department of Social Development should provide Parliament  |
|with an assessment report on the impact of its poverty          |
|alleviation mechanisms. This report should evaluate the impact  |
|of such mechanisms, identify shortcomings and introduce plans to|
|address these.                                                  |
|Government departments, particularly the Department of Social   |
|Development, need to intensify their community outreach         |
|campaigns to inform communities about available services and to |
|empower them to access such services.                           |
|Parliament should intensify its oversight function to ensure    |
|that the fight against crime is successfully maintained by the  |
|departments in the criminal justice sector.                     |

Objective  2:  Constitutional  Democracy,   including   periodic   political
competition and opportunity for choice, the rule of law, citizen rights  and
supremacy of the Constitution

The  Committee  resolved  that  South  Africa  does   have   a   functioning
constitutional democracy  in  which  human  rights  are  protected  and  the
citizens of the country can freely dialogue,  participate  in  Parliamentary
processes, as well as criticise and praise Government and  State  structures
with regard to the realisation of their  rights.  Furthermore,  the  country
has reached the stage where opposing views are  not  only  accommodated  and
tolerated, but are actively encouraged. There is general acceptance  of  and
respect for the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of  law.  Various
features  in  the  Constitution  that  promote   democratic   rule   include
provisions protecting the  Constitution  from  arbitrary  amendment;  public
participation in the processes of Government; the principle  of  cooperative
governance; decentralisation of  powers  to  provinces;  a  bill  of  rights
containing specific human rights for individuals and groups; an  independent
Executive, Legislature and Judiciary,  as  well  as  independent  bodies  to
ensure that rights are protected and respected. Public awareness of  Chapter
9 Institutions is still minimal. Independent  Constitutional  bodies  report
poor  feedback  on  recommendations  contained  in  reports   submitted   to
Parliament. As these bodies do  not  have  enforcement  powers,  a  lack  of
feedback seriously compromises the effectiveness of  their  work.  Political
parties have reached a level of maturity  where  they  can  actively  engage
with each  other  without  resorting  to  violence.  The  Committee  finally
resolved that elections held in the country since 1994 can be rated as  free
and fair.




|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|All structures of Government, as well as Parliament, should work|
|to maintain public confidence in the democratic system of       |
|governance by promoting the Constitutional principles of        |
|accountability, transparency and inclusivity.                   |
|Political parties are central to the promotion and entrenchment |
|of democracy and should thus take responsibility for promoting  |
|democratic rule in the country.                                 |
|Parliament should develop mechanisms to actively engage Chapter |
|9 Institutions.                                                 |
|The Electoral Commission should be encouraged to continue its   |
|election outreach campaign, with a view to improving voter      |
|registration.                                                   |

Objective 3: Promotion and  Protection  of  Economic,  social  and  cultural
rights,  civil  and  political  rights   as   enshrined   in   African   and
international human instruments

The Committee resolved that the state of human rights in the country can  be
rated as  good  to  excellent  at  the  level  of  policy,  legislation  and
institutional mechanisms. However, at the level of  implementation,  it  can
only be rated as satisfactory, as several challenges remain.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|Constitutional bodies should better inform the public of their  |
|services, including access to these services.                   |
|The South African Human Rights Commission should educate the    |
|public, particularly rural communities, about their human rights|
|and responsibilities. Such education programmes should be       |
|customised in terms of language and format to maximise access by|
|identified target groups.                                       |

Objective 4: Uphold the Separation of Powers, including  the  protection  of
the independence of the judiciary and of an effective Legislature

The Committee resolved that the separation of powers  generally  works  well
in the country. The separation of powers has resulted in a strong  sense  of
independence in  the  execution  of  judicial  functions.  The  Constitution
emphasises the need for the judiciary to  broadly  reflect  the  racial  and
gender  composition  of  South  Africa.   Consequently,   the   process   of
transformation of the Judiciary is in progress, and attempts are being  made
to accelerate the process. There is no legislation in  place  to  deal  with
misconduct by judges which does  not  amount  to  impeachable  conduct,  but
which constitutes  serious  misconduct.  The  oversight  and  accountability
function of the Legislature  is  a  useful  measure  to  ensure  accountable
Government. Whereas the  primary  responsibility  of  the  Executive  is  to
implement laws  and  obligations  arising  from  international  instruments,
structures within the Presidency also deal with internal oversight over  the
Executive.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|Parliament should monitor progress and the pace of              |
|transformation in the judiciary.                                |
|Parliament should intensify its oversight role to ensure that   |
|the Executive is held accountable for service delivery,         |
|ratification of international instruments and reporting on      |
|progress with regard to obligations arising from such           |
|instruments.                                                    |
|Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive should respect,     |
|sustain and uphold the separation of powers as entrenched in the|
|Constitution by subjecting it to ongoing scrutiny.              |
|Parliament should initiate a debate on the separation of powers,|
|with particular reference to the relationship between Parliament|
|and the Executive.                                              |

Objective 5: Ensure  accountable,  efficient  and  effective  public  office
holders and civil servants

The Committee resolved  that  South  Africa’s  Public  Service  operates  in
compliance  with  the  constitutional  values  and  principles   of   Public
Administration outlined in section 195 of the Constitution, as well  as  the
Constitutional requirement of cooperative governance.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|Departments should focus more attention on integrated planning  |
|to ensure coordinated, streamlined and holistic service         |
|delivery.                                                       |
|Government’s programme on public-private partnerships for the   |
|improvement of service delivery should be accelerated and should|
|include civil society organisations.                            |
|Further attention should be given to raising awareness of       |
|Government’s programmes and policies to enable meaningful       |
|community involvement.  Similarly, the role of Parliamentarians |
|in informing their constituencies about government policies and |
|programmes should be accelerated.                               |

Objective 6: Fighting corruption in the political sphere

The Committee resolved that corruption is one of  the  most  serious  crimes
committed in the country. However, the South  African  Government  has  made
major strides in undertaking various initiatives to curb  corruption.  There
are perceptions that exaggerate the true state of  affairs  with  regard  to
the prevalence of corruption in the country.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development must   |
|expedite the finalisation and distribution of the Guideline     |
|Booklet on the Prevention of Corruption and Corrupt Activities  |
|Act.                                                            |
|There is a need for improved coordination between the agencies  |
|responsible for dealing with matters of corruption.             |
|There is a need to build bigger and better anti-corruption      |
|capacity in the country.                                        |
|There is a need to improve cooperation with neighbouring        |
|countries.                                                      |


Objective 7: Promotion and Protection of the rights of women

The Committee resolved that the Government of South Africa  has  shown  true
commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of women  and  entrenching
gender equality in the country at the  levels  of  policy,  legislation  and
institutional mechanisms. In terms of  the  People’s  Contract  Policy,  all
major  role-players,  including  business,  the  religious  community,   and
broader civil society, are also required to  promote,  protect  and  enhance
gender equality.  However,  many  challenges  remain,  including  entrenched
gender inequality and patriarchy; violence against women;  access  to  land;
trafficking in girl children; and gender mainstreaming.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|Programmes to eradicate violence against women and children     |
|should be reviewed in terms of appropriateness, access and      |
|capacity to protect all vulnerable women and children.          |
|Chapter 9 Institutions must take steps to form partnerships with|
|organisations working in their focus areas to ensure that       |
|information regarding human rights, and in particular women’s   |
|rights, filter down to grassroots level.                        |
|The Commission on Gender Equality should develop mechanisms to  |
|ensure that the activities of all relevant departments involved |
|in the fight against violence against women and inequality are  |
|conducted in a coordinated manner.                              |
|The Commission on Gender Equality (CGE) should intensify its    |
|development programmes in rural areas and ensure broad-based    |
|accessibility.                                                  |

Objective 8: Promotion and Protection of the rights of children and young
persons

The Committee resolved that the Constitution provides for the protection
and promotion of children’s rights. South Africa is also party to a number
of International Instruments aimed at protecting and promoting children’s
rights. However, certain challenges remain with regard to education;
children in prison; children living on the streets; child trafficking and
sexual exploitation; child-headed households; children with disabilities
and crimes against children.

|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|The Office on the Rights of Children (ORC) should conduct a     |
|review of all Constitutional Court decisions favouring          |
|children’s rights and report to Parliament on compliance with   |
|such decisions by government Departments.                       |
|The ORC in the Presidency should facilitate and coordinate the  |
|establishment of children’s rights focal points in all spheres  |
|of Government.                                                  |
|Children’s rights intervention mechanisms should include a focus|
|on the family unit.                                             |
|Parliament should accelerate the passing of legislation that    |
|prohibits the trafficking in children and young persons and     |
|impose sanctions against traffickers.  Furthermore, policies and|
|programmes need to be developed to provide support and          |
|assistance to victims of trafficking.                           |
|Parliament should devise mechanisms to increase public awareness|
|around issues of child trafficking and child pornography.       |

Objective 9: Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Vulnerable Persons,
including internally displaced persons and refugees
The Committee resolved that the Government of South Africa  has  achieved  a
great deal in trying to meet its commitment towards all forms  of  migrants.
However, a number of challenges remain in  the  treatment  of  refugees  and
asylum  seekers.  These  include  a  lack  of   capacity   and   ineffective
implementation of the Refugees Act.  The  Committee  notes  efforts  by  the
Government to address the plight of internally displaced persons,  including
economically-induced  and  disaster-induced  displaced  persons,   such   as
several housing  projects  to  accommodate  economically  induced  displaced
persons.


|Recommendations                                                 |
|                                                                |
|The relevant Parliamentary Committees should include a focus on |
|the realisation and protection of the rights of vulnerable      |
|persons in their strategic plans.                               |
|Inter-departmental collaboration regarding facilities and       |
|services for refugees should be improved, taking into account   |
|the requirements of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act |
|and the Refugees Act.                                           |
|The Department of Home Affairs should develop systems for the   |
|accurate reporting of human migration for more effective policy |
|development and planning.                                       |




Economic Governance and Management





The  mandate  of  the  Committee  derived  from  Section  2  of   the   APRM
Questionnaire containing the following objectives:


    ❑ Promote macroeconomic policies that support sustainable development
    ❑ Implement sound, transparent and predictable government economic
      policies
    ❑ Promote sound public finance management
    ❑ Fight corruption and money laundering
    ❑ Accelerate regional integration by participating in the harmonisation
      of monetary, trade and investment policies




Limitations and Challenges of the Committee



The  Committee  experienced  a  number  of  challenges  during  its   public
hearings, such as the non-availability of stakeholders;  communication  gaps
between  Parliament  and  civil  society,  which  affected  the   level   of
participation by civil society; shortened  time  frames;  and  the  lack  of
feedback from departments.  As a result,  the  Committee  acknowledges  that
the report does not provide a complete picture of  the  issues  due  to  the
narrow base of participation and time restrictions on  potential  additional
research.




Key Findings and Recommendations

The  following  comprises   an   overview   of   the   main   findings   and
recommendations of the Committee under each objective.


International Codes And Standards


The Committee resolved that South Africa is  internationally  compliant;  as
it  has  both  signed  and  ratified  most  of  the  relevant  international
instruments.   The  report   enumerates   South   Africa’s   financial   and
legislative framework,  which  ensures  its  compliance  with  international
standards and codes.  South Africa has also established  various  regulatory
and supervisory institutions to ensure that this legislation is adhered to.


Objective 1:     Promote Macro-Economic Policies That Support Sustainable
Development


The Committee resolved that South Africa’s macro-economic  policy  is  sound
and supportive of sustainable development.  However, key challenges  remain,
including  poverty,  inequality  and  unemployment.   This  view  has   been
supported by an overview of the South African economy, including the  Growth
Employment  and  Redistribution  Policy  (GEAR),  as  well  as  the  present
economic environment, including  the  economic  structure  and  performance,
relationship  between  Government  and  business,   corporate   performance,
privatisation, Black  Economic  Empowerment  (BEE)  and  affirmative  Action
(AA), exchange controls and the future economic outlook.



Recommendations

    ❑ Government  should  investigate  the  feasibility  of  increasing  the
      deficit to address some of the service delivery backlogs.  For several
      years, the fiscal deficit has been  projected  lower  than  originally
      intended by Government due  to  unanticipated  overflows  of  revenue.
      Government should therefore improve its methods for projecting revenue
      flows so that the projected deficit  is  attained.    This  should  be
      backed by a comprehensive strategy to ensure that there is substantial
      capacity to  spend  the  allocated  funds.   This  is  a  particularly
      important consideration, given the implementation  challenges  of  the
      financial  management  framework  (particularly  the  Public   Finance
      Management Act No. 1 of 1999 (PFMA), as amended, and Municipal Finance
      Management  Act  No.56  of  2003  (MFMA)   at   sub-national   levels,
      particularly at Local Government level.
    ❑ Government should clarify South Africa’s industrial policy.



Objective 2:     Implement Sound, Transparent And Predictable Government
Economic Policies


The Committee resolved that South Africa’s policy-making process is fairly
transparent.  However, the credibility and reliability of statistics is a
concern, as is the lack of independence of Statistics South Africa
(StatsSA). Furthermore, the budget process needs more engagement as the
budget is currently presented without much room for changes from Parliament
and other stakeholders.  The report further lists the pieces of legislation
that have been passed to improve transparency, the importance of public
participation and the role of Parliament in this regard (as well as related
constitutional provisions), and the parliamentary budget process.

Recommendations

      ❑ The budget process needs to be further decentralised to ensure the
        involvement of critical stakeholders, such as Parliament and civil
        society.  The Government should also facilitate greater public
        involvement and understanding of the complex characteristics of
        South Africa’s fiscal policy so as not to compromise on budget
        transparency.
      ❑ Parliament should effect the Constitutional requirement, in terms
        of Section 77 (2) of the Constitution, that allows for an Act of
        Parliament to enable Parliament to amend money bills.
      ❑ The credibility and reliability of statistics used for policy
        development and planning should be improved.
      ❑ The feasibility of Stats SA being independent of Government should
        be considered.



Objective 3:     Promote Sound Public Finance Management


The Committee resolved that South Africa has a potentially effective  public
finance management framework, particularly regarding the PFMA and the  MFMA.
 However, challenges regarding  implementation  hinder  progress  in  socio-
economic development.   The  report  further  elaborates  on  implementation
challenges regarding the management  of  government  programmes  and  goals,
monitoring and evaluation systems, the  Medium  Term  Expenditure  Framework
(MTEF), and compliance with the PFMA and the MFMA.

Recommendations

    ❑ The accountability cycle needs  to  be  further  strengthened  through
      improved  coordination  and  communication   between   all   arms   of
      government.
    ❑ The implementation of  policy  and  legislation  should  be  monitored
      regularly to ensure effective service delivery.
    ❑ Government should address  the  capacity  challenges  and  constraints
      evident at Local Government level.



Objective 4:     Fight Corruption and Money Laundering


The Committee resolved that corruption should be the focus in both the
public and private sectors.  The protection of whistleblowers has not been
as effective as intended by legislation as in many instances whistleblowers
feel vulnerable and, therefore, feel discouraged.  Furthermore,
disciplinary procedures against perpetrators are not satisfactory.  There
are also no statistics on corruption and crime from Stats SA, making it
difficult to measure precisely the levels of implementation of legislation
dealing with corruption.

Recommendations

    ❑ Statistics South Africa should start collecting statistics on
      economic crime, including corruption.
    ❑ The protection of whistleblowers under the Protected Disclosures Act
      [Act 26 of 2000] should be improved and corrupt officials should
      receive appropriate sanctions.  In addition, the concept of
      “whistleblower” needs to be defined and further clarified in the Act.
    ❑ Corruption should be distinguished from financial mismanagement, such
      as irregular expenditure.  This is particularly important in
      quantifying the incidence of corruption in the public sector.



Objective 5:     Accelerate Regional Integration By Participating In The
Harmonisation Of Monetary, Trade And Investment Policies


The Committee resolved that while South Africa promotes trade between
African countries, trade balances are skewed towards South Africa.  There
is, therefore, a need to assess the negative impact of such trade balances
in order to develop and implement possible corrective measures to advance
sustainable economic development.  South African companies should be
encouraged to invest within the region and continent.  It is important,
though, for the Government to keep track of the behaviour of South African
companies and to ensure that they abide by good business ethics.  South
Africa is a member of several regional, continental and global
organisations, including the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), African Union (AU), the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), the Indian Ocean Rim (IOR),
and the African, Caribbean and Pacific States-European Union (ACP-EU).

Recommendations

    ❑ Government should monitor the behaviour of South African companies
      abroad to ensure that they abide by good business ethics.  Government,
      labour, business, civil society and other relevant stakeholders should
      develop protocols governing business behaviour in foreign countries.
    ❑ Government should investigate the unequal trade balances within the
      continent, as this is not sustainable.

Corporate Governance

The mandate of  the  Committee  derives  from  section  three  of  the  APRM
Questionnaire on Corporate Governance, which enquires exhaustively into:

    ❑ Legal and administrative measures in place to facilitate corporate
      governance;
    ❑ Modes of promoting of corporate good citizenship;
    ❑ Codes of good business ethics; corporate fair relations with
      stakeholders, including shareholders, employees, communities and
      suppliers; and
    ❑ Provisions for accountability of corporations, directors and
      officers.

The Ad Hoc Committee on Corporate Governance has not attempted to answer
the detailed questionnaire contained in the APRM Mechanism document. The
questions cover every aspect of corporate governance in exhaustive detail
and very often, large amounts of technical and empirical information are
required. Instead we opted for a more strategic approach, which sought to
highlight critical matters related to corporate governance in South Africa
today, including some matters that are less often spoken about. In
particular, we chose to focus on how well businesses in South Africa are
responding to socially responsible investment. We noted too, that this
emphasis is built into the structure of the APRM questionnaire. However, we
did not ignore the latter entirely: the Johannesburg Securities (JSE) was
requested to respond to the questionnaire, which they have done in a most
authoritative and comprehensive manner, concentrating on the wealth of pure
information that is required. It is an excellent piece of work and the AD
Hoc Committee wishes to present it as part of their Report.
There is no doubt that a culture of good corporate governance has come a
long way since the heydays of the secretive, inward-looking, sanctions-
busting apartheid era. Much of the necessary legislative framework is in
place and the remainders are in the process of being instituted. In many
instances South Africa has been at the cutting edge of corporate governance
in the developing world. It was one of the first countries to adopt a Code
of Good Corporate Governance and to include in it provisions for reporting
on the triple bottom-line i.e. the economic, social and environmental. The
Johannesburg Securities Exchange (JSE) is the first Exchange in a
developing country to have launched a Socially Responsible Investment Index
(SRI) in 2004. Currently 49 companies constitute the Index including 32 of
the Top 40 companies in the country. Through legislation and protocols, the
Government is increasingly incorporating central features of good
governance as part and parcel of its administration that is equally
applicable to State Owned Enterprises and other public entities. On the
whole all of these provisions are beginning to bear fruit with a good
prognosis for the future. There is an on-going and lively public discourse
on good governance aided by an active and interested media. Several of our
leading companies have taken a lead in setting good standards for corporate
governance. The business community has recognised, by and large, that one
of the primary drivers for good governance must be the social and economic
transformation of the country from an inequitable apartheid past. A recent
review of the standards of corporate governance in the banking sector
reported that banks were committed to high standards of corporate
governance and that no serious breaches were found to exist (cf. The
Myburgh Report). The increasing number of successful prosecutions for
insider trading, points to an improving enforcement capability. Tax
compliance has surged ahead in the wake of a massive restructuring of our
revenue collection systems, which has a positive spin-off for inculcating a
culture of good governance.

On the other hand South Africa has had its fair share of corporate failures
and scandals such as the Leisurenet and Masterbond debacles and there is
more to come. There are still gaps in our legislative and regulatory
frameworks and serious weaknesses in our powers of enforcement. Many
companies and institutions still fall outside any comprehensive compliance
net and some, like powerful state-owned enterprises, fall between the
cracks of several regimes of corporate governance. Apart from an
understandable preoccupation with Black Economic Empowerment, a more
broadly based culture of socially responsible investment is yet to flourish
and shareholder activism is extremely weak. Allegations of questionable
business practices regarding procurement continues to capture the newspaper
headlines and at times dubious relationships between political
parties/politicians and business are revealed. Much has been achieved, yet
much still needs to be done.


South Africa’s Enabling Environment and Regulatory Framework


One of the principal issues raised by the APRM Mechanism is the extent to
which there is an enabling environment and appropriate regulatory framework
to encourage and support good corporate governance in South Africa. The Ad
Hoc Committee has a few recommendations to make in this regard. There are
four pillars upon which the architecture of good corporate governance rests
in South Africa:

    ❑ The King Report on Corporate Governance, issued after extensive
      consultation by the Institute of Directors, and subsequently revised
      in March 2002. Known as King II, it emphasises voluntary compliance,
      which becomes mandatory for listing on the JSE and its philosophy of
      “comply or explain,” and it is the private sector benchmark. It
      requires companies to report not only on their financial results but
      also on their social responsibilities and impact;
    ❑ The Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and the Municipal Finance
      Management Act (MFMA) are applicable to all three spheres of
      government and all public entities including State owned enterprises
      (SOEs). Insofar as it incorporates some principles of corporate
      governance, it is a legal codification of corporate governance
      principles often with criminal sanctions. Some commentators were of
      the view that the corporate governance requirements in the public
      sector were far more stringent than in the private sector;
    ❑ The Companies Act, which is under review with particular attention to
      clauses pertaining to corporate governance, which are inadequate and
      is presently under review. Promulgated in 1926, it was last reviewed
      in 1973. The Department of Trade and Industry is currently engaged in
      the much-needed comprehensive review of the legislation prompted by
      the changed economic environment of the 21st century, a new
      constitutional dispensation, and an obvious need for modernisation.
      The Committee acknowledges and endorses this important process;
    ❑ Common law, with rich and extensive case histories pertaining to
      corporate governance. This section, and section 7, lists key
      legislation, which applies to corporate governance in South Africa.

There are still gaps and some contradictions between these different
regimes. For instance, state-owned enterprises fall under the PFMA and the
Companies Act without the necessary alignment having been done. The
Companies Act has not been reviewed since 1973; the face of business has
changed dramatically since then. Some commentators would prefer to have
principles of corporate governance not heavily incorporated into statute,
but to have common law prevailing; others feel otherwise.

Several commentators referred to the apparent incoherent system of
corporate governance in relation to state-owned enterprises (SOE’s). This
manifests firstly in certain anomalies in the corporate governance
relationship between the state as a major stakeholder and the board of
directors/ managers of an enterprise; secondly it is found in the complex
relationship between the state, the regulator and the SOE. The role of
Parliament as a critical stakeholder is also not clearly defined. All this
leads to confusing arrangements.

On the question of the regulatory environment, it is to be noted that South
Africa has wide-ranging regime of regulation, particularly in the financial
services sector. However, it is common cause that there are far too many
regulators, which obviously undermines good corporate governance and leads
to some being under-resourced. Government has long been promising a review
of regulation in South Africa.

There is still concern about the efficiency and effectiveness of our
judicial system to bring wrongdoers to book despite some good achievements
such as an increase in successful prosecutions relating to insider trading
and the establishment of special commercial crimes courts.

Finally a large number of businesses fall outside of formal compliance
regimes, in particular the SMME sector, often because these regimes are
inappropriate for the structures of these companies.




Recommendations


    ❑ The Ad Hoc Committee is of the view that it is critically important
      that the four cornerstones of good corporate governance viz. the King
      Report, the PFMA and the MFMA, the Companies Act, and precedents set
      by common law be aligned with one another to ensure a seamless
      environment for corporate governance. An appropriate forum, inclusive
      of all relevant role-players, should be formed to develop a common
      view on the overall architecture of corporate governance in South
      Africa. In this regard, the dilemmas faced by State Owned Enterprises,
      which fall between regimes, needs to be addressed.
    ❑ The review of the Companies Act is currently underway. The Ad Hoc
      Committee welcomes this comprehensive review and urges a swift
      finalisation of this matter and assurance that aspects of law dealing
      with corporate governance will be aligned with other regimes.
    ❑ Government must make a concerted attempt to refine the corporate
      governance arrangements of SOEs.
    ❑ The Ad hoc Committee wishes to reiterate the urgency of streamlining
      our regulatory structures and ensuring that they are adequately
      resourced for enforcement purposes.
    ❑ The Ad Hoc Committee recommends that serious attention be given to
      further improving our investigative and prosecutorial abilities to
      deal with white-collar crime and corporate failures.
    ❑ Those sectors falling outside of formal compliance regimes need to
      develop standards for the observation of good business practices
      bearing in mind the limited capacity for enforcement as well.


Good Corporate Citizenship, Socially Responsible Investment (SRI)





As noted above the Ad Hoc Committee has chosen to focus on socially
responsible investment in South Africa. The inclusion of the requirement
for triple bottom line reporting in the King Report and the launch of the
Socially Responsible Investment Index (SRI Index) by the JSE have been
watersheds for the promotion of socially responsible investment practices.
Several factors such as increasing regulation and company brand and
reputation are encouraging companies to report on their socially
responsible investment practices. If this trend is to continue then
companies must be properly held to account. The Committee sees shareholder
activism and pension fund trusteeship as key pressures to ensure corporate
good citizenship, and responsible investing. We note that while financial
institutions in South Africa potentially have massive leverage for this
purpose, they neglect to use it. Moreover pension fund trustees are ill
prepared to exercise their powers, which could advance socially responsible
investment in South Africa. Other issues critical to corporate
accountability are access to information and ethical leadership. The Rules
Board has yet to finalise the rules for the use of the Access to
Information Act, small businesses face onerous tasks to be fully compliant,
the fees for low income requesters are high and the Human Rights Commission
needs to step up its education programmes. Even government departments have
poor responses to requests for information. Finally there are emergent
areas of ethical risk that could be harmful to corporate governance. They
revolve around some dubious procurement practices, instances of
unacceptably high CEO remuneration and the lack of an official policy
relating to the revolving door phenomenon.



Recommendations

    ❑ The Committee recommends a forum assembling crucial role-players from
      government and the appropriate representatives from the field of
      regulators, representative associations, labour and civil society to
      examine strategies to bolster shareholder activism. Reference should
      be made to the recommendations of the King report.
    ❑ The  Public Investment Corporation (PIC) with its massive leverage as
      investors, must be mandated to equip itself to become a champion of
      socially responsible investment.
    ❑ National Treasury and the Financial Services Board must examine
      mechanisms to empower Trustees of Pension Funds.
    ❑ Government should scrutinise its shareholder responsibility with
      regard to SOE’s.
    ❑ The Committee calls upon the Departments of Justice, of Public-
      Service and Administration and the South African Human Rights
      Commission to address gaps in legislation that focus on access to
      information, and to extend education programmes, formulate rules for
      the implementation of the legislation and consider the relevance of
      the legislation for small enterprises.
    ❑ Both government and business should embark on a comprehensive
      scrutiny of our procurement practices to rid them of the flaws that
      encourage abuse of the system. All three spheres of government must be
      engaged.
    ❑ Government must expedite the formulation of a policy to counteract
      the revolving door phenomenon (restraint of trade or cooling off
      period) for senior civil servants and politicians at ministerial level


    ❑ Business organisations must engage with the issue of CEO remuneration
      in a much more vigorous way, and that shareholders become far more
      proactive on this matter than in the past. The possibility of
      mandatory disclosure of voting at board meetings should be considered



Key Focus Areas of SRI in South Africa


The Ad Hoc Committee decided to scrutinise four key aspects of SRI, namely
the practices of corporations as they impact on the environment, labour and
disabled people, and the treatment of HIV/ AIDS at the work place. These
are key social issues in South Africa, but have received less attention in
South Africa as aspects of socially responsible investing than those
matters related to BEE (black economic empowerment) and employment equity.

The Impact of Business on the Environment

South Africa has some of the world’s most progressive environmental
legislation and is signatory to a number of international agreements that
aim to protect the environment and ensure environmental sustainability.
This legal framework not only governs environmental management in South
Africa, but also provides the context within which the corporate sector
must operate. A number of legal requirements and mechanisms (such as
environmental impact assessments and environmental inspectorates) operate
at local, provincial and national level. These are aimed at ensuring
compliance with environmental regulations from the corporate sector in
particular. However, transgressions of environmental regulations and EIA
restrictions by the corporate sector often go unpunished due to a lack of
capacity among environmental authorities at local and provincial level.

Some corporations (such as Sasol) comply with the requirements for good
corporate governance and produce comprehensive environmental reports. Many,
however, do not. Moreover, the Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism (DEAT) does not undertake monitoring of environmental performance
reporting.

South Africa has an active and diverse non-governmental environmental
sector that reflects both social and ecological concerns. While civil
society is clearly committed to monitoring South Africa’s progress in
ensuring environmental sustainability, it is constrained in this task by
its limited capacity (viz. the technical, scientific and environmental
expertise, as well as the financial resources, staff and infrastructure) to
do so effectively.


Recommendations


    ❑ Local and Provincial government should investigate partnerships with
      civil society which support the capacitation of the environmental NGO
      sector and in particular affected communities in monitoring and
      evaluation of the environmental governance of the corporate sector.
      The power of the corporate sector needs to be balanced by an
      empowered, civil society, aware of, and able to, exercise its
      environmental rights.
    ❑ The environmental NGO sector and in particular, affected communities,
      should be encouraged to engage in ‘shareholder activism’, in an
      attempt to make corporations more accountable. Linkages need to be
      sought with other like-minded shareholders.
    ❑ The DEAT needs to ensure that its monitoring mechanisms (such as
      inspectorates) are sufficiently capacitated (in terms of qualified
      staff, equipment and financial resources) to effectively monitor and
      evaluate the environmental performance of the corporate sector.
      Further, the DEAT must take the lead in monitoring the environmental
      performance of the corporate sector and in ensuring that they are held
      accountable for poor corporate governance and committing environmental
      transgressions.
    ❑ The DEAT should continue and indeed, bolster, its current initiatives
      to co-operate with local and provincial authorities in achieving good
      environmental governance by the corporate sector.
    ❑ The DEAT needs to ensure that the punitive aspect of its monitoring
      mechanisms (i.e. fines), are of such a nature, as to bring about
      compliance from the corporate sector. In addition to fines, the
      principle of managerial accountability should be upheld.




    ❑ The DEAT needs to collaborate with the Johannesburg Stock Exchange to
      ensure that listed companies which are guilty of environmental
      transgressions, are held to account.


Labour and the Workplace


Only one trade union federation gave evidence to the Committee viz.  Cosatu.
It recognises the progressive nature of  the  post  1994  labour  framework,
introduced by the democratic government that is intended to improve  working
conditions,  reduce  labour  market   inequalities,   increase   sustainable
employment  and  enhance  the  skills  of  working.  The  presentation  also
highlighted the legislation that has an impact on conditions  of  employment
which needs attention namely: the Insolvency Act, Companies  Act,  Protected
Disclosures Act, Immigration Act and the  Mineral  and  Petroleum  Resources
Development Act. The flexibility of South African labour market  has  become
a major point of debate. This matter is presently under discussion.

Structural changes in the economy  have  had  implications  for  the  labour
market with Cosatu arguing that  employers  have  responded  by  introducing
greater casualisation, informalisation and  outsourcing.  The  restructuring
of the labour market has had  implications  for  the  enforcement  of  basic
labour rights and has undermined the protection of basic  labour  rights  as
enshrined by the legislative system. The Committee  notes  the  relationship
between improving competitiveness and meeting basic labour standards.

Cosatu pointed out that South Africa has ratified major International
Labour Organisation Conventions including the freedom of association, the
abolition of forced labour, promotion of equality, elimination of child
labour, tripartite consultation, occupational health and safety and safety
in the mines. Cosatu argues that these conventions ensure a minimum labour
standard that should be maintained. International conventions that still
need to be ratified by South Africa include the UN Convention on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the ILO Convention on the Prevention of Major
Industrial Accidents, ILO Convention 183 on Maternity Protection and
International Instruments on the Rights of Migrant Workers.


Recommendations


    ❑ The Ad Committee calls for greater dialogue between trade unions,
      government and the private sector on questions of labour market
      flexibility, improved competitiveness and basic labour standards.
    ❑ The Ad Hoc Committee calls on Government to indicate its intentions
      on outstanding international conventions that have yet to be ratified


Disability and Business

The invisibility, to the corporate world, of people living with
disabilities, both in the market, and in the workplace, is still of great
concern. People living with disabilities continue to experience
discrimination in procurement and employment.

The Disabled People South Africa (DPSA) held a workshop so as to prepare a
submission for the APRM process. The following points were submitted to the
Committee, which did not have the opportunity to engage the DPSA.

The DPSA notes:

    ❑ The ARPM questionnaire assumes incorrectly that people with
      disabilities are widely employed; the DPSA noted that trade unions do
      not have a policy or support programme for unemployed people with
      disabilities
    ❑ Companies are willing to invest socially in the development of people
      with disabilities but do not procure goods and services from
      businesses owned by people with disabilities.
    ❑ People with disabilities continue to be discriminated against in the
      labour market and face major concerns as entrepreneurs.
    ❑ Companies do not market their products in a manner that is accessible
      to people with disabilities.
    ❑ Most big companies do not employ people with disabilities and where
      they do, they often do not make the necessary arrangements to
      facilitate employment.
    ❑ Companies are obliged by legislation to report annually on their
      employment equity status, but many of them fail to report on
      disability.




Recommendations
    ❑ Representative business organisations must engage with the challenges
      facing people with disabilities as enumerated above.
    ❑ The monitoring and reporting of compliance with legislating relating
      to disability should be strengthened.
    ❑ The Disability Sector should lobby for the inclusion of a disability
      specific provision in the current review process of the National
      Sustainability Strategy to address some of these issues.

HIV/AIDS and the Workplace

HIV and AIDS in the workplace is increasingly having a social and economic
impact. Currently, many companies in South Africa have a standard workplace
policy on HIV and AIDS, which is premised on non-discrimination. Mandatory
HIV testing has been gradually phased out since the Employment Equity Act
(Act No. 55 of 1998) came into force and brought about the elimination of
unfair discrimination in employment.

Despite these positive developments, there are challenges in efforts to
respond to HIV and AIDS. Firstly, broader policy issues in South Africa are
unclear, which is hampering the ability of small and medium enterprises to
respond more effectively to the HIV and AIDS epidemic. Secondly, the lack
of efficacy of the South African National AIDS Council (SANAC), which is
the country’s coordinating AIDS Council mechanism for purposes of the
Global AIDS Fund, poses a hindrance to the effective management of HIV and
AIDS by companies. Many enterprises depend on SANAC funding to begin their
treatment programmes. Thirdly, there are barriers to foreign funding for
private sector projects based on assumptions that the private sector is
financially viable and as such, not entitled to donor funding.


Recommendations


    ❑ The Committee recommends that small, medium and large businesses
      must, as a minimum, have in place workplace HIV and AIDS policies in
      accordance with the principles set out in the Department of Labour’s
      Code of Good Practice on HIV/AIDS.
    ❑ Larger businesses should assist medium and smaller businesses in
      implementing treatment programmes (including the provision of ARVs) to
      reduce the burden on the public health sector and also assist in
      improving access to general health services for workers and their
      families and surrounding communities.
      ❑ The Committee recommends that social responsibility programmes
     require greater investment in resources to improve the working and
    living conditions, as well as educational and housing opportunities,
     for workers and their families. In situations where workers live in
    hostels, programmes to assist surrounding communities should also be
                                implemented.

Areas for further consideration

The Ad Hoc Committee notes that there are several matters which are  salient
for corporate governance but which  the  Committee  did  not  have  time  to
pursue, but which merits further attention.

They are the following:

    ❑ Several commentators alluded to the poor corporate governance in the
      sporting sector in certain quarters.
    ❑ The NGO sector does not have a code of corporate governance that is
      appropriate for that sector. The same applies for the SMME sector.
    ❑ Women and especially black women are completely under-represented on
      Boards.
    ❑ There is a thin spread of directors generally in South Africa, with
      some individuals holding many directorships. This should be
      discouraged.


Socio-economic Development


The inclusion of a section on the assessment of socio-economic development
in the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) demonstrates the strong
commitment that the leaders of the continent have taken to continuously
improve the well-being and standard of living of the people of the African
continent.

The socio-economic development section in the APRM is intended to highlight
efforts and progress made by States in designing appropriate policies,
legislative frameworks and delivery mechanisms in key social development
areas in order to advance the conditions of the people of the continent. It
also seeks to measure the compliance of States with their international
commitments and the manner in which they construct their national
legislation, policies and programmes in order to meet their international
commitment.

The mandate of the Joint Ad-hoc Committee on Socio-Economic Development was
derived from the socio-economic section of the APRM Questionnaire
encompassing the following six objectives:

    ❑ Promoting self-reliance in development and build capacity for self-
      sustaining development.
    ❑ Accelerating social-economic development to achieve sustainable
      development and poverty eradication.
    ❑ Strengthening policies, delivery mechanisms and outcomes in key
      social areas, including education and combating of HIV and AIDS and
      other communicable diseases.
    ❑ Ensuring affordable access to water, sanitation, energy, finance
      (including micro-finance), markets, Information Communication
      Technology (ICT), shelter and land to all citizens, especially the
      rural poor.
    ❑ Progressing towards gender equality in all critical areas of concern,
      including equal access to education for girls at all levels.
    ❑ Encouraging broad-based participation in development by all
      stakeholders at all levels.

The following are the key findings, observations and recommendations of  the
Committee that were derived from  inputs  from  civil  society,  communities
leaders and representatives, and research institutions:


International Codes and Standards


South Africa has signed and/or ratified or acceded to most of  the  relevant
international instruments highlighted in  the  APRM  Questionnaire,  and  is
generally compliant with their reporting requirements. The country has  also
promulgated a number of pieces of national legislation and  created  several
programmes and initiatives to give effect to the  obligations  arising  from
these international commitments.

However, the country still has  not  submitted  its  report  to  the  United
Nations on  the  state  of  children  as  required  by  the  United  Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Although  this  instrument  obligates
the State to ensure that every child  has  access  to  benefit  from  social
security, the Child Support Grant, which is regarded  by  civil  society  as
key in children’s survival in South Africa, is only accessible  to  children
below 14 years.

Although the Convention of the Rights of the Child also obligates the  State
to take  measures  to  encourage  regular  attendance  at  schools  and  the
reduction of drop-out rates, the country is still faced with  a  high  drop-
out rate of learners who never reach their matriculation  (the  final  stage
of schooling in South Africa). The Convention also obligates  the  State  to
provide measures that will ensure the  survival  of  children  in  order  to
ensure that  they  reach  their  full  potential.  However,  in  most  cases
poverty, particularly for poor learners, has been  attributed  to  the  high
drop-out rate of learners. The country’s school nutrition programmes,  which
has been found to have positive effects on the  attendance  of  learners  in
primary level is not yet available for poor learners at secondary level.

Though South Africa has  signed  the  International  Covenant  on  Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, it  has  yet  to  ratify  this  instrument.  The
Covenant is the most important international treaty brought  into  existence
to protect the social, economic and cultural rights of people all  over  the
world. This treaty forms part of what is  often  called  the  'International
Bill of Rights.' When a State ratifies this treaty,  its  government  agrees
to begin to take steps immediately to start realising the  rights  contained
in the Covenant.

There is no  apparent  reason  for  the  country’s  failure  to  ratify  the
Covenant, because it imposes no greater duties than the Constitution.


Recommendations


    ❑ The government, particularly the  Department  of  Social  Development,
      should  investigate  the  social  and  economic  implications  of  the
      extension of the Child Support Grant to cover children under 18  years
      of age.
    ❑  The  government  should  investigate  the  economic  implications  of
      extending the feeding scheme to benefit all poor learners at secondary
      level.
    ❑  Parliament  should  develop  mechanisms   to   proactively   initiate
      signature  and   ratification   of   key   outstanding   international
      instruments.
    ❑ The government should put in place measures to eliminate the  drop-out
      of learners, particularly poor learners from school.
Objective 1: Promoting Self-reliance in Development  and  Building  Capacity
for Self-sustainable Development in South Africa

Since the country’s first democratic elections in 1994,  the  South  African
government  has  adopted  a  sustainable  human  development   approach   to
transforming  and  redressing  the  legacy  of  apartheid  underdevelopment.
Sustainable livelihoods in South Africa are identified  as  a  key  thematic
area for development programmes that seek to give effect to the  commitments
and goals of poverty eradication.  These  programmes  are  informed  by  the
commitments that are made nationally and  to  various  international  forums
such as the Millennium Summit and World Summit  on  Sustainable  Development
(WSSD).

In order to ensure the participation of local  communities  in  development,
the  South  African  government  has  established  a  system  of  Integrated
Development Planning  (IDP).  This  new  approach  to  Local  Government  is
developmental, which aims to overcome the poor  planning  of  the  past  and
foster  more  public  involvement  in  development,  while   also   ensuring
sustainable livelihoods. The country has also recognised that the  viability
and  effectiveness  of  livelihood  strategies   is   dependent   upon   the
availability and accessibility of assets, services and opportunities,  which
can be positively enhanced or adversely  undermined  by  social  structures,
ecological factors or institutional processes.

South Africa has also managed to  establish  itself  as  a  credible  and  a
competitive borrower. The country’s management risk  framework  has  shifted
from  managing  capital  markets  risks  to  include  government-wide   risk
oversight.  This  is  also  with  the  aim  of   monitoring   and   managing
government’s financial exposure across a broad range of contingent risks.

The major challenge that is facing sustainable development in  South  Africa
is the role of vulnerable groups such  as  women,  the  youth,  people  with
disabilities and rural  communities  in  development  structures  and  their
benefit from development projects. Vulnerable  groups  such  as  women,  the
youth and people with disabilities still have a larger share of the  poverty
burden, which can also be explained by their disadvantaged position  in  the
labour market, in terms of jobs and incomes.


Recommendations

    ❑  All  constraints  to  vulnerable  group’s  access  and   benefit   to
      development projects should be removed.
    ❑ The country’s approach  to  development  and  sustainable  development
      should  place  vulnerable  groups  at  the  forefront  of  development
      projects.
    ❑ There is also a need to ensure the removal of  all  institutional  and
      social constraints  to  the  participation  of  local  communities  in
      development  structures  and  institutions,   particularly   the   IDP
      stakeholder forums.
    ❑ There is a need for a renewed focus and resourcing of  the  Integrated
      Sustainable Rural Development Strategy in  order  to  ensure  that  it
      achieves a broad range  of  developmental  outcomes,  particularly  in
      empowering disadvantaged groups such as women, rural communities,  the
      youth and people living with disabilities.
    ❑ National and provincial line departments should build the capacity  of
      municipalities to be able to implement developmental initiatives.
    ❑  Municipalities  need  to  develop   their   capacity   to   implement
      development projects in order to be able to outsource  development  in
      an effective manner, and monitor the results.
    ❑ Parliament needs to reinforce  its  oversight  role  on  international
      commitments and platforms such as  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable
      Development (WSSD) and the World Trade Organisation (WTO)  as  far  as
      they affect the country’s path to  self-reliance  in  development  and
      building capacity for sustainable development.


Objective 2:     Accelerating Socio-Economic Development to Achieve
Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication in South Africa

The South African government  has  committed  itself  to  the  reduction  of
poverty, low wages and salaries,  and  extreme  inequalities  in  wages  and
wealth generated by the apartheid system.  The  country  has  put  in  place
various mechanisms that are aimed at meeting the basic needs of  the  people
of South Africa, particularly  the  poor.  The  country  has  put  in  place
programmes and initiatives aimed at ensuring that every South African has  a
decent living standard and economic security.

While a considerable effort has been made to improve the standard of  living
of the poor, the major challenge that is still facing  the  country  is  the
spatial distribution of poverty that remains highly  concentrated  in  three
of the country’s nine provinces: Free  State  (63%),  North-West  (62%)  and
Limpopo Province (59%), which  have  a  large  concentration  of  previously
marginalised communities.

There is also a considerable  variation  in  poverty  concentration  between
rural and urban areas in South Africa. A  disproportionate  number  of  poor
people are children,  with  high  incidences  of  visible  malnutrition  and
stunting. The most seriously affected children  are  those  in  rural  areas
whose mothers have relatively little education. If  South  Africa  does  not
put in place effective poverty interventions, the country is not  likely  to
meet the Millennium Development Goal of halving poverty by 2015.

One of the main challenges of the government’s poverty eradication  strategy
is the availability of capacity to implement projects. It takes a long  time
for departments to spend the money they allocate  for  poverty  initiatives.
This is directly related to the fact that departments  are  being  asked  to
perform functions that are not  traditionally  within  the  scope  of  their
work, which means that they have to develop a particular  kind  of  capacity
to deal with the allocations.

The  agencies  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of  assisting   with   the
identification of viable  poverty  projects,  disbursing  money  to  poverty
projects, and providing a  monitoring  and  support  service,  such  as  the
National Development Agency, are facing problems with capacity.


Recommendations

    ❑  The  country  should  gear  itself  to  enhance  poverty  eradication
      programmes  whilst  accelerating  the  completion  of  poverty  relief
      projects.
    ❑ There is a need for reinforcing the implementation  and  expansion  of
      Expanded Public Works Programmes, particularly at community level.
    ❑ The government  and  the  private  sector  should  explore  innovative
      employment measures such as job sharing, worker  share  ownership  and
      local substitution initiatives.
    ❑ The government should  restructure  the  current  poverty  alleviation
      programmes in order to ensure that they  are  strongly  integrated  to
      Small and Micro Business Development initiatives.
    ❑ Municipalities, in particular, should play a more aggressive  role  in
      eradicating poverty in South Africa.
    ❑ Local government should assume their legally enshrined  implementation
      powers to effectively implement poverty intervention measures.
    ❑ Municipal institutional  capacity  should  be  enhanced  in  order  to
      ensure that they are able to manage existing resources and to mobilise
      additional resources in order to create self-sustainable projects that
      will empower local communities.
    ❑  Local  government  must  play  a  critical  role  in  supporting  the
      contribution of civil society anti-poverty initiatives at local  level
      in order to maximise their impact. This can be done  through  funding,
      sponsorships, and facilitating community involvement.
    ❑ The  Departments  of  Education,  Social  Development,  and  Transport
      should have a co-ordinated approach to meeting the needs  of  learners
      with disabilities. The tendency is that disabled  children  use  their
      grants to pay for  transport  to  school  and  are  required  to  have
      expensive devices that are key for them  to  access  education,  which
      result in a cross-subsidisation by the three departments.
    ❑ There is a need to ensure that poverty  interventions  have  long-term
      outcomes and are able to create employment opportunities for the  poor
      and the unemployed in order to ensure that they are self-sustainable.
    ❑ There is a need for innovative approaches by  civil  society  and  the
      private sector to empower communities to be sustainable.
    ❑   Civil   society    organisations,    particularly    community-based
      organisations should play an  active  role  in  development  projects,
      particularly  in  devising  long-term  term  solutions   to   poverty,
      unemployment, and under-development.


Objective 3:     Strengthening Policies, Delivery Mechanism and Outcomes in
Healthcare in South Africa

The cornerstone of improving people’s access to  health  services  in  South
Africa and making it more accessible has been the issue of transforming  the
health system from its fragmented and inequitable status to a health  system
that is integrated, inclusive and responsive  to  the  needs  of  all  South
Africans. In the transformation of  the  country’s  healthcare  system,  the
government  has  promulgated  a  number  of  pieces  of   legislation.   The
legislative framework also seeks to ensure that the  broader  South  African
society has equal access to healthcare, health services and facilities.

Whilst there have been major achievements such as  the  establishment  of  a
Unitary Public Health  System,  with  the  District  Health  System  as  its
backbone, based on a primary healthcare approach, there  still  remain  some
challenges that inhibit the  country’s  progress  towards  providing  effect
access to healthcare. These challenges included the migration of  healthcare
expert professionals to developed countries and the HIV and  AIDS  pandemic,
which has posed more strain to the transformation  of  healthcare  in  South
Africa.

The major challenges facing healthcare in South  Africa  is  that  many  new
clinics and the
District Health System are not yet adequately functional because of  a  lack
of personnel and
finances, poor administration, and expanding demands.  This  is  exacerbated
by the fact that in
many instances rural healthcare is compromised by  lack  of  infrastructure,
including basic
services such as roads, water and electricity in the implementation  of  the
Primary Healthcare
approach.

Despite several interventions by government, the socio-economic profile of
infant mortality in South Africa also indicates that mortality is
consistently higher in rural and peri-urban areas compared with urban
areas.  There are also striking differences in mortality rates by
population group, with more infant and under-five mortality in the African
population.

Childhood mortality rates in South Africa also vary depending on whether
the mother received any antenatal or delivery care. Mothers who receive
neither antenatal nor delivery care or only one type of care suffer higher
neonatal and infant mortality than mothers who receive both antenatal and
delivery care.


Recommendations

    ❑ The country should foster more  public  and  private  interactions  in
      improving access to quality healthcare in South Africa.
    ❑ The Department of Health, in particular, should enhance  its  strategy
      of creating more public-private healthcare  initiatives,  particularly
      in previously marginalised areas.
    ❑ The government should establish a strategy  to  co-ordinate  the  many
      different kinds of community health  workers  that  provide  care  and
      support regarding HIV and AIDS  and  home-based  care  throughout  the
      country.
    ❑ The government’s strategic interventions on  the  retention  of  South
      African health  scarce  expertise  should  be  modelled  more  towards
      finding long-term solutions to the problem  of  scarce  skills  rather
      than on short-term interventions. This should start  at  school  level
      with the encouragement of more learners to take science  subjects  and
      providing a comprehensive bursary scheme to first  year  students  who
      are taking health degrees.
    ❑ There is a need  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  funds  that  are
      allocated for upgrading State and provincial hospitals  to  create  an
      efficient and well-run alternative healthcare system  to  the  private
      sector.
    ❑  The  government  should  ensure  the  equitable   redistribution   of
      healthcare resources between urban and rural areas in order to provide
      rural communities access to quality healthcare.
    ❑  The  government  should  intensify  the   participation   of   health
      beneficiaries  in  existing  health  governance  structures  such   as
      hospital boards and health committees.
    ❑ There is a need for engaging the private sector to  ensure  that  poor
      people get a pro rata discount to access private healthcare.
    ❑ Medical schemes should devise mechanisms to  ensure  that  even  those
      who earn less get access to medical aid schemes.


Strengthening policies, delivery mechanism and  outcomes  in  combating  HIV
and AIDS in South Africa

South Africa has initiated a comprehensive response to communicable and non-
communicable diseases.  The  country  has  also  developed  a  comprehensive
response to the adverse challenges  of  the  HIV  and  AIDS  pandemic.  This
includes  access  to  medication,   nutrition   and   information.   Various
government  departments  have  also  initiated  various   initiatives   that
directly address the effects of the HIV and AIDS  pandemic.  Parliament,  in
particularly, has passed a number  of  laws  that  addresses  public  health
issues posed by HIV and AIDS.

However, studies on the impact of HIV and AIDS  in  various  sector  of  the
South African society continue to  highlight  the  ravaging  impact  of  the
pandemic in the labour market, economy and healthcare. Within the  education
system, students and educators continue  to  fall  ill  and  die.  Learners,
especially girls, are dropping out of school in increasing numbers  to  take
care of sick family members or to help support their families.

HIV and AIDS co-infection is leading to sharp increases in the incidence  of
tuberculosis (TB). The number of  reported  cases  of  TB  has  consistently
risen since inception of the National TB Control  Program  (NTCP)  that  was
launched in 1996. KwaZulu-Natal, Eastern Cape  and  Western  Cape  have  the
highest number of cases of TB. These provinces, together with  the  Northern
Cape, also have incidences  of  TB,  which  are  higher  than  the  national
average.




Recommendations

    ❑ There is a need for the government,  civil  society  and  the  private
      sector to create a  comprehensive  ARV  roll-out  literacy  programme,
      particularly in previously marginalised communities  where  there  are
      still negative perceptions about HIV treatment.
    ❑ The government should intensify  prevention  strategies  in  order  to
      ensure that the level of awareness about the disease  translates  into
      behavioural change.
    ❑ The government should intensify  its  collaborative  approach  to  the
      reduction of the spread of HIV, and address the socio-economic  burden
      of  AIDS  morbidity  and  mortality,  particularly  between   schools,
      churches and civil society in addressing the HIV and AIDS pandemic.
    ❑ There is a need for a  comprehensive  approach  focus  on  prevention,
      treatment and care when dealing with the HIV and AIDS pandemic.
    ❑ Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) tests to detect  HIV  in  infants  and
      young children must be available at all treatment and referral  sites.
      HIV  PCR  testing  should  be  included  as  part  of  the  Integrated
      Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) and  linked  to  immunisation
      coverage. This way, children will not be lost to follow up and can  be
      identified easily.
    ❑ The government should undertake a situational analysis on  the  extent
      of the impact of HIV and AIDS on pensioners.
    ❑  Existing  government  service  providers  such  as  social   workers,
      teachers and nurses, should be trained in  addressing  the  needs  and
      rights of children affected by HIV and AIDS.
    ❑ Education and advocacy concerning the treatment of children  with  HIV
      and AIDS within the  medical  profession  must  be  improved  so  that
      children can benefit from the implementation of the  Operational  Plan
      on a much wider scale.
    ❑ More effort is needed to strengthen the  Mother-to-Child  Transmission
      (MTCT) programme, particularly in Provinces such as  Mpumalanga  where
      the programme seems not to have been implemented at all.
    ❑ There is a need for more sites with HIV counselling and testing.
    ❑ The government should intensify programmes that are aimed at  ensuring
      that children who are infected by the disease have access to ARV’s.
    ❑ The Department of Health, in particular,  should  improve  its  health
      management systems in recording causes  of  death  in  order  for  the
      government to create appropriate responses to the pandemic.




Strengthening policies, delivery mechanism  and  outcomes  in  education  in
South Africa


Since 1994, the education system in South Africa has  undergone  significant
and extensive restructuring aimed at redressing the long years of  apartheid
of unjust policies in education. This is reflected in  the  new  policy  and
legislative framework that has been established to give effect to the  goals
and values that seek to achieve greater  access  and  equity  in  education,
particularly by poor communities. South Africa  is  also  party  to  various
international protocols that commit  the  country  to  expanding  access  to
education.

Education in South Africa is also  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  crucial
measures to attaining  economic  and  social  development,  particularly  in
redressing the legacy of apartheid. It forms  one  of  the  cornerstones  of
government policies such as the  Reconstruction  and  Development  Programme
(RDP) and the Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR)  Strategy.  Since
1994, the broad focus in South Africa has been to  improve  access,  quality
and equity in education. Of the country’s over  12  million  learners,  more
than 90% are currently in school. Net primary enrolment rates have  remained
steady at about 95.5% since  1995  and  secondary  participation  rates  are
currently approximately 85% indicating  increases  in  about  15  percentage
points since the early 1990s. In addition,  the  male  to  female  enrolment
ratio is around 97% indicating the higher overall participation  rate.  This
is a far high enrolment rate than in most other developing countries.

South Africa has also put in place various measures aimed at  ensuring  that
vulnerable learners such as those that are affected and infected by the  HIV
and AIDS pandemic,  learners  with  disabilities  and  learners  from  rural
areas, have access to education.

There is, however, an indication in some provinces that more money is  still
needed to address the  endemic  backlogs  left  by  40  years  of  apartheid
education, where government resources were channelled into  white  education
at the expense of black schools. This has presented  a  major  challenge  to
the government’s efforts to rectify the imbalances  in  education  in  South
Africa. The greatest challenge in redressing the legacy  of  apartheid  lies
in  the  poorer  and  rural  provinces  like  the  Eastern  Cape,   Limpopo,
Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal.

Recommendations

    ❑ The government should ensure the effective implementation of the  laws
      and policies  that  are  aimed  at  removing  barriers  to  education,
      including access to higher education.
    ❑ The government should abolish school fees in all  farm  schools  as  a
      standard policy.
    ❑ Farm schools should be  consolidated  into  larger  and  better-funded
      rural education centres, which will be able to draw on a  broad  range
      of teaching talent and benefit from better resourcing and economies of
      scale.
    ❑ Adequate transport services should be provided to farm schools and  in
      areas where learners have to walk long distances to and from school.
    ❑ Provincial departments of education should take a more active role  in
      farm school management and governance.
    ❑ The Rural Education Policy should  focus  on  the  education  of  farm
      children as a way of transforming rural power relations and broadening
      social opportunities in farm labouring households.
    ❑ The government should set a target for eliminating illiteracy.


Objective 4:     Ensuring Affordable Access to Water, Sanitation and  Energy
to all citizens in South Africa, especially the rural poor

Since the demise  of  the  apartheid  regime  in  1994,  the  South  African
government has strongly located basic services for citizens within a  rights
based approach. Access to  potable  water,  sanitation  and  electricity  is
enshrined in South Africa’s Constitution as a human right, as is  the  right
to live in a healthy environment.  South  Africa’s  legislative  and  policy
framework reflects the urgent need  to  implement  integrated,  cross-sector
approaches to water, sanitation and electricity services.

The welfare of poor communities with  access  to  basic  services  in  South
Africa has  improved  significantly  in  post-apartheid  South  Africa.  The
provision of free basic services to the poor has also  resulted  in  several
additional benefits. The electrification of clinics and schools has  yielded
significant   benefits   for   improved   health-care   service   provision,
involvement of schools in evening adult education, and  improved  efficiency
of school operations through use of  equipment,  such  as  photocopiers  and
computers. In certain cases, electric street  lighting  has  contributed  to
reduced crime levels.

Of utmost importance is that  the  major  challenge  that  is  facing  basic
services in South Africa is that the implementation of free  basic  services
is a complex and demanding process, which requires a wide  range  of  issues
to  be  addressed  locally  and  nationally,  particularly   in   terms   of
infrastructure. In the rural parts  of  the  country,  it  is  difficult  to
determine the number of  households  benefiting  from  free  basic  services
because many of these communities  do  not  have  the  necessary  monitoring
mechanisms such as water metres.


Recommendations

    ❑  The   allocation   of   powers   and   functions   between   District
      Municipalities and Local Municipalities needs to be resolved  and  co-
      ordinated in order to ensure the harmonisation of service delivery  at
      local government level.
    ❑ The government should ensure the rationalisation of  local  government
      financial framework in order to support sustainable service provision,
      specifically with regard to the provision of free basic  services  and
      implementing appropriate pricing for services.
    ❑ The government should promote the Water Service  Development  Planning
      Process, within the framework of Integrated Development Plans, as  the
      key  instrument  for  planning,  monitoring  and   regulating   waster
      services, with full community involvement.
    ❑ Service provision  should  be  demand-responsive  rather  than  supply
      driven to ensure  appropriate  choices  of  technology,  lower  costs,
      better uses of resources and more  sustainable  services.   The  Water
      Service Development Plan should guide strategies related to the choice
      of service levels and technology implemented.
    ❑ The  government  should  ensure  the  development  of  an  appropriate
      regulatory framework that ensures the effective, efficient,  equitable
      and sustainable provision of basic sanitation services to  all  people
      living in South  Africa,  and  cost-effective,  reliable  services  to
      businesses and institutions.
    ❑ The Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,  in  particular,  should
      look at more innovative water management  mechanisms  such  as  water-
      harvesting mechanisms by communities and creating dams in  areas  that
      are constantly facing floods.


Ensuring affordable  access  to  Information  Communication  and  Technology
(ICT) in South Africa

Since  1994,  South  Africa   has   focused   on   the   liberalisation   of
telecommunications through a new regulatory framework that  has  been  aimed
at ensuring affordable access to Information Communication Technology  (ICT)
for the poor, particularly those in the rural areas.  The  country’s  vision
to improve the quality  of  life  of  all  South  Africans  by  creating  an
information economy and a knowledge-based  society  has  ensured  that  many
South Africans have  access  to  ICT’s.  However,  despite  the  legislative
reform initiatives  since  1994,  the  telecommunications  sector  in  South
Africa continues to be characterised  by  relative  inaccessibility  due  to
high  retail  prices,  super  profits,  job  losses,  licensing  delays  and
deadlocks, and minimal  new  foreign  investment  in  the  sector.  Internet
access is a great area of concern. Since 1994, it continues to  increase  by
6% to an estimated 1.1 million dial up subscribers.


Recommendations

    ❑ Free or subsidised telephones should be  used  as  part  of  achieving
      universal service and access by the poor and those in rural areas.
    ❑ Effective competition and regulation  should  be  adopted  as  guiding
      principles  for  achieving  the  strategic  telecommunications  policy
      objectives, including a  restructuring  of  the  market  to  encourage
      effective competition  and  the  entry  of  new  competitors  and  the
      empowerment of ICASA to execute its mandate in full.
    ❑  ICASA  should  investigate  mechanisms  to  discourage   profiteering
      through delaying tactics and the manipulation of the legal system.
    ❑  The  local  communications  loop  should  be   unbundled   and   line
      disconnections should be prohibited.
    ❑ Communication operators should fulfil their line roll-out  obligations
      in under-serviced areas and this should be enforced by ICASA.
    ❑ ICASA should urgently investigate the high telephone  prices  and  put
      in place mechanisms to regulate communication prices.
    ❑ The government should declare  communication  operators  international
      gateways as essential services, and, in so doing, lower  the  cost  of
      international calls.
    ❑ Emergency telephone services should  be  regarded  as  a  basic  human
      right, and such, should be freely extended to all subscribers.
    ❑ ICASA should ensure that there is continuous investment  in  upgrading
      the country’s communication infrastructure by making it obligatory for
      all subscribers to regularly review and upgrade  their  infrastructure
      in order to provide quality services to the poor.



Ensuring affordable access to housing (shelter) and land in South Africa

Access to housing and land in South  Africa  is  at  the  forefront  of  the
national agenda for settlement and social  transformation.  It  is  also  an
integral part of government’s commitment to reduce poverty and  improve  the
quality of people’s lives. In  the  last  ten  years,  government  has  made
tremendous strides in ensuring that access to land  and  housing  becomes  a
reality to the people of South Africa, especially the poor.

After the demise of the apartheid regime in 1994, South Africa  adopted  the
Reconstruction  and  Development  Policy  (RDP),  as  an  integrated  socio-
economic policy framework, which sets out  broad  guidelines  for  land  and
housing reform. The country’s Constitution provides further impetus  to  the
progressive realisation of the right of citizens to land  and  housing.  The
provision of housing in South Africa is also in  line  with  a  strategy  to
provide subsidy assistance to households who are  unable  to  satisfy  their
housing needs  independently.  The  government  has  also  put  in  place  a
comprehensive legislative framework to  ensure  that  the  people  of  South
Africa have access to housing.

Although the new government inherited a critical housing shortage, with  the
1996 Census reflecting a housing backlog  of  2,  2  million  houses,  since
1994, the State has built 1,8 million housing units, providing more  than  5
million  people  with  secure  homes.  Since  1994  to  December  2002,  the
Department of Land Affairs has redistributed 456 060 hectares (ha) of  State
land. This constitutes 68% of targeted land (669 00 ha), and 23,8% of  total
redistributed land. Through the tenure reform programme, there are a  number
of pieces of legislation that begin to regulate people’s occupation  of  and
eviction from other people’s land.



Recommendations


    ❑ The government should ensure the empowerment of housing  beneficiaries
      through  the  process  of   intensification   of   housing   delivery,
      particularly through fostering SMME’s and cooperatives.
    ❑ The Department of Housing, in particular,  should  develop  a  housing
      strategy for rural communities and farm workers.
    ❑ The government should  reduce  policy  incoherence  and  institutional
      fragmentation in housing delivery and clarify the  role  of  provinces
      and municipalities in housing delivery.
    ❑ Housing delivery should take into account government’s  commitment  to
      social cohesion and integrating communities.
    ❑ The issue of women’s access to land  and  property  rights  remains  a
      critical impediment to the  furthering  of  women’s  rights  in  South
      Africa. Customary practices  that  prohibit  women  from  owning  land
      should be abolished.
    ❑ The government should engage the private  sector,  particularly  banks
      in eliminating barriers to housing finance,  particularly  for  people
      who do not qualify for the government housing subsidy.
    ❑ The government should start building  family  houses  that  take  into
      consideration cultural sensitivities and  the  sizes  of  families  in
      order to enhance social cohesion.


Objective 5: Progress Towards Gender  Equality  in  all  Critical  Areas  of
Concern, including Equal Access to Education for  Girls  at  all  Levels  in
South Africa

South Africa stands out in Africa  and,  indeed,  in  the  world  in  having
succeeded in bringing large numbers of  women  into  formal  politics  since
1994. The country’s commitment towards gender equality clearly  demonstrates
that it is imperative that more women are elected  into  public  office,  in
line with giving substance to a culture of human rights.

South Africa's transition from apartheid  and  minority  rule  to  democracy
required that all existing practices, institutions and  values  be  reviewed
and rethought in terms of their fitness for ensuring equality  for  all  the
people of the country, regardless of gender, race, ethnicity, religion,  and
social status.

The transformation of higher education in South Africa was seen as  a  major
instrument to fostering equal opportunities for women. After the  demise  of
the apartheid regime, it was imperative for  the  country  to  redress  past
inequalities by ensuring that the  higher  education  system  serves  a  new
social order, to meet the pressing national needs, and  to  respond  to  new
realities and opportunities.

Recommendations

    ❑ Government departments and entities should establish  National  Gender
      Policy Frameworks in order to guide  gender  transformation  in  their
      staff composition. The purpose of the frameworks would  be  to  ensure
      the effective implementation of a gender perspective into all  aspects
      of  planning,  policy,  legislation,  development  and  transformation
      activities within the government.
    ❑ The principles of equal opportunities and  equal  partnership  between
      male and female staff in government departments and entities should be
      reflected and promoted through the adoption of gender codes. The codes
      should state explicitly the government’s commitment to ensure equity.
    ❑ The various departments should provide detailed  progress  reports  on
      their  employment  equity  plans  and  targets   when   reporting   to
      Parliament.
    ❑ The Department of Education and higher education institutions need  to
      mainstream gender into all their human resources policies,  programmes
      and structures in order to  ensure  more  education  opportunities  to
      women.
    ❑ The Council on Higher  Education  should  establish  a  selection  and
      recruitment policy that will focus more on the  recruitment  of  women
      professionals in the higher education sector.
    ❑  All  government  departments  and  entities  should  use  pro   forma
      reporting  tools  (percentages  and  numbers)  in   order   to   allow
      quantifiable scrutiny by Parliament and the public, particularly civil
      society.


Objective 6:     Encouraging Broad-based  Participation  in  Development  by
all Stakeholders at all Levels in South Africa
With increasing decentralisation of governance responsibilities and
decision-making in post apartheid South Africa to lower-levels of
government, local institutions, communities and public participation have
emerged as fundamental tenets in the promotion of local governance in South
Africa. Since the demise of the apartheid regime in 1994, South Africa has
put in place various mechanisms and measures to ensure that the broader
population are active participants in the governance of the affairs of the
country. The country has introduced various legislative and policy measures
that are aimed at ensuring that the people of South Africa are active
participants in the governance of the country.

Within  the  country’s  evolving  democratic  culture,   there   are   still
challenges that are confronting the effectiveness of the country’s  measures
to foster broader  participation,  including  poor  communication,  lack  of
information, and complicated processes.


Recommendations


    ❑ Municipalities, in particular,  should  enhance  their  programmes  of
      public participation in order  to  ensure  constant  interaction  with
      communities.
    ❑ Municipalities should improve the content and structure  of  IDP’s  in
      order to enhance the involvement of vulnerable groups such  as  people
      with disabilities, women, and the youth.
    ❑ Provincial  governments  should  enhance  their  public  participation
      measures.
    ❑  Parliament  should  launch   a   comprehensive   awareness   campaign
      explaining  the   various   protocols   governing   participation   in
      parliamentary  activities  such  as   public   hearings   and   making
      submissions.
    ❑ Parliament should comprehensively  restructure  participation  of  and
      mass communication with vulnerable and marginalised groups.
    ❑ Parliament should ensure a creative and effective resourcing  as  well
      as utilisation of  Parliamentary  Constituency  Offices  in  order  to
      ensure that they play a major role in interacting with  and  educating
      communities about Parliament.
    ❑  All  political  parties  should  allocate   sufficient   constituency
      resources in order to ensure that they constantly keep in  touch  with
      the people and are able  to  inform  the  public  about  Parliamentary
      activities.
    ❑ There is a need for the usage of plain language  in  policy  documents
      and laws  in  order  to  ensure  that  ordinary  people  are  able  to
      comprehend them.
    ❑  Where  major  laws  and  policies  are   promulgated,   comprehensive
      awareness campaigns should be undertaken to inform  communities  about
      them.
    ❑ Parliament and government should give the public  sufficient  time  to
      make submissions or comments.
    ❑ There is a need to  capacitate  community  representatives  about  the
      Integrated Development Planning process to ensure that they  are  able
      to sufficiently educate communities about  their  value  in  enhancing
      participation.
    ❑ Parliament should put in place a mechanism to respond  and  attend  to
      formally public queries.
    ❑ Parliament should enhance the  integration  of  and  participation  of
      civil society in its oversight work, particularly in initiatives  that
      are aimed at taking Parliament to the people.
    ❑ Parliament should ratify and implement the  resolution  taken  by  the
      113th  General  Assembly  of  the  Inter-Parliamentary  Union  on  the
      importance of civil society in a democracy.

Community Consultations

One of the primary objectives of Parliament’s involvement in South  Africa’s
Peer  Review  process  was  to  facilitate  public  awareness   and   ensure
meaningful  public  participation  in  Parliament’s   APRM   self-assessment
process.  Community consultations were conducted in  rural,  semi–urban  and
urban municipalities.  Approximately seven thousand people  participated  in
the community meetings and 1 052 written submissions were received.


Key Findings


The following  is  a  synthesis  of  the  responses  received  to  questions
extrapolated from the four thematic sections of the APRM questionnaire.


Democracy & Good Political Governance


Communities were engaged on the following questions:

   1. Do you have access to justice, e.g. access to maintenance and domestic
      violence protection orders for women?
   2. Do you have access to basic services such as clean  water  and  proper
      sanitation facilities?
   3. Has your relationship  with  Parliament  (or  provincial  legislature)
      changed since 1994 in terms of access to Parliament and  participation
      in the activities of Parliament?
   4. Do you know who the Members of Parliament are in your province and are
      you able to access them for assistance when needed?

Accessibility of courts emerged as a consistent challenge in  municipalities
across the geographic and socio-economic spectrum.  The factors that  hinder
accessibility were more severe in semi-urban and rural  communities.   These
included:

    ❑ Distance to courts
    ❑ Transport costs
    ❑ Requirement for multiple visits due to daily  court  rolls  not  being
      concluded
    ❑ Safety and security at courts particularly for women  seeking  redress
      against violence

The lack of basic services  was  a  pervasive  experience,  particularly  in
rural communities.  These included:

    ❑ Lack of or erratic supply of potable water and water for irrigation
    ❑ Inadequate sanitation
    ❑ Lack of electrification
    ❑ Sustainable and affordable energy

Communities were largely unaware of the role of  Parliament  and  Provincial
Legislatures.  Communities were  not  knowledgeable  about  their  political
representatives  at  provincial  and  national  levels.   Local   Government
representatives however  interacted  with  their  local  communities.   Some
communities  suggested  that  this  situation  could  be  obviated  by   the
introduction of a constituency-based electoral system.

The level and  quality  of  service  delivery  was  cited  as  an  area  for
improvement.  Poor service delivery was  compounded  by  negative  attitudes
and conduct of certain public servants.  This confirmed the need  to  infuse
the Batho Pele principles throughout the public service.


Economic Governance and Management


Communities were engaged on the following questions:

   1. Do you think ordinary citizens are getting opportunities  to  generate
      an income, whether short-term or long-term?
   2. Do you think the government tells you enough about the budget and what
      it intends to do with the taxes collected?
   3. Do you think the budget is managed properly?
   4. Are you aware of the anti-corruption forum and  other  anti-corruption
      initiatives in the country?  Is this information accessible  at  local
      level?  If not, what can you recommend to make it more accessible?
   5. What is the level of corruption in your own community?   How  can  the
      government  and  communities  work  together   to   fight   corruption
      effectively?

 Income generation with particular focus on youth was considered a priority
                   across all communities.  This included:

         ❑ Government support of entrepreneurship
         ❑ Access to business finance, skills development  and  information
           on business management

There was a  lack  of  awareness  on  the  budget  process  and  communities
therefore expressed the need for more active  participation  in  the  budget
process.

Communities  were  unaware  of  government’s  anti-corruption   initiatives.
Communities reported that corruption at local government  manifested  mainly
in:

    ❑ Allocation of RDP houses
    ❑ Awarding of tenders in municipalities
    ❑ Nepotism in the public sector
    ❑ Inefficient / inappropriate management of social security grants

Communities expressed the need for improved  public  finance  management  to
achieve  targeted  spending   and   thereby   minimize   opportunities   for
corruption.


Corporate Governance


Communities were engaged on the following questions:

   1. Do companies in South Africa look after the environment?
   2. How do you think companies in South Africa assist the  communities  in
      which they operate?

Communities cited environmental degradation and pollution as  evidence  that
companies were  non-compliant  with  environmental  regulations.   Pollution
impacted negatively on the health of communities.

Communities articulated a lack of local investment by companies.   This  was
compounded by a lack of policy regarding  employment  of  local  communities
and preferential procurement from local small businesses.

Socio-Economic Development

Questions on social development were divided into three areas:

Social Assistance


   1. How effective are government systems and programmes that are aimed  at
      protecting the poor?
   2. What are the challenges faced and should be the role of Parliament  in
      addressing such challenges?

Communities acknowledged social security  as  one  of  government’s  poverty
alleviation mechanisms.  Some concerns raised and suggestions  forwarded  by
communities included:

    ❑ Grants not reaching intended beneficiaries
    ❑ Age and gender disparity for access to old age pensions
    ❑ More effective poverty alleviation mechanism would be the  replacement
      of cash grants with food vouchers
    ❑ Perceived correlation between increased teenage  pregnancies  and  the
      child support grant


     Education



   1. Have the new laws in education improved access to education?






   2.
     2.
   3. What are the challenges faced in the education sector in South  Africa
      and  what  should  be  the  role  of  Parliament  in  addressing  such
      challenges?

Access to and quality of education was constrained by:

    ❑ Unaffordability of school fees and uniforms
    ❑ Lack of integrated planning
    ❑ Lack of transport and roads infrastructure
    ❑ High learner : educator ratio, particularly in rural schools
    ❑ Lack of government-funded facilities for early childhood education


     Healthcare



   1. Is it  becoming  easier  and  better  for  your  community  to  access
      healthcare services?








   2. How should healthcare be improved and  what  should  be  the  role  of
      Parliament in this?



Access to basic health care was cited as a challenge across all
communities.  This included:

    ❑  Inadequate  primary   healthcare   facilities,   medical   personnel,
      medicines and treatment
    ❑ Poorly managed healthcare facilities
    ❑ Poor working conditions and remuneration of  healthcare  professionals
      resulting in low morale and poor service delivery
    ❑ Lack of infrastructure and facilities for the  aged  and  people  with
      disabilities
    ❑ Lack of nutritional support for people living with HIV

Conclusion

The report reflects the views and lived experiences of  a  cross-section  of
South Africans.  It would be important for Parliament, Government and  civil
society organisations to further investigate some of the issues raised.   It
would appear that South Africa has a sound legal and  policy  framework  for
the consolidation  of  democracy,  the  progressive  realisation  of  socio-
economic  rights  and  the  acceleration  of  development.   The  unintended
consequences of policy and legislation, service delivery  and  the  capacity
of local government may however require more focussed attention.


National Council of Provinces


1.    REPORT OF THE OVERSIGHT VISIT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL
    SERVICES TO THE FREE STATE PROVINCE 17 – 21 OCTOBER 2005

Introduction

The Select Committee on Social Services undertook a study tour to  the  Free
State Province from 17 – 21 October 2006. The purpose of the study tour  was
for the Committee to exercise its oversight function,  as  mandated  by  the
Constitution. The primary objectives of the provincial visits included:

    • To conduct oversight over  the  management  and  quality  of  services
      rendered in respect to social development, health and home affairs.
    • To  inspect  various  health,  social  development  and  Home  Affairs
      facilities, in order to determine the state of physical infrastructure
      and equipment.
    • Identify progress made and challenges that are  being  experienced  by
      all the stakeholders.

The Committee has prioritized the provinces,  which  they  wanted  to  visit
during the 2005/06 financial year and  the  Committee  identified  the  Free
State Province as a priority.

This report aims and  envisages  that  the  challenges  experienced  by  the
various regions in the Free State Province are taken cognizance of and  that
they are addressed to improve service delivery to our people. The  Committee
undertook this oversight visit to the Free State Province  not  to  “police”
the  Provincial  Departments  of  Social  Development  and  Health  and  the
Department of Home Affairs, but the aim is to “unblock the  blockages”  that
might be hampering service delivery.

The information  was  gained  by  interacting  with  the  MEC’s,  HOD’s  and
Regional Managers of the Provincial Departments of  Social  Development  and
Health and  the  Department  of  Home  Affairs.  Before  the  oversight  was
undertaken the Committee identified the regions which they wanted to  visit,
and the main aim is to visit the rural areas, where service delivery is  not
up to standard (Batho Pele).

The Committee also took tours of health centres; social development  centres
and Home Affairs offices to ascertain whether what  has  been  said  in  the
meeting with the various stakeholders are  a  true  reflection  of  what  is
happening.

Limitations of the report:
    • The fact that not the whole  of  the  Free  State  Province  could  be
      visited, but only parts of it;
    • The fact that the delegation could not visit for e.g.  pay  points  on
      the day of payouts. It is the intention of the  Committee  to  arrange
      for future visits to arrange this.

The  delegation  had  meetings  with  the  various  MEC’s,  HOD’s,  Regional
Managers and undertook tours of the institutions, which they  visited.  This
report will highlight the important issues raised during these meetings.

 1. VISITS TO DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS REGIONAL OFFICES

   1. BLOEMFONTEIN REGIONAL OFFICE

The Regional Manager informed  the  delegation  that  previously,  the  ID’s
could not be locked up because there was no strong room and the  office  has
currently 2 000 undelivered ID’s in the  office.  The  Manager  stated  that
since the beginning of September 2005 no ID’s were delivered, due to the  3-
month period that is in place, and only after this period  has  expired  the
office will begin to deliver the  ID’s.  He  further  noted  that  ID’s  are
locked up and that the office does not give ID’s to councilors  to  give  to
clients.

The Manager stated that they try to obtain  the  telephone  numbers  of  the
clients to inform them of their ID’s, but that this exercise is very  costly
and that the department is  in  the  process  to  finalize  the  process  of
sending SMS’ to clients.

The manager informed the  delegation  that  the  office  is  making  use  of
interns and that their contracts will be  expiring  soon  (end  of  November
2005) as well and that the office  has  already  lost  12  people  and  this
places a heavy burden  on  the  remaining  staff  to  deliver  an  excellent
service. With regard to the 12 people, the  manager  stated  that  some  are
under investigation and that 3 have returned and some were either  dismissed
or suspended.

The office is servicing 17 towns.

The manager stated that there are 3 people working on the mobiles  and  they
only go out twice a week and that  they  work  out  of  any  space  that  is
available and that they are “at the mercy of  the  local  municipality”  and
conditions under which these people at times work is not conducive.

With regard to the infrastructure, the manager  stated  that  it  is  better
than what it was previously.  A  problem  at  the  current  offices  is  the
escalators and that at times people  have  fallen  and  broken  their  legs.
There is security at the  front  to  assist  people,  but  at  times  it  is
difficult for disabled persons to enter e.g. person in wheelchair. There  is
also no parking at the offices, and the manager stated that  their  contract
expires in 2006.

The manager stated that the delivery of ID’s is not as  successful  as  they
would want it to be e.g. many give the wrong addresses and this  delays  the
process.

The manager noted that there is not sufficient  personnel  dedicated  to  do
registration of births at the hospitals.

With regard to  fraudulent  marriages,  6  fraudulent  marriages  are  under
investigation, but the response from Head Office is very slow.

With regard to IT, the computer systems have improved  and  the  office  has
received a number of new computers, but that they are still working  on  old
passwords and when the passwords expires it takes time. The  manager  stated
that the printers on the new system do not work well and  that  the  back-up
system is problematic.

The manager informed the delegation that  the  new  fingerprints  system  is
going to be installed in December 2005.

1.2. THABA NCHU (PERMANENT SERVICE POINT)

1.2.1. Departmental Fraud Prevention Plan  and  Risk  management  strategies
(including focus on outstanding identity documents)

The office is implementing the objectives of the fraud prevention plan  that
was compiled for the whole province, the dynamics thereof being:

    • Ensuring that cash received is banked daily, that cash  registers  are
      programmed in such a way that only one transaction  can  validate  per
      transaction.
    • The daily  intake  or  transactions  are  controlled  and  checked  by
      supervisors daily and also weekly by the officer in charge.
    • Two officers do banking i.e. one official cannot  do  banking  without
      being accompanied by a witness, thus ensuring that it is not easy  for
      one to collude with the bank official.
    • There are no security guards; this is one risk area  that  the  office
      finds itself in, as there  is  no  proper  access  control  of  people
      entering the office. However, alarm systems have been installed in the
      office to ensure safety of government assets.
    • The office is receiving a reasonable  number  of  identity  documents.
      Currently the total number of uncollected ID’s in the office  is  325.
      The collection process is very  slow  and  even  if  posted  to  given
      addresses, about 80 % of them end up being sent back  undelivered  due
      to wrong address. Sometimes they also end up in the  wrong  hands,  as
      there is no security that the rightful owners receive the documents.
    • The office has implemented several means of trying to deliver the ID’s
      e.g. door-to-door delivery, posting to serviceable addresses,  listing
      ID’s and handing names to the councilors to  inform  people  in  their
      constituencies to collect their ID’s at the office.
    • It has however been noticed that the method of posting seems to be  an
      easy one, whereby ID’s are delivered in big numbers, has proved to  be
      risky as there is no  proper  and  definite  confirmation  of  control
      whether the rightful applicant is the one who received  the  document.
      The postman places the ID’s in a postbox at the given address  without
      positive identity of the applicant.  Sometimes where there is no  post
      box identity  documents  are  just  thrown  into  the  yard  and  this
      contributes to the risk of ID’s ending in the  wrong  hands  and  thus
      causing the level of fraud to rise.
    • Other risks that are growing and seem uncontrolled is  the  increasing
      number of late registration cases over 15 years, whereby people freely
      and fraudulently acquire  baptismal  certificates  and  other  proofs,
      clearly being illegal foreigners.  They then  apply  for  ID’s,  where
      they are able to access different forms of services and grants offered
      by government.

1.2.2. Quality of service
Quality of service has somewhat improved at Thaba-Nchu service  point  to  a
certain degree especially with the appointment of the interns.

In order to enhance service delivery,  extended  working  hours  during  the
week have been implemented, namely 07:00-17:00.  Offices are  also  open  on
Saturdays from 08:00-13:00.

1.2.3. State of physical infrastructure and equipment


    • The current  accommodation  is  not  user-friendly  as  there  is  not
      sufficient space inside i.e. office is too small  and  allows  only  a
      limited number of people to get inside.
    • There are no air conditioners, therefore during hot  summer  days  and
      high temperatures serious health problems are caused
    • Alarm systems have been installed in the office to enhance safety  and
      security, however; lack of physical security in the form  of  security
      guards still leaves serious risks.
    • Recently in 2004 the department has entered into a five (5) year lease
      agreement contract with the owner  of  the  building,  however  it  is
      envisaged to move to  a  bigger  office  once  the  contract  expires.
      There is also no fridge, microwave or stove.

1.2.4. Information Technology (IT systems)

New computer systems with updated programs like GroupWise etc have  replaced
five (5) old terminal computers in  the  office.  Additional  computers  are
needed to allow the smooth running of services e.g.  scanner  for  passport,
computer for E-mails and administrative functions.

Only  one   (1)   printer   is   allocated   to   this   office   to   print
Birth/Death/Marriage/Temporary Identification  certificates.  However,  this
causes delays.

The office cannot scan passports, as it  has  to  borrow  the  scanner  from
other offices in the Province i.e. Sasolburg service point and this  results
in the delay of passport applications.

User-ID’s (to gain access to departmental programme) of this  service  point
have often been used to capture  fraudulent  transactions,  e.g.  fraudulent
marriages.   In all the cases reported, these  marriages  were  captured  in
other Provinces or towns e.g. Durban, Cape Town, Johannesburg and  Pretoria.
A request has since been sent to head office to block them, but still  there
are people out there who still continue with the practice.

1.2.5. Clarity seeking, comments

The Provincial Manager stated that overtime is paid out  of  the  Provincial
budget savings (i.e. vacant posts.)

It was also clarified to the  delegation  that  ID’s  couldn’t  be  produced
locally as only Head Office has access to the HANIS system.

It  was  also  put  to  the  delegation  that  the  turn  around  time   for
applications is restricted to one day in the  offices,  however,  there  are
constraints to this due to human resource capacity.

It was also made known to the committee that the department has embarked  on
a  stakeholder  forum  with  other  government  departments,   e.g.   Social
Development, Correctional Services, SAPS, NGO’s  and  Education,  to  ensure
that all services can be accessed at one point.

Information sessions are constantly held to  inform  the  public  about  the
services  of  the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  and  also   with   chiefs,
councillors and church leaders/Ministers  to  fight  corruption  of  illegal
issuance of fraudulent documents.

1.2.6. Challenges

    • Among the challenges facing the office is to capacitate the office  in
      terms of Human Resources in order  to  live  up  to  the  Department’s
      vision of rendering a world-class service.
    • To computerize Dr. J.S.Moroka Hospital in Thaba-Nchu to allow  online-
      registration of newly born babies at the hospital.
    •  Acquisition  of  the  necessary  funds/budget  as  requested  by  the
      province. Filling of all vacant posts in the Province and  the  Acting
      Provincial Manager alluded to the  fact  that  backlogs  in  terms  of
      service  delivery  will  be  resolved  once  the  new  Civic   Affairs
      Establishment is approved and implemented fully. However as of now the
      establishment has not been funded thus vacancies cannot be filled.

1.3. PHUTHADITJHABA REGIONAL OFFICE

1.3.1. Clarity seeking, comments

The delegation enquired why ID  Statistics  from  the  Provincial  Manager’s
Office and Regional Office differ i.e. 900 and  1  100  and  the  Provincial
Manager replied that his office is only having statistics ending 14  October
2005 while the Regional Office is submitting stats up to date.  As  IDs  are
distributed weekly the office also receives new books.

The delegation stated that this office has become  a  Regional  Office  with
the result that the establishment has expanded which means that  the  office
is going to employ more staff. The provincial  manager  replied  and  stated
that the Deputy Director post has already been advertised  and  he/she  will
have to ensure that all the remaining posts are filled.

Management of  the  office  stated  that  they  are  understaffed,  and  the
delegation enquired how the office  manages  to  distribute  IDs  especially
during  weekends  by  door-to-door  delivery.  The  management  stated  that
offices are open on Saturdays and skeleton staff are  working  whilst  other
officers are utilised to go out of office to distribute IDs.

The delegation asked the management whether they have  areas  that  have  no
service points to serve, if so, how do they cover those?  Management  stated
that they are working together with traditional  leaders,  ward  councillors
and the Department of Social Development where they identify the areas  with
backlogs.  Thereafter  dates  are  secured  for  information   sessions   to
communities where they are informed of  the  requirements  for  applications
and  after  that  dates  are  identified,  the   Department   will   collect
applications.

1.3.2. Concern raised by the delegation

    • The committee was concerned as to what will happen when the  contracts
      of interns expire on 31 October 2005, and Home Affairs relies entirely
      on them.  The committee said that they would motivate that the interns
      be kept for another year because they do a good job.

    • There is no sign board for direction of Home Affairs or  stating  HOME
      AFFAIRS PHUTHADITJHABA REGIONAL OFFICE


1.4. KROONSTAD DISTRICT OFFICE

   1. Personnel
   2.
The establishment was discussed with members of the committee where  it  was
explained that there are 13 clerks, 5  supervisors  and  two  vacant  posts.
The shortage of staff was discussed, with  the  delegation,  and  they  were
informed that supervisors are also performing functional tasks.

1.4.2. Mobile Units and Service Points

There are 3 permanent service points, namely Viljoenskroon, Parys and
Heilbron and mobile units are visiting Edenville, Koppies, Steynsrus,
Lindley, Vredefort, Deneysville, Oranjeville, Petrus Steyn, Hennenman and
Ventersburg, only once per month due to staff shortages.

1.4.3. Distribution of IDs

ID’s are distributed door-to-door or posted to serviceable addresses but  at
this stage there are many identity  documents  in  the  office  due  to  the
problems experienced with the franking machine.

1.4.4. Accommodation

The lease of the building has expired and the contract has been  renewed  on
a month to month basis.  The condition of the building is not satisfactory.

1.4.5. Information Technology

Some  of   the   staff   members   still   do   not   have   User-ID’s   and
computers/printers are off line most of the time  due  to  the  new  service
provider (SITA).

1.5. Ports of Entry (PoE) in the Free State Province:

Clarity seeking, comments:

The delegation enquired why the Arrival & Departure totals are so high  when
Maseru Bridge experiences a staff shortage? The department  replied  that  a
number of businessmen residing in Ladybrand commute on a daily basis to  and
from their businesses in  Lesotho.  The  Cross  Border  Permits  also  allow
Lesotho and South African Nationals to cross the border without  hassles  in
order to conduct business in both countries.


The delegation wanted to know how rife  corruption  is  at  the  ports?  The
department stated that corruption is rife at the ports because of a lack  of
manpower and a lack of proper systems. Officials make themselves  guilty  of
corruption by fixing passports of foreigners and taking money  from  persons
who have overstayed.

The pedestrian facilities at Maseru Bridge are closed because there  are  no
officials to man this clearing point.

The department stated that here are no  official  unmanned  borders  on  the
Lesotho/South  African  borderline.  The  South  African  Defence  Force  is
currently responsible for the borderline.

There is sufficient/ adequate  transport  and  even  vehicles  to  transport
officials between the workplace and their residences.


 2. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

2.1. Meeting with MEC and HOD of Social Development

2.1.1. Clarity seeking, comments

The delegation enquired into Foster Care and wanted to  know  whether  there
are any delays w.r.t. the Department Of Justice,  whether  applications  are
delayed? At the regional courts there are backlogs and the MEC  stated  that
there are delays with regard to the  Department  of  Justice  and  that  the
department is in the process to  alleviate  the  situation  e.g.  they  have
campaigns with other stakeholders, a new computer system is being  developed
to fast track the process and that they have to strengthen the  relationship
with the Department of Justice.

With regard to the roll-over of the budget, the MEC stated that  there  were
roll-overs to the value of R250 million, and the HOD further noted that  the
roll-over was due to the fact that there was a delay in the adjudication  of
the tender process, which is centralized and that the tender was awarded  at
the end of the last financial year. He further noted that it was  the  first
time that money was rolled over.

On the issue of the upgrading of pay points  the  HOD  stated  that  54  pay
points were upgraded to make it more conducive for beneficiaries,  and  with
the current budget the department has to  prioritise  which  pay  points  to
upgrade. He further noted that security at the pay points  is  an  important
part of the department’s programmes.

With  regard  to  old  age  homes  the  MEC  stated  that   conditions   are
unacceptable  in  the  Free  State  and  he  stated  that  the  Historically
Disadvantaged Individuals (HDI’s) are not benefiting from  this.  Every  Old
Age Home that is funded by the department must report to the department  and
the department is also funding about 50 luncheon clubs in the province.  The
department is also running a 24hr call on the abuse of older persons.

The HOD stated that they do  provide  for  people  with  disability  at  pay
points.

The HOD stated  that  many  of  the  social  workers  apply  for  government
positions, with the result that NGO’s are battling.

Members of the delegation voiced their concerns regarding  pay  out  of  the
different grants and whether these grants are paid out on the same day,  the
reason being that for e.g. beneficiaries coming for the Child Support  Grant
(CSG) pushing for e.g. the pensioners out of the way.  The  MEC  noted  that
there are different pay out dates for the different grants e.g. CSG and  Old
Age Pension

The  department  highlighted  to  the  delegation  that  beneficiaries   are
informed well in advance of the lapsing of their benefits and this  is  done
in writing.

2.2. Child Support Grant
2.2.1. Challenges:
     • Lack of Home Affairs documents
     • Decrease in the volumes of applications
     • Impact of the indemnity process
     • Alleged fraud by caregivers
     • Poor access of service by farm communities

2.2.2. Recommendations from Department
    • Provincial business plans focused on the  registration  and  awareness
      drive have been completed
    • Specific operational plans for each district have been completed
    • Strengthening partnerships and  joint  campaigns  with  Home  Affairs,
      Education, Health, Municipalities, NGO’s etc.
    • 40 additional staff have been appointed
    • additional computers, printers, scanners and  photocopiers  have  been
      procured for all the district offices
    • Additional vehicles including 10 mobile offices have been procured, to
      reach out to farming and rural communities.

2.3. Services to Children
2.3.1. Challenges:
    • Inadequate funding for Early Childhood Development Centres.  Only  32%
      of  the  74  000  children  from  the  poor  communities/families  are
      benefiting from government funding. Current subsidy of R4.50 per child
      per day basically provides for food.
    • Shortage of social  workers  to  provide  intervention  and  statutory
      services to children. Currently 259 social workers available  and  the
      national norm are 549.
    • Inadequate funding to NGO’s to pay market related salaries
    • Handling of backlogs of about 2 075 i.t.o. intervention and  statutory
      services
    • Shortage of Places of Safety
    • Inadequate  facilities  for  statutory  placements  of  multi-disabled
      children
    • Successful implementation of the Children’s Bill
    • Competent personnel
    • Street Child phenomenon


2.3.2. Recommendations

    • To obtain additional funds for more social workers
    • Consideration be given to funding of NGO who will  specialize  in  the
      selection of training of foster parents
    • The establishment of residential places of safety in those areas where
      needed
    • Establishment of a residential Child Care  centre  for  children  with
      disabilities as well as group foster homes.

2.4. Probation services
    • Shortage of Probation Officers
    • Training and capacity building of personnel especially those rendering
      services in residential care facilities
    • Roll out of Home Based Supervision Programme in all districts
    • Insufficient resources for after hour assessment of arrested  children
      and effective monitoring of children place in diversion programmes
    • Delay of finalisation of cases resulting in  blockages  in  Department
      of Social development (DSD) facilities
    • Lack of reform schools for further rehabilitation of children.

 3. Meeting with Concerned People Against Abuse (CPAA) at  Kamohelo  Heaven,
    Thaba Nchu

CPAA is a CBO rendering services to victims of abuse in Thaba Nchu  and  the
Trust Areas. The following services are provided for:
    • Accommodation for woman and children
    • Support and counselling to victims at the shelter
    • Referral of victims for medical attention when needed

Since 2002 the shelter accommodated 479 women and  children.  Cases  handled
by the Social Worker after-hours from June 2004 until April 2005 was 223.

3.1. Challenges include:
    • Marketing of services/shelter to other areas to  utilize  the  shelter
      effectively
    • Recruitment  of  people  from  the  community  to  form  part  of  the
      organisation and management
    • Appointment of a shelter manager to help with the  day-to-day  running
      of the shelter. The need was  identified  and  will  be  budgeted  for
      2006/07
    • No assistance from municipality
    • No salaries/stipends for volunteers
    • No contract that building was donated to shelter

3.2. Clarity seeking, comments

The Chairperson of CPAA stated that the volunteers at the centre are  always
there when they are needed and as from  1996  they  have  not  received  any
monetary compensation to date.

She further noted that the shelter does not  get  any  assistance  from  the
municipality.

The building belongs to the Provincial Department of Social Development  and
she stated that it was donated to the shelter,  but  there  is  no  contract
stating the fact.

The SA Police Service use to take victims to the hospital.

3.3. Tour of shelter
    • There is rooms for administration and counselling
    • One room is for the matrons with 2 beds
    • There are 9 beds for victims and the rooms are clean and tidy.
    • There is security at the gate and it was stated  that  there  is  very
      little break-ins
    • There is a laundry and the machines are all in good working order.
    • During the tour the delegation met with a woman who  is  a  victim  of
      abuse, where the boyfriend wanted to kill her and her  two  boys.  The
      victim stated that they are well looked after at the shelter.

 4. Meeting with management of Boiketlong Old Age Home

Boiketlong is  a  government  institution  and  the  budget  allocation  for
2005/06 is R4 835 569.14 and the institution renders  a  24  hr  residential
care service as well as, balanced meals, a safe environment, primary  health
care services, access to secondary health care services etc.

The staff structure of care personnel  rendering  24hrs  services:  1  Chief
Professional nurse, 1 senior professional nurse, 6  Nursing  Assistants  and
12 care workers. The staff works on shifts between 07h00 – 16h00  and  07h00
– 19h00during the day and 19h00 – 07h00 during the night to sustain  the  24
hour service.

   1. Challenges
    •  The  newly  approved  staff  structure  makes  provision   for   five
      professional nurses. Presently there is only one  senior  professional
      nurse.
    • There is a need to appoint an administrative officer  to  assist  with
      the administration. Currently there is only one Snr Admin Clerk.

4.2. Tour of Old Age Home
     • The kitchen  has  stoves  which  are  in  perfect  working  condition
       (enquired from caterer)
     • The catering has been outsourced
     • The food supply is adequate (shelves were packed with food)
     • Older person’s receive 5 meals a day
     • The ones living in the rondawels eat in the hall.
     • Each rondawel has a bed, a cupboard and ablution  facilities  are  in
       the hall.

 5. Meeting with Regional Manager of Social Development: Kroonstad

   1. Social Security

The  presenter   highlighted   the   number   of   beneficiaries,   physical
infrastructure of pay points, and  access  to  grants  at  the  various  pay
points in the region.

   2. Indemnity process

The process went  well  and  897  different  grants  in  the  district  were
stopped. The  process  is  still  continuing  with  the  Compliance  Officer
investigating cases reported  after  the  deadline  and  action  taken  e.g.
stopping of grants and recommending re-payments in some cases.

5.3. Developmental Social Services
5.3.1. Children Awaiting Trial

The presenter informed the Committee that as from 2003 a Probation Unit  was
established within the  department  and  currently  there  are  4  Probation
Officers and 2 Assistant Probation Officers for the whole district.

The main focus is to do  assessments  to  all  arrested  children  that  are
reported to the department. In Kroonstad the Probation  officer  visits  the
court every morning to check if there are any children to be  assessed,  and
the reason  being  that  SAPS  do  not  report  all  of  the  cases  to  the
department. These visits are done to avoid children  being  given  sentences
for minor offences and impacting negatively on their future.  The  Probation
Officer and the Assistant Probation Officers also visit the  prison  once  a
week.

The presenter  informed  the  Committee  that  in  the  last  6  months  314
assessments were done in the district.

The presenter also gave a  brief  background  on  the  Secure  Care  Centre,
Matete Matches. The capacity of the centre is 40 children, i.e. 38 boys  and
2 girls; currently there are 27 boys and 1 girl. Programmes  at  the  centre
include: art and craft, drama and culture.

The department provides 100% funding to the centre annually and in terms  of
the Memorandum of  Understanding  signed  between  the  department  and  the
centre, the department is also responsible for the monitoring of the  centre
to ensure proper  utilization  of  funding  as  well  as  effective  service
delivery.

5.3.2. Food Security Programme
The district was allocated a budget of R5,8 million for  2003/2004  and  the
same amount for 2004/2005 and 19 422 food parcels were distributed  to  6474
households over a period of three months in both financial years.

For the 2004/05, the identification  was  through  Stakeholder  Forums  that
were established when public meetings were held in all the 15 towns.

5.2.3. Challenges in the region include:
     • Only 346 food parcels were issued till the end of September 2005. The
       MEC’s gesture to issue out food parcels to the  needy  and  destitute
       for the festive season will contribute to  spending  all  the  funds.
       Social security relies in social workers to hand in reports to  issue
       out food parcels.
     • The lapsing of temporary disability grants has caused hardship for  a
       lot of people, and many of them have appealed, but are still awaiting
       assessments and their grants have stopped before the outcome of their
       appeal.
     • The district is struggling  to  reach  the  target  as  set  for  the
       children 11-14 years.
     • With regard to children awaiting trial, not  all  children  that  are
       arrested are reported to the department for assessment.
     • Court cases take to long to be finalized and children stay  for  long
       periods even for more than a  year  at  Matete  Matches  Secure  Care
       Centre
     • Resistance of the Court to refer children to the centre  due  to  the
       absence of security, which leads to abscondment.
     • Limitation of capacity at Matete Matches for children  who  committed
       serious crimes who end up in prison.
     • Due to  unemployment  and  poverty  everybody  feels  that  they  are
       elegible to receive food parcels
     • Venue for distribution of food parcels was a problem.
     • Safety of officials was at stake, where they were threatened.

 6.  Meeting  Regional  Director  of  Social  Development:   Qwaqwa   (Thabo
    Mofutsanyane)

Thabo Mafutsanyana District has an overall population of 725,939.  Maluti-A-
Phofung has been declared a presidential node. The nature of  leadership  is
traditional leadership and political leadership  (councillors).  Traditional
leadership is very strong at the community level (villages).

The presenter informed the Committee on the location of  offices/sub-offices
and satellites, also the institutions  e.g.  Leratong  Children’s  Home  and
Thekolohelong Welfare Centre.

She further highlighted the status quo regarding the  personnel  profile  of
the various offices in the region, including Qwaqwa  District  Head  Office,
Bethlehem Sub- Office, Ficksburg satellite etc.

The  challenges,  as  indicated  by  the  Regional  Manager   includes   the
following:
    • shortage of Social Workers, Community  Developers.  The  remote  rural
      areas are not attracting skilled experienced personnel.
    • Backlogs in service delivery especially foster care applications

6.1. Children Awaiting  Trial
There are currently 19 children that are awaiting trial in the region

Challenges:
    • Children are kept for long periods in the police cells,  before  being
      taken to alternative care like Matete Matches


6.2. Food Security Programme
Allocations were done according to municipalities.
Maluti-A Phofung                  13 216
Lihlabeng                           3 428
Setsoto                                   7 584
Nketoana                            1 593
Phumelela                           3 085
TOTAL DISTRIBUTION                28 906

Challenges
    • Facilitation of formation of forums for identification and
      distribution
    • Role of clarification between the  department  and  the  Municipality.
      There  was  confusion  who  was   in   control.   The   criteria   for
      identification of beneficiaries not clear and concise. The  object  of
      the programme not fully understood by communities and  politicians  at
      local level.
    • Delays in distribution due to suppliers stock shortage
    • The contents of the food parcel not user friendly to a family  without
      an income. Samp, beans require electricity or  wood  to  be  prepared,
      i.o.w. it defeats the objective.


6.3. Social Grants
The presenter explained to the Committee that some of the pay points were
upgraded according to the norms and standards.

Challenges
    • Documentation is still a problem where both biological parents and
      children are without documentation.
    • Lapsing of grants, which demand direct physical follow-ups  to  enable
      the applicant to meet the doctor. At times it is difficult  to  locate
      the address or the address has changed since the initial application.
    • More transport and officials with driver’s licenses  are  required  to
      ensure follow-ups on lapsed grants are made timeously.
    • Entering into farms still a challenge although they are aligning their
      visits with the Department of Health with their mobile  clinic  visits
      is helpful.
    • Vandalization of upgraded pay points and service points by communities
      rendering the efforts made by the government futile
    • Unavailability of farm  workers  during  the  week  when  departmental
      officials are at work. Consequently visits have to be organized.

6.4. NGO and CBO funding
With regard to NGO and CBO funding the presenter informed the  committee  on
the following challenges regarding the funding of CBOs and NGOs.

Challenges
    • Lack of capacity on the part of the  funded  organizations  to  comply
      with the memorandum  of  agreement.  Training  was  given,  they  were
      workshopped, but still compliance is difficult.
    • Late payment of organizations by the department
    •  Effective  monitoring  and  evaluation  and  evaluation   of   funded
      organizations by the department provincially and locally.

6.5. Child Headed and Orphaned Children
Due to their culture and traditions the number of  child  headed  households
is  very  little  as  extended  family  members  come  forward   to   foster
immediately  the  biological  parents  are  deceased.  Also   with   sibling
households some children affected by the death of their  parents  and  being
old enough can care for their siblings they still leave  the  responsibility
with elders in the extended family.
There are 3856 families that are receiving foster care and 11  568  children
who are fostered and 650 file backlogs for  foster  care  application  cases
awaiting home visits and compilation of reports.

Challenges
   Shortage of social workers
   Shortage of transport for social workers  to  intensively  intervene  and
   follow up on cases
   Lack of co-operation with some magistrate courts regarding foster care
   applications. Magistrates not appointed as commissioners of child welfare


   Escalation of HIV and AIDS related deaths increases the demand for foster
   care
   Interpretation of political statements by communities creates  dependency
   on the system.

6.6. Indemnity process
The  presenter  gave  the  following  information  regarding  the  indemnity
process in the region:

   Bethlehem – 354
   Qwaqwa – 1845
   Senekal – 128
TOTAL - 2327

6.7. Recommendations:
    • Recruitment of social workers for tertiary training is done at matric
      level to address the current escalating demand for social workers.
    • Training of social workers by tertiary institutions to be aligned to
      the current demands for service delivery, and this will enable
      incoming social workers to be prepared for the situation.
    • Foster care application process to be reviewed, especially where proof
      of death of both biological parents is available.
    • Availing resources to the social workers to perform their functions
      effectively, e.g. transport is always a problem.
        • Clear and better systems be put in place for organizations
          mismanaging funds.
        • Officials with financial management expertise to be employed at
          district level.
    • NGOs/CBOs to be empowered/capacitated to administer food distribution.
      Food distribution always takes precedence over actual service
      rendering.
    • A blueprint on procedure to follow for situations where the parent and
      the biological children are without documents are availed by the
      Department of Home Affairs as an information leaflet.
    • The issue of unknown parent in the case of single parent death is
      clarified as to the investigation procedure of the whereabouts of the
      reputed parent. This is still a very sensitive issue.

6.8. Tour of Children’s Home
   In the  admin.  Block  there  is  offices  for,  the  transport  officer,
      registry, manager’s office and the
   switchboard
   In the foyer the disciplinary code and procedures
   The  Acting  manager  informed  the  delegation  that  all  children  are
      attending school except for 3
   boys
   There are currently 114 children at the home
   There is no air conditioning in the rooms
   There are 32 care workers
   In the girls block the girls eat  separately  and  they  have  their  own
      bathroom facilities and 5 girls per
   room
   The children are getting pocket money according their age.

6.9. Visit to pay point
   The pay point which the delegation visited is a tribal pay point
   3000 to 3500 beneficiaries receive pay outs at this pay point
   Payouts are being done in period. e.g. 1 000 people a day
   There is sufficient shelter at the pay point
   There is sufficient space and chairs for beneficiaries
   Ablution facilities are in a good condition
   On the day of the pay outs members of the luncheon clubs assists
   The Regional Manager stated that pay outs from 08:00 am to 11:00 am
   She further noted that people are aware on which days they are to be paid
   Vandalism is a frequent occurrence at the hall
   The Regional Manager informed the delegation that payouts  used  to  take
      place at the school
   (which is opposite the pay point),  but  a  need  had  arisen  to  obtain
      another venue for these payouts,
   for this reason Social Development identified this hall.
   There is a fence around the hall
   Security is also visible at the hall

7. HEALTH

Meeting with the MEC of Health and  the  HOD  of  Provincial  Department  of
Health
The HOD briefed the Committee on the following:

7.1 Comprehensive plan for treatment and care of HIV and AIDS.  (Focus on
Home-based Care, VCT & PMTCT).

The number of people living with HIV & AIDS is  about  487  772  and  it  is
estimated that there will be 62 517 births, of which 4 366  babies  will  be
infected at birth.

   Prevention programmes – 85%  of  frontline  primary  nurses  health  care
      nurses have been trained in the Syndromic Management of STI’s, and 1,6
      million male condoms  have  been  distributed  per  month  and  female
      condoms have been distributed to from 18  functional  sites.  VCT  has
      been established in all 81  towns  and  is  available  at  242  health
      facilities. Training of 175 NGO’s in the past two years in  financial,
      personnel and project management.
   Home Based Care (HBC) – this programme has been  established  in  all  81
      towns and is currently expanded to 10 farms in the province.
   Implementation of ARV – the Free State implemented 5 ARV sites,  one  per
      district and the plan is to implement another 5 ARV  sites,  for  each
      district.
   Prevention form  Mother-to-Child  Transmission  (PMTCT)  –  it  has  been
      extended to have one PMTCT facility  per  district,  with  140  feeder
      clinics and 30 hospitals participating. Midwives working at  maternity
      facilities are rendering the service.


7.2. Management and governance of health  facilities  and  quality  of  care
(focus on hospital Revitalisation)

The clinic committees are functional  in  more  than  90%  of  the  clinics.
Challenges  include:   training,   attendance,   transport,   identity   and
motivation.

With regard to the Hospital Revitalisation the province received R113 m  and
actual spending up to 30 September 2005 was R18m (16%),  the  infrastructure
grant the province received R47m and R11, 7 m (25%) was  spent  (30/09/2005)
and clinic building and  upgrading  received  R21,  4  m  spent  (as  at  30
September 2005) R4m (19%).

8. Meeting with Regional Manager of Health: Southern Free State

8.1. Summary of briefing

Health facilities within the region:
Xhariep District Facilities:
   Clinics: 17
   Community Health Centre: 1
   Mobile clinics: 20
   District Hospital Complexes: 2

Motheo District Facilities
   Clinics: 63
   Community Health Centre: 2
   Mobile clinics: 13
   District Hospital Complexes: 3

The Regional Manager  briefed  the  delegation  on  the  District  hospitals
within the region, Pelonomi Hospital that is  a  regional  hospital;  Dr  JS
Moraka  Hospital  and  its  available  services,  clinic  information,   the
upgrading of facilities and the environment, the equipment  and  quality  of
care.

From 1999 – 2005 5023 TOPs was performed  and  the  age  profiles  are  that
below 18 years is less, with the over 18’s increasing.

VCT is not mandatory and it is a localized service in the  hospital  with  a
dedicated professional nurse.

Prevention of Mother- to- child  Transmission  (PMTCT)  was  implemented  in
2004 and to monitor the end results for follow up is difficult,  due  to  no
feedback and reporting, it is not systemized.  Recommendation  is  made  for
the central reporting to be done locally for outcomes to be captured.

8.2. Challenges include:
   High vacancy rates for professional nurses
   Recruitment and retention is difficult  even  rural  and  scarce  skills
      allowances and headhunting
   Budgetary constraints for medication
   Maintenance to clinics and hospitals

8.3. Achievements include:

   Agency nurses to cover the shortage
   Relaxed recruitment for rural areas
   One advanced midwife has qualified  and  acts  as  consultant  for  other
      midwives
   Functional and active clinic committees at all fixed clinics
   Functional hospital Board for the hospital complex
   Recently purchased a park home to accommodate the EMS station
   Critical equipment purchased and delivered for the hospital complex
   Maintenance budget for the clinics has been increased.

8.5. Clarity seeking, comments
The Regional Manager stated the hospital was built in 1973 and  that  it  is
not part of the revitalization programme.

The Regional Manager further noted that the hospital is experiencing  budget
constraints and that the hospital is going to overextend.

She stated that there are no  2-roomed  structures,  but  in  one  area  the
community built a structure, which was used as clinic,  which  received  the
Premier’s Award, and this proved that the people in this region  are  not  a
passive citizenry.

Dr JS Moraka Hospital has a trained professional infections nurse,  who  has
a master’s degree to do research as well.

A challenge for the hospital is that the IT is not up to standard.

One trained nurse performs TOP at the hospital. They had two, but  one  left
and the hospital is in the process to appoint another. On the issue of  back
street abortions, the Regional Manager stated that this is not performed  in
the region.

8.6. Tour of Dr JS Moraka Hospital

   Maternity ward
        The maternity ward is modified and painted
        There are 2 delivery rooms
        There is a doctors room for the doctor on call, which is  furnished
           with a TV, a fridge and
        bed
   Post-caesarian section
        Furnished with six beds
        The bedding is clean and tidy

   Sonar room
        It is under lock and key
        Equipment in the room is in good working condition
        Ablution facilities for disabled

   1 room is set aside  for  the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  for  online
      registration
   new incubators were bought
   the ambulances for EMS is not well equipped and has the basic equipment
   there is an Occupational Health and Safety officer at the hospital
   pediatrics ward
        there are 20 beds
        security is visible at the front gate of the ward,  for  children’s
           safety
   Nursing manager stated that if mortuary is full, the hospital  makes  use
      of private funeral
   undertakers
   the hospital has an eye clinic.

8.7. Tour of Thaba Nchu Clinic
The Committee made an unscheduled stop at the clinic
   there is a Dots room
   3 consulting rooms
   sluice room
   2 counsellors
   4 staff members working at the clinic
   in the pharmacy there is a shortage of medicines, and as  stated  by  the
      Senior Professional Nurse
   (SNP), this is because of a shortage from Bloemfontein.
   The SNP  stated  that  a  major  problem  is  the  training  of  pharmacy
      assistants

9. Meeting with Regional Manager of the Eastern Free State Region

9.1. Comprehensive Care, management and treatment of HIV and AIDS  programme

The Regional Manager informed the delegation that Voluntary Counselling  and
Testing (VCT) is performed at all health facilities as well  as  PMTCT.  The
current number of patients on ARV treatment  is:  male  adults  245,  female
adults 792 and children 30.

9.2. Revitalization Programme
At Thebe Hospital the maternity ward and dental clinic have  been  completed
and currently they are busy with the last phase, which includes EMS  station
and administration block.

At Elizabeth Ross the maternity ward,  male  and  female  wards,  children’s
ward, admin offices have been completed and they are now busy with the  last
phase, which includes the casualty, X-ray department.

9.3. Clinic Building and upgrading Programme
No clinic upgrading took place in 2004/05 financial year  and  the  priority
list for upgrading remained the  same  for  2005/06  financial  year.  These
priorities  include:  A  total  R10,5m  was  budgeted  in  the  region   for
equipment. The Regional Manager informed the delegation that 38% (R3,  974m)
of the equipment has been purchased and paid for, 50% has been  ordered  and
delivery is awaited. The remaining 20% is awaiting tender procedures as  the
equipment costs above R100 000. The region anticipates that at  the  end  of
the financial year 100% of the budget will be utilized.

9.4. Challenges
   Shortage of personnel
   Accommodation for personnel
   Limited budget
   Equipment
   Staff recruitment and retention because of the ruralness of the area
   Maintenance of facilities
   Transport
   Roll-out of HIV and AIDS comprehensive management, care and treatment.


10. Meeting with Northern Regional Manager of Health

10.1. Summary of presentation

The General Manager of the Northern Free State  briefed  the  delegation  on
the structure and  clusters,  the  institutional  structure  and  management
structure. He noted that Bongani  Regional  Hospital,  Welkom  is  currently
engaged  in  a  twinning  programme  with  the  Royal  Children’s  Hospital,
Melbourne Australia, and he stated that knowledge is  shared  between  these
two institutions in the field of  paediatrics,  specially  the  relationship
between the community and the hospital and the  care  for  children  in  the
community. The General manager added that 4 hospitals  in  the  region  were
accredited as baby-friendly in 2004.

The General Manager stated that all hospitals boards are in place  and  that
all have business plans and that they are operational. Thirty five (35)  out
of 37 clinic committees in the region are functional.

With regard to the PFMA, managerial accountants was appointed,  an  internal
control check list was developed and cost centre training took  place  while
some hospitals have already implemented cost centres.

With regard to Emergency Medical Services (EMS) the General  Manager  stated
the following challenges:
    • EMS is rendered according to a provincial plan identifying three legs:
      pre-hospital, inter-hospital and planned patient transport
    • Provincialisation of EMS from municipalities  without  any  supporting
      infrastructure in smaller towns
    • An ageing fleet of  vehicles  that  also  are  being  written  off  by
      irresponsible members of EMS
    • Vehicle abuse including petrol card fraud.
    • Patient transport across the province to receive higher levels of care
      e.g. patients leave Villiers at 3am, arrive in Bloemfontein  by  10am,
      leave Bloemfontein at 5pm and return home around 10pm.

10.2. Lejweleputswa report in District Plans

The following challenges in the District was  highlighted  by  the  District
Manager:
    • Recruitment and retention of personnel
    • Equipment and facilities maintenance and replacement
    • Budget – over expenditure
    • Dispensing licences for nurses
    • Finalize process of devolution
    • Vehicles for service provision
    • Provision of doctors at PHC level – session doctors not meeting needs
      of communities

10.3. Bongani – Boitumelo Complex

Challenges:
    • Maintaining standards that was set with accreditation
    • Implementation of family health to address the  level  of  burden  of
      diseases.
    • Implementation of the new Mental Health Act to assure a comprehensive
      approach
    • To reach Employment Equity targets by 2006
    • Retention strategy for Health professionals.
    • To stay within allocated budget
    • The replacement and purchasing of equipment.

10.4. Tour of Boitumelo Hospital

10.4.1. Emergency Medical Services

When the delegation arrived at the hospital the first thing they  wanted  to
check,  was  the  ambulances  and  the  equipment  in  these  vehicles.  The
ambulance, which was parked outside the hospital, had  no  drip,  but  there
was oxygen and the ambulance driver  informed  the  delegation  that  it  is
working. The ambulance had a low kilometer  reading  on  the  odometer.  The
General Manager stated that the hospital has 26 ambulances.

10.4.2. X- ray department

    • The X-ray department is going to be  revitalized,  where  the  current
      room is being extended.
    • They are in the process in ordering a new special machine, because the
      one machine they currently have is more than 10 years old and that  it
      is very costly to repair.
    • The  general  manager  stated  that  R8m  is  being  ring  fenced  for
      equipment.

10.4.3. Revitalization programme

    • The hospital is in the process to finalize building  of  a  brand  new
      store
    • A completely new out patients department and ARV site is also underway
      and they are envisaging finishing at the end of November 2005  and  it
      will open in mid November 2005.
    • Paving has been laid at the parking.
    • Doctors quarters are being built, which includes 22  flats  (6  double
      rooms and 16 single rooms), also included  are  the  parking  bays  at
      these flats.
    • The theaters are being renovated (all 4), but 2 currently.
    • A training college will also be built.
    • Accommodation for nurses is being built,  which  will  include  a  TV,
      stove etc. in the flat. The Committee Secretary went to the flats  and
      he informed the delegation that the accommodation that is being  built
      for these nurses and doctors looks beautiful and it  is  spacious  and
      comfortable (only about 100 meters away from the hospital).
    • A training college  will  also  be  built,  and  the  Nursing  Manager
      informed the delegation that this will be  very  advantageous  to  the
      hospital, as nurses will be trained there and the hospital  will  show
      them the culture of the hospital, and at the end of their studies that
      they would not want to “leave” the hospital.

11. WAY FORWARD

    • The Committee will undertake follow-up  visits  to  the  province,  in
      order to provide oversight and monitor progress made  with  regard  to
      some of the challenges raised by  stakeholders  during  the  oversight
      visit.
    • The Committee will take up some of the issues raised with the relevant
      Departments, and  will  continue  provide  oversight  on  departmental
      strategic plans to ensure that the relevant issues  are  taken  up  in
      strategic and operational plans.


                          MONDAY, 13 FEBRUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

      The Speaker and the Chairperson, on 13 February 2006, called a Joint
    Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces,
    as follows:

                   CALLING OF JOINT SITTING OF PARLIAMENT

      The Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms B Mbete, and the Chairperson
    of the National Council of Provinces, Mr M J Mahlangu, in terms of
    Joint Rule 7(2), have called a joint sitting of the Houses of
    Parliament for Tuesday, 14 February 2006 at 14:00 to debate the Report
    from the Parliamentary Process on the African Peer Review Mechanism.


    _______________________                  ________________________
    B MBETE, MP                              M J MAHLANGU, MP
    SPEAKER OF THE                           CHAIRPERSON OF THE
    NATIONAL ASSEMBLY  NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

    Date: ____________________    Date: ___________________

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    We would like to highlight the  following  matters  in  regard  to  the
    debate on the Report from the Parliamentary Process on the African Peer
    Review Mechanism at the Joint Sitting on Tuesday 14 February 2006.

     1. CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

        The Chairperson of  the  National  Council  of  Provinces  and  the
        Speaker of the National Assembly, acting jointly, have  called  the
        Joint Sitting in terms of Joint Rule 7(2).

     2. RULES GOVERNING DEBATE

          1) There are no comprehensive rules  governing  debates  at  Joint
             Sittings. The NA and the NCOP Rules on Order in Meetings and on
             Rules of Debate (including the Chair’s disciplinary powers) are
             not identical.
          2) Joint Sittings are  governed  by  Joint  Rules  7  to  14.  The
             following Joint Rules apply specifically to debate:


             JR 12: When the Houses sit jointly –
                  a) the Assembly Rules on discipline remain applicable  to
                     an Assembly member; and
                  b) the Council Rules on discipline remain applicable to a
                     Council member.

             JR 13: (1) An  Assembly  or  Council  member,  other  than  the
                  officer presiding at a joint sitting, may  not  speak  at
                  the sitting –
                  1.  unless invited to do so by the presiding officer; or
                  2.  without having obtained the permission of the Speaker
                     and the Chairperson of the Council before the meeting.
                    1.      No vote or decision may be  taken  by  or  in  a
                       joint sitting. (In this
                         regard the Houses will meet separately  to  take  a
                         decision on the       Report)

     3. ADDITIONAL JOINT RULES
        In terms of Joint Rule 2(1), the Speaker and the Chairperson of the
        Council, acting jointly, may give  a  ruling  or  make  a  rule  in
        respect of any matter for which the Joint Rules do not  provide.  A
        rule made by the  Presiding  Officers  remains  in  force  until  a
        meeting of the  Joint  Rules  Committee  has  decided  on  it.  The
        Presiding Officers have now framed the following  Joint  Rules  for
        application  in  the  Joint  Sitting  scheduled  for  Tuesday,   14
        February.

          1) Order in Joint Sitting and Rules of Debate

        With the exception of disciplinary rules which are provided for  in
        Joint Rule 12 the rules of  Debate  and  the  Rules  and  Order  in
        Meetings of the NA and the NCOP apply to the debate  in  the  Joint
        Sitting to the extent that those  Rules  are  compatible  with  one
        another and to the extent that they are consistent with the purpose
        and nature of the debate at the Joint Sitting.

          2) Offensive language

        No member may use offensive or unbecoming language in  relation  to
        any other member of either House,  including  Cabinet  members  and
        special   delegates   of   the   NCOP,   and    local    government
        representatives, who are present at the Joint Sitting.

          3) Calling of members and time limits


        For purposes of Joint Rule 13, members are called in the debate  by
        the presiding officer  in  accordance  with  a  list  of  scheduled
        speakers  and  the  time  allocated  for  speeches  by  members  of
        different parties and of both Houses.


          4) Charge against a member

        If information charging a member of either House comes  before  the
        Joint Sitting, such information may not be proceeded  upon  at  the
        Joint Sitting, but must be reported to the House concerned  at  its
        next sitting.

          5) Podium

        Members may only speak from the podium, except –
          a) to raise a point of order or a question of privilege, and
          b) to furnish a personal explanation in terms of Rule 69 of the NA
             or rule 50 of
           the NCOP.

    4.      PRACTICAL ISSUES
        The following procedural issues will be dealt with as  a  practical
        application of the Joint Rules and the additional Rules:

          1) Questions: Any member may, through the Chair, put a question to
             the member speaking.
          2) Points of order: Any member may raise a point of order  on  any
             procedural issue that may arise.
          3) Presiding Officer: Joint Rule  10  envisages  that  either  the
             Speaker or the  Chairperson  of  the  Council,  by  arrangement
             between them, will preside – by implication, for  the  duration
             of the Joint Sitting. The Presiding Officers will agree on  who
             will preside at various times according to a  roster  drawn  up
             for that purpose.
          4) Relief of Presiding Officers:  Despite  Joint  Rule  11  (which
             envisages an Assembly or Council member taking the chair  at  a
             joint  sitting  when  requested  to  do  so  by  the  Presiding
             Officer),  in  this  instance  only  other  elected   presiding
             officers  will  be  used  to  relieve  the  Speaker   and   the
             Chairperson of the Council.
          5) Conduct of visitors on the  gallery:  Despite  Joint  Rule  14,
             which states that the Speaker must consult the  Chairperson  of
             the Council when exercising her powers, the Presiding  Officers
             should agree in advance that either may  use  their  discretion
             when applying the relevant NA Rules 40 to 42 and  the  relevant
             NCOP Rules 26 to 28 and that for that purpose it will be deemed
             that consultation took place.
          6) Changes to speakers’ list: Any changes to  the  speakers’  list
             that may affect the allocation of time to the  Houses  must  be
             effected by the Table only after the concurrence of  the  Chief
             Whip of the Majority Party in the Assembly and the  Chief  Whip
             of the Council.




   …………………………..........                       ………………………………………
   B MBETE, MP                                M J MAHLANGU, MP
   SPEAKER OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL
      NATIONAL ASSEMBLY                      COUNCIL OF PROVINCES

     Date:………………………                     Date:…………………………….


                          TUESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2006


ANNOUNCEMENTS:

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bill by Joint Tagging Mechanism


     (1)    The Joint Tagging Mechanism on 13 February 2006 in terms of
         Joint Rule 160(6)(b), classified the following Bill as a section
         75 Bill:


         (i)     Government Immovable Asset Management Bill [B 1 – 2006]
              (National Assembly – sec 75)
2.    Draft Bill submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

     (1)    Division of Revenue Bill, 2006, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance on 8 February 2006. Referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Finance and the Select Committee on Finance.


TABLINGS:


National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Housing


        b) Report and Financial Statements of Servcon Housing Solutions
           (Proprietary) Limited for 2004-2005, including the Report of the
           Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2004-2005.

-----------------------
[1] For  a  detailed  report  encompassing  all  components  of  the  Taking
Parliament to the  People  programme,  please  refer  to  the  comprehensive
document, available from  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  the  National
Council of Provinces.
[2] For a detailed report encompassing all components of the Taking
Parliament to the People programme, please refer to the comprehensive
document, available from the Office of the Secretary of the National
Council of Provinces.
[3] Please note: A detailed account of concerns and challenges appears in
the original report.
[4] Cited example RDP houses in the Nwamitwa areas.
[5] Such as Dan, Lusaka and Khujwana villages.

-----------------------
TAKING PARLIAMENT TO THE PEOPLE: LIMPOPO PROVINCE


                        31 October – 04 November 2005





























































































































